CHAPTER 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS .................................................... 1-1
SECTION 101.01 CITY CODE .......................................................................... 1-1
SECTION 102.01 APPLICATION ..................................................................... 1-1
SECTION 103.01 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.......................................... 1-1
SECTION 104.01 DEFINITIONS....................................................................... 1-2
SECTION 105.01 VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR OR
PETTY MISDEMEANOR .................................................... 1-3
SECTION 106.01 SEPARABILITY............................................................................... 1-4
SECTION 107.01 ORDINANCES REPEALED ............................................................ 1-4
SECTION 108.01 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED....................................................... 1-4
SECTION 109.01 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.......................................... 1-4
SECTION 110.01 EXISTING RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ........................................ 1-4
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 101.01. CITY CODE.
Subd. 1. How Cited. This code of ordinances shall be known as the Delano City Code or
Code and may be so cited.
Subd. 2. Additions. New ordinances proposing amendments or additions to the Code shall
be assigned appropriate Code numbers and shall be incorporated into the Code as of their
effective date. Reference or citation to the Code shall be deemed to include such amendments
and additions. When an ordinance is integrated into the Code, there may be omitted from the
ordinance the title, enacting clause, Section numbers, definitions of terms identical to those
contained in this Code, the clause indicating date of adoption, and validating signatures and date.
In integrating ordinances into the Code, the Clerk, in cooperation with the City attorney, may
correct obvious grammatical, punctuation, and spelling errors; change reference numbers to
conform with Sections, articles, and Chapters; substitute figures for written words and vice
versa; substitute dates for the words “the effective date of this ordinance;” and perform like
actions to insure a uniform Code of ordinances without, however, altering the meaning of the
ordinances enacted.
Subd. 3. Title Headings; Cross References. Chapter, part, Section, Subdivision, and
other titles shall not be considered part of the subject matter of this Code but are intended for
convenience only and not necessarily as comprehensive titles.
Subd. 4. Copies. Copies of this Code shall be kept in the office of the Clerk for public
inspection or sale for a reasonable charge. Copies may also be viewed at the Delano Public
Library and on the City of Delano’s web site: www.delano.mn.us.
SECTION 102.01. APPLICATION.
The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to all Chapters, Sections, Subdivisions,
paragraphs and provisions in the City Code. The City Code shall apply to all persons and
property within the City of Delano, Minnesota, and within such adjacent areas as may be stated
in specific provisions.
SECTION 103.01. RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
Subd. 1. Rules of Construction. The definitions, rules of construction, presumptions, and
miscellaneous provisions pertaining to construction contained in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter
645, as amended from time to time, are adopted by reference and made a part of this Code. As
so adopted, references in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 645 to laws and statutes mean provisions
of this Code and references to the legislature mean the Council.
1-3
Subd. 2. Grammatical Errors, Transposition, and Additional Words. Grammatical
errors do not negate an ordinance. A transposition of words and clauses may be used when a
sentence is without meaning as written. Words and phrases that may be necessary for the proper
interpretation of an ordinance may be added if they do not conflict with its obvious intent and do
not affect its scope and operation.
Subd. 3. Gender; Singular and Plural; Tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender
shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders unless such a construction would
negate the obvious intent of the language; words in the singular shall include the plural, and
words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.
SECTION 104.01. DEFINITIONS.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases have the
meaning given them in this Section.
Subd. 1. City. “City” means City of Delano, Minnesota, acting by or through its duly
authorized representative.
Subd. 2. State. “State” means State of Minnesota.
Subd. 3. Council. “Council” and the “City Council” mean the City Council of the City of
Delano, Minnesota.
Subd. 4. Clerk. “Clerk” means the City Clerk.
Subd. 5. City Administrator. “City Administrator” means the City employee with that
job title and who possesses lead administrative responsibility for City operations, duly
designated by and subject to the City Council’s authority.
Subd. 6. Person. “Person” means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, or
corporation. As applied to partnerships or associations, the term includes the partners or
members; as applied to corporations the term includes the directors, officers, agents, and
employees.
Subd. 7. Written and In Writing. “Written” and “in writing” mean any written, printed,
or electronic text representing words and letters in the English language.
Subd. 8. Public Property and Public Place. “Public property” and “public place” mean
any place, property or premises dedicated to public use, owned by the City, occupied by the City
as lessee, or maintained by the City as a public right-of-way by reason of a written, recorded or
prescriptive easement, including, but not limited to, public buildings, streets, trails, sidewalks,
parks or parking lots so owned or occupied.
1-4
Subd. 9. Private Property. “Private property” means all property not included within the
definition of Public Property or Public Place and which is not property owned by, leased to, or
dedicated for public use to the county, state or federal government, or other political Subdivision.
Subd. 10. InterSection. “InterSection” means the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different streets joining at an angle may cross each other’s path.
Subd. 11. Roadway. “Roadway” means that portion of a street improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event a street includes two or more separate
roadways, the term “roadway” as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately or
collectively, depending upon the context.
Subd. 12. Street. “Street” means the entire area dedicated to public use or contained in a
written, recorded or prescriptive easement or other conveyance or grant to the City, for public
right of way and related support, drainage and utility purposes, and shall include, but not be
limited to roadways, boulevards, sidewalks, alleys, drainage areas and ditches adjacent to the
roadway and public property between lateral property lines in which a roadway lies.
Subd. 13. Ordinance. “Ordinance” means an ordinance duly adopted by the Council.
Subd. 14. Ex-Officio Member. “Ex-Officio Member” means a person who is not counted
for the purpose of determining a quorum, and has no right to vote, but shall have the right and
obligation (within the person’s discretion) to speak to any question coming before the Board,
Commission or other deliberative body of which the person is such a member.
Subd. 15. May. “May” is permissive.
Subd. 16. Shall. “Shall” is mandatory.
Subd. 17. Violate. “Violate” includes failure to comply with.
Subd. 18. Premises. “Premises” means any lot, piece or parcel of land together with
improvements thereon with a continuous boundary whether publicly or privately owned,
occupied or possessed.
Subd. 19. County. “County” means Wright County, Minnesota.
SECTION 105.01. VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR OR PETTY MISDEMEANOR..
Subd. 1. Misdemeanors. Unless another penalty is expressly provided in this Code, any
person violating any provision of this Code, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto,
or any other provision of any code adopted in this Code by reference, including any provision
declaring an act or omission to be a misdemeanor, shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of
not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days or both, plus, in either
case, the cost of prosecution.
1-5
Subd. 2. Petty Misdemeanors. Whenever an act or omission is declared by this Code to
be a petty misdemeanor, any person violating the provision shall, upon conviction, be subjected
to a fine of not more than $300.
Subd. 3. Separate Violations. Unless otherwise provided, each act of violation and every
day on which a violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense.
Subd. 4. Application to City Personnel. The failure of any officer or employee of the
City to perform any official duty imposed by this Code shall not subject the officer or employee
to the penalty imposed for violation unless a penalty is specifically provided for such failure.
SECTION 106.01. SEPARABILITY.
If any portion of this Code or part thereof hereafter is held invalid or suspended, such invalidity
or suspension shall not apply to any other part of the Code unless it is specifically provided
otherwise.
SECTION 107.01. ORDINANCES REPEALED.
All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this Code shall be deemed repealed
from and after the effective date of this Code.
SECTION 108.01. ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects
not embraced in this Code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly
or by necessary implication.
SECTION 109.01. EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
All ordinances requiring publication shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof,
or publication of a summary thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided.
SECTION 110.01. EXISTING RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
The repeal of prior ordinances and adoption of this code are not to be construed to affect, in any
manner, rights and liabilities existing at the time of repeal of such prior ordinances and the
enactment of this Code. Any offense committed; or right accruing; or liability, penalty,
forfeiture, or punishment incurred or assessed prior to the effective date of this Code is not
affected by the enactment of the Code.
P:\Home\1500.309 -- Delano City Code\CHAPTER 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS\CHAPTER 1 (clean) 2009 01 14.doc
2-1
CHAPTER 2 OPERATIONS AND ADMINISTRATION 2-1
SECTION 201.01 COUNCIL MEETINGS 2-2
SECTION 202.01 DUTIES AND SALARIES, OF MAYOR
AND CITY COUNCILMEMBERS 2-5
SECTION 203.01 CODE OF ETHICS FOR ELECTED PUBLIC OFFICIALS 2-5
SECTION 204.01 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND TASK FORCES 2-7
SECTION 205.01 PLANNING COMMISSION 2-8
SECTION 206.01 WATER, LIGHT AND POWER COMMISSION 2-11
SECTION 207.01 VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT 2-11
SECTION 208.01 DELANO ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 2-11
SECTION 209.01 PARK AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMISSION 2-12
SECTION 210.01 POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY COMMISSION 2-12
SECTION 211.01 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 2-12
SECTION 212.01 COMPENSATION FOR COMMISSIONS
AND SUBCOMMITEES 2-13
SECTION 213.01 IDEMNIFICATION 2-14
SECTION 214.01 PROHIBITIONS RELATING TO
EMPLOYMENT APPLICATIONS 2-15
SECTION 215.01 ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS 2-15
SECTION 216.01 AUTHORITY TO OBTAIN CRIMINAL HISTORY 2-15
SECTION 217.01 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED, UNCLAIMED
AND EXCESS PROPERTY 2-16
SECTION 218.01 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 2-20
SECTION 219.01 REIMBURSEMENT OF CERTAIN EXPENSES 2-20
2-2
CHAPTER 2
OPERATIONS AND ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 201.01. COUNCIL MEETINGS.
Subd. 1. Regular Meetings. Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the first
Tuesday and third Tuesday of each calendar month at 7:00 p.m. If the date of regular meeting is
changed, notice of the same shall be provided pursuant to Section 201.01, Subd. 3. Any regular
meeting falling upon a holiday shall be held on the next following business day at the same time
and place unless otherwise specified in the manner for giving notice of special meetings. In
addition to the notice requirements herein, the Council may announce a date of change regarding
a regular meeting at the meeting preceding the one to be changed. All meetings, including
special and adjourned meetings, shall be held in the City Hall unless the Council decides
otherwise at a prior meeting, or meeting in the City Hall is impossible.
A. Regular Meeting Procedure.
The City Administrator or the City Administrator’s designee shall prepare the following
items for regular meetings:
1. An agenda for the forthcoming meeting;
2. A copy of all Council minutes to be considered, reviewed and approved;
3. Minutes and proposals from advisory boards and commissions
4. Applications for land use, license, permit or other applications that require
Council action, but only if the applicant has submitted a complete application, and
the City Administrator deems the application appropriate for consideration at the
meeting, given the Council’s workload for the meeting and other available
meeting dates when the application might be considered consistent with legal
requirements;
5. Copies of other proposals, communications or documents the City Administrator
or a Council member deems necessary or proper for consideration by the Council;
6. Miscellaneous administrative activities which the City Administrator deems
appropriate for Council Review; and
7. A compiled list of all claimants who have filed verified accounts claiming
payment for goods or services rendered to the City.
The City Administrator shall forthwith cause to be mailed, delivered or electronically
transmitted to each member of the Council copies of all of the above listed documents that are
available in advance of the meeting.
2-3
B. Regular Meeting Order of Business.
The order of business at regular meetings shall be as follows:
1. Call to Order.
2. Invocation.
3. Pledge of Allegiance.
4. Roll Call and Approval of Agenda.
5. City Council Minutes.
6. Speakers, Presentations and Awards.
7. Consent Agenda.
8. City Strategies/Current Business.
9. Other Business.
10. Communications and Announcements.
11. Miscellaneous.
12. Claims, appropriations and contract payments; and
13. Executive Session.
14. Adjournment.
Subd. 2. Special Meetings. The mayor or any two members of the Council may call a
special meeting of the Council. At the special meeting, the Council shall transact only that
business for which notice has been provided. Notice of a special meeting shall be by writing
filed with the Clerk who shall then mail, email or otherwise deliver a notice of the time and place
of the meeting to all Council members at least 1 day before the meeting. Where all Council
members are present at a special meeting and take part in the proceedings, failure to give notice
in the manner provided shall not invalidate the proceedings nor any action taken at the special
meeting.
Subd. 3. Notice to Public. For all special meetings, except emergency meetings or special
meetings for which a notice requirement is otherwise expressly established by statute, the City
Clerk shall post, at least 3 days before the date of the meeting, a written notice of the date, time,
place and purpose of the meeting in the City Hall where other notices are generally posted.
Subd. 4. Notice Pursuant to Special Request. Any person may file a written request for
notice of special meetings with the City. A person filing a request for notice of special meetings
may limit the request to notification of meetings concerning particular subjects, in which case the
written notice provided below need be given to that person concerning special meetings
involving those subjects only. Each written request shall expire December 31 of each year and
must be refiled to remain effective. Prior to December 31 of each year, the City Clerk shall send
out notices of the refiling requirement to each person who filed during the previous year. The
City Clerk shall mail or otherwise deliver a written notice of special meetings, at least 3 days
before the date of the meeting, except an emergency meeting, to each person who has filed the
request therefore. As an alternative to mailing notices to persons who have filed written
requests, the City may publish the notice once, at least three days before the meeting in the
official newspaper.
2-4
Subd. 5. Calculation of Days for Providing Special Meeting Notice. In calculating the
number of days for providing notice for special meetings, the first day that the notice is given
shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or a
legal holiday, that day is omitted from the calculation and the following day is considered the
last day.
Subd. 6. Actual Notice. If any person receives actual notice of a special meeting at least
24 hours prior to the meeting, all notice requirements of this Section are satisfied with respect to
that person.
Subd. 7. Emergency Meetings. Notice of a special meeting may be dispensed within a
situation which requires immediate emergency action. In determining what constitutes such an
emergency, the Council shall consider whether the situation calls for immediate action involving
the protection of the public peace, health or safety.
Subd. 8. Notice. Mailed notice to Council members is not required for any emergency
meeting. Posted public notice is not required for an emergency meeting. After notice of an
emergency meeting has been given to Council members by telephone or any other method, the
City Clerk shall make good faith efforts to provide notice of an emergency meeting by telephone
or by any other method used to notify the members of the Council to each news medium which
has filed a written request for such notice pursuant to Section 201.01, Subd. 4., provided such
request includes the news medium’s telephone number.
Subd. 9. Unrelated Matters. If the Council discusses or acts upon matters not directly
related to the emergency meeting, the minutes of the meeting shall include a specific description
of such matters.
Subd. 10. Recessed Meetings. If a meeting is a recessed session of a previous meeting, and
the date, time and place of the recessed meeting was established and announced during the
previous meeting and recorded in the minutes of that meeting, then no additional public notice is
necessary.
Subd. 11. Open Meeting Law. All Council meetings including special and adjourned
meetings and meetings of Council committees, shall be conducted in accordance with the
Minnesota Open Meeting Law.
Subd. 12. Presiding Officer. The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council. In the
absence of the mayor, the mayor pro-tem shall preside. In the absence of both, the Clerk shall
call the meeting to order and shall preside until the Council members present at the meeting
choose one of their members to act temporarily as presiding officer.
Subd. 13. Procedure. The presiding officer shall preserve order, enforce the rules of
procedure herein prescribed, and determine without debate, subject to the final decision of the
Council on appeal, all questions of procedure and order. Except as otherwise provided by statute
2-5
or by these rules, the proceedings of the Council shall be conducted in accordance with the most
recent edition of Robert’s Rules of Order.
Subd. 14. Meetings Conducted By Interactive Television. A City Council meeting may
be conducted by interactive television if all of the following provisions are met:
A. At least one member of the Council is physically present at the regular meeting location.
B. All members must be able to hear and see each other and all discussion and testimony
presented at any location at which at least one member of the Council is present.
C. All members of the public at the regular meeting location must be able to hear and see all
discussion and testimony and all votes of all members of the Council.
D. Each location at which a member of the Council is present must be open and accessible to
the public.
SECTION 202.01. DUTIES AND SALARIES, OF MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
MEMBERS.
A. The duties of the Delano Mayor and City Council Members shall be all duties prescribed
by state statute and City Code.
B. The salary of the Mayor and Council Members shall be as follows:
1. The sum of $550 per calendar month for the Mayor;
2. The sum of $375 per calendar month for each Council member;
3. The additional sum of $50 for each special or emergency Council meeting
attended in a calendar month; and
4. The additional sum of $10 for each meeting attended which concerns City
business, but excluding the following:
(a) All regular, special and emergency City Council meetings;
(b) Ceremonial and social functions;
(c) Such meeting compensation shall not exceed $10.00 per day.
SECTION 203.01. CODE OF ETHICS FOR ELECTED PUBLIC OFFICIALS.
Subd. 1. General Declaration of Policy. The proper operation of democratic government
requires that public officials be independent, impartial, and responsible to the people; that
governmental decisions and policies be made in the proper channels of the governmental
2-6
structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in
the integrity of its government. To further achieve these goals there is hereby established a code
of ethics. This code of ethics is in addition to, and not in lieu of, other laws and regulations
concerning ethics, conflicts of interest, and the integrity of public officials.
Subd. 2. Scope of Persons Covered. The provisions of this code of ethics shall be
applicable to the Mayor and Council Members as well as candidates for the offices of Mayor and
Council Member.
Subd. 3. Standards of Conduct.
A. No Special Privileges. The Mayor and Council Members shall not use their positions to
secure special privileges or exemptions for themselves or others or to intentionally
jeopardize the position or employment of others.
B. Conflict of Interest. The Mayor and Council Members shall not participate in
deliberations in any matter before the Council which affects that official’s financial
interests directly or indirectly or those of a business with which the official is associated.
Whenever such conflict is recognized, the affected City official shall disclose such
interest prior to any discussion or vote and shall be disqualified from any further official
activity on the issue.
C. Agent or Attorney. The Mayor and Council Members shall not act as agents or attorneys
for another in any matter before the Council.
D. Compensation or Gratuity. The Mayor and Council Members shall not directly or
indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward or gratuity as an
inducement to support or influence any matter proceeding connected with, or related to,
the duties of the office.
Subd. 4. Public Disclosure by Public Officials.
A. The Mayor and Council Members shall annually file with the Clerk, a signed disclosure
statement identifying any interests or rights in real property (except the official’s
homestead) located within the City and disclosing any proprietary interest of 10% or
more in any company, business enterprise, corporation, partnership, labor union or
association doing business with the City, and any positions, including whether said
positions are gratuitous or for compensation, held as officer, director, partner, agent,
proprietor or employee with any such company, business enterprise, corporation,
partnership, labor union or association.
B. Each person who files as a candidate for election as Mayor or Council Member shall file,
at the time of filing as a candidate for any such office, a disclosure statement as specified
in Subd. 4, A..
2-7
C. Within 30 days after a person has been elected such person shall file a disclosure
statement, unless such person has done so pursuant to subparagraphs A or B hereof.
D. In the event any person fails to file a complete disclosure statement within the times
provided in subparagraphs A, B or C hereof, the Clerk or the Clerk’s designee shall give
written notice of the provisions of this Section to such person, who shall thereafter file a
disclosure statement within 10 days of said notice.
E. Any material change in property or business interests or rights shall be disclosed by filing
an amended disclosure statement within 30 days after such change has occurred.
F. This code of ethics shall not be construed to require the filing of any information relating
to any person’s affiliation with, or interest in, any professional society, charitable,
religious, social, fraternal, educational, recreational, public service, civic, governmental,
political, or similar organization.
Subd. 5. Enforcement. Upon the signed written complaint of any person questioning
adherence to the requirements of this Section, or on the Council’s own volition, the Council shall
refer the matter to the City attorney for investigation and the City attorney shall report the results
of his investigation to the Council within 45 days thereafter. A copy of the City attorney’s report
shall be furnished to the person complained against, who may request a hearing on the matter
before the Council. The request for hearing shall be filed with the Clerk not later than 10 days
following receipt of the City attorney’s report by the person complained against. Upon receipt of
the City attorney’s report and at the conclusion of any hearing on the matter, the Council, by
majority vote, may dismiss the complaint as having no merit or may adopt a resolution of
censure.
SECTION 204.01. BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND TASK FORCES.
Subd. 1. Generally. Except as otherwise provided with respect to a specific board,
commission or task force, the provisions of this Section shall apply to all boards, commissions
and task forces referred to in this Chapter 2.
Subd. 2. Open Meeting Law and Data Practices Act. All meetings and matters of any
City board, commission, or task force shall be subject to the Minnesota Open Meeting Law and
the Minnesota Government Data Practices Act.
Subd. 3. Conflict of Interest. No member of any City board, commission or task force
may vote on a matter in which the member has a direct or indirect financial interest or other
substantial interest.
Subd. 4. Vacancies and Removal of Members.
A. Vacancies: Except as otherwise specified in this Chapter, a member’s position shall
become vacant upon the occurrence of any of the following:
2-8
1. The death of a member.
2. A determination by the Council that the member’s physical or mental disability
renders the member incapable of service.
3. The member’s resignation in writing.
4. A member’s absence from 3 consecutive meetings, unless excused by action of
the Council.
5. Termination of a member’s residence in the City.
B. Removal from Office. Except as otherwise specified in this Chapter, a member may be
removed:
1. Upon petition of a board, commission or task force. The board, commission or
task force by a three-fifths vote of its members, may petition to the Council to
remove any member when it believes the best interests of the City would be
served thereby. The removal of the member is not accomplished unless and until
the Council passes a motion removing the member.
2. By the Council. The Council shall have the authority, in its discretion, to remove
any member without a petition from the board, commission or task force.
C. Delano Water, Light and Power Commission. The provisions of this Subdivision 4 shall
not apply to the Delano Water, Light and Power Commission.
Subd. 5. Term Limit. The term of a member’s appointment to any City board
commission, or task force shall be 3 years. A member’s appointment to any City Board
commission or task force shall be limited to 2 full consecutive terms. An existing member of a
City board, commission or task force whose term is set to expire must apply for re-appointment
to their position and be considered with any applicants for the position. The term limit imposed
by this Subdivision shall not apply if there are no eligible applicants to fill a member’s position
that is set to expire or if the Council, upon a majority vote, re-appoints the member whose
position is set to expire for 1 additional term.
SECTION 205.01. PLANNING COMMISSION.
Subd. 1. Establishment. The City Planning Commission is established pursuant to the
provisions of Minn. Stat. §462.354, Subd. 1.
Subd. 2. Composition. The Planning Commission shall consist of 7 members. Members
are appointed by the Council and may be removed by four-fifths vote of the Council. A member
of the Council, the Building Inspector, Planning Consultant, and Engineer, shall be considered
ex-officio liaisons to the Planning Commission.
Subd. 3. Terms and Compensation. Members of the Planning Commission are appointed
for terms of 3 years in such a manner that the terms of no more than 3 of the members shall
2-9
expire on December 31st of each year. Members hold office until their successors are appointed
and qualified. The terms of ex-officio liaisons shall correspond to their respective official terms.
Vacancies during the term shall be filled by the Council for the unexpired portion of the term.
Members shall receive financial compensation for services and meeting attendance per Section
212.02 of this Code.
Subd. 4. Powers and Duties. The Planning Commission shall have the powers and duties
given to such agencies by the laws of Minnesota. The powers shall include, but are not
necessarily limited to the following:
A. To prepare and maintain, subject to Council approval, a comprehensive plan for the
development of the City.
B. To make recommendations to the Council, hold public hearings, perform other duties
pursuant to the City of Delano Land Use Code, and perform such other tasks as are
assigned to it by the Council.
Subd. 5. Organization and Meetings.
A. Election of Officers. At the January meeting, the Planning Commission shall elect a
chairperson, vice chairperson and a secretary from its membership for an annual term to
end on December 31st.
B. Chairperson. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings, appoint committees and
perform other such duties as may be ordered by the Planning Commission.
C. Vice Chairperson. The vice chairperson shall act in the capacity of the chairperson in the
absence of the chairperson. In the event the office of the chairperson becomes vacant, the
vice chairperson shall succeed to the office of the chairperson for the unexpired term and
the Planning Commission shall elect a successor to the officer of vice chairperson for the
unexpired term.
D. Meetings. The Planning Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month.
E. Special Meetings. The Chairperson or any two members of the Planning Commission
may call a special meeting of the Planning Commission. Notice of a special meeting
shall be by writing filed with the Clerk who shall then mail a notice of the time and place
of the meeting to all Planning Commission members at least 1 day before the meeting.
Where all Planning Commission members are present at a special meeting and take part
in the proceedings, failure to give notice in the manner provided shall not invalidate the
proceedings nor any action taken at the special meeting.
F. Record/Reporting. The Planning Commission shall adopt rules for transaction of
business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions and findings, which
2-10
record shall be public record. Planning Commission minutes shall be submitted to the
City Council monthly as a report of its work.
G. Work Rules.
1. The Planning Commission will meet on the second Monday of each month. All
Meetings shall be public.
2. A majority of the 7 members shall constitute a quorum. In the absence of a
quorum, the minority shall adjourn any Planning Commission meeting to a
specified time.
3. Meetings shall run from 7:00 PM to 11:00 PM. In the event that there are more
Planning Commission cases than can reasonably be concluded by 11:00 PM, the
Chair and the Planning Commission shall be empowered to extend the meeting
time or schedule another meeting during the same month to take care of the
overload.
4. In the absence of pending development applications, the Chair and/or planning
staff shall have the prerogative to cancel or postpone any regularly scheduled
meetings.
5. All public hearings shall be held at the City Hall or officially noticed location.
6. All meetings shall be conducted pursuant to the most recent edition of Robert’s
Rules of Order.
7. All recommendations shall be sent to the Council by means of written minutes,
and shall include the record of the division of votes on each recommendation.
8. Minutes of the meetings shall be recorded and kept by the planning staff.
H. Meeting Attendance.
1. A Commission member may be excused from an individual meeting for reasons
of illness, work, out of town trip, or other justifiable reason. Commission
members shall notify the Clerk of expected absences from the meeting.
2. Any member who shall be absent for any reason for 2 consecutive meetings shall
receive a reminder from the clerical secretary assigned by the City. Upon 3
consecutive absences, or absences of more than 50% of the regular Planning
Commission meetings in a given year, he/she may be recommended by Planning
Commission to the Council for replacement.
2-11
SECTION 206.01. WATER, LIGHT AND POWER COMMISSION.
Subd. 1. Establishment. The City Water, Light and Power Commission is established
pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes Sections 412.331 through 412.391.
Subd. 2. Jurisdiction. The Water, Light and Power Commission shall have full
jurisdiction and control over the City-owned water, light, power and gas system, including the
water, light, power, and gas plant, and all apparatus and materials used in operating said plant.
The Water, Light and Power Commission shall further have the authority to maintain the water,
light, power and gas plant and system, and to set rates for usage of water, light, power, and gas.
Subd. 3. Membership. The Water, Light and Power Commission shall consist of 5
members, each of whom is appointed by the Council to a 3–year term. Each member shall hold
office until a successor has been appointed and qualified.
SECTION 207.01. VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT.
There is created and continued the City Volunteer Fire Department in accordance with and
subject to applicable Minnesota Statutes, as amended from time to time.
Subd. 1. Appointment of Members. The Council shall have the power to appoint and
remove a fire chief, subordinate officers and all members of the Volunteer Fire Department.
Subd. 2. Duties. The duties of the Volunteer Fire Department shall include fire and rescue
operations within geographic areas designated by the Council and within the technical and
personnel limitations of the Volunteer Fire Department. The Council shall approve by-laws for
the Volunteer Fire Department and may enter into joint powers or mutual aid agreements for the
purpose of fire and emergency response and may authorize the expenditure of City funds for fire
and emergency response purposes.
SECTION 208.01. DELANO ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.
Subd. 1. Establishment. The Delano Economic Development Authority is established
pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes Sections 469.090 through 469.108.
Subd. 2. Governance. The Delano Economic Development Authority shall be governed
by the Board of Commissioners, which shall consist of 5 commissioners, each of whom shall be
a member of the Council.
Subd. 3. Officers. The officers of the Delano Economic Development Authority shall be a
President, a Vice-President, a Treasurer, an Assistant Treasurer, and a Secretary. The President,
the Vice-President, and the Treasurer shall be members of the Board of Commissioners and shall
be elected annually by the commissioners, and no commissioner may be both President and
Vice-President simultaneously.
2-12
Subd. 3. Powers and Authority. The Delano Economic Development Authority shall
have all powers and authority contained in Minn. Stat. §§469.090 to 469.108 and the powers of a
Housing and Redevelopment Authority contained in Minn. Stat. §§469.001 to 469.047.
SECTION 209.01. PARK AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMISSION.
The Park and Recreation Advisory Commission shall study, investigate and make
recommendations regarding short and long-term park planning and systems management,
including but not limited to the acquisition, development, construction, maintenance and
operation of City parks and playgrounds; coordination of recreational programming; preservation
of natural resources; promotion of environmental awareness; and such other matters as may be
referred to it by the Council which may include the following:
1. Recommendations regarding the acquisition and development of a complete
system of parks and recreation facilities in the City.
2. Planning and implementing a program of recreation opportunities within the City.
3. Review of proposed and existing recreation programs and advice to the recreation
staff on programming and operation.
4. Recommendation of policies to the Council on matters pertaining the operation of
recreation facilities and programs.
5. Recommendation of an annual budget for the operation of said programs and
facilities to the Council in time for inclusion in the budget proposal.
6. Cooperation and coordination of recreation and other leisure opportunities and
proposals with other City groups, school groups, community groups, and county,
state and federal agencies.
7. Review of development proposals for consistency with the City park and
recreation objectives and requirements.
SECTION 210.01. PUBLIC SAFETY COMMISSION. The Public Safety Commission
will study, investigate and make recommendations regarding crime, public safety, and law
enforcement activities within the City. The Police and Public Safety Commission shall consider
and make recommendations concerning such other matters as may be referred to it from time to
time by the Council.
SECTION 211.01. HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION. In addition to such
other duties as are assigned by the Council from time to time, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
2-13
1. The Commission shall conduct a continuing survey of all areas, places, buildings,
structures, or objects in the City which the Commission, on the basis of
information available or presented to it has reason to believe are significant to the
cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history of the City.
2. The Commission shall continually survey all areas to determine needed and
desirable improvements of older buildings throughout the City, acting in a
resource and advisory capacity to owners of historically significant sites regarding
their preservation, restoration and rehabilitation.
3. The Commission shall work for the continuing education of the citizens of the
City with respect to the civil and architectural heritage of the City. It shall keep
current a public register of designated and proposed historic preservation sites and
areas along with the plans and programs that pertain to them.
4. The Commission may recommend to the Council the acceptance of contributions
offered to the City, and to assist the City staff in preparation of applications for
grant funds to be made through the City for the purposes of the historic
preservation.
5. The Commission will, on a continuing basis, collect and review City planning and
development records, documents, studies, models, maps, plans and drawings to be
passed onto the State Historical Society as a permanent record of City history and
development.
6. The Commission shall make no application to the National Registrar of Historic
Places or to the State of Minnesota for the designation of a historic site or district
without the consent of the Council.
SECTION 212.02. COMPENSATION FOR COMMISSIONS AND
SUBCOMMITTEES.
Subd. 1. Official Commission Member Status.
A For those commissions which meet less frequently than once per month, only those
members of a commission who attend at least 75% of all general and special meetings
held by a commission or subcommittee within a consecutive 12 month period shall be
classified as official members.
B. For those commissions which meet once per month or more frequently, and for the City
Planning Commission, only those members who attend at least 75% of all general and
special meetings held by the commission within a consecutive 6 month period of time
shall be classified as official commission members.
2-14
C. Any commission member removed from such body by the Council shall not hold official
member status for the year in which the member is removed.
D. Council Members serving on the Delano Water, Light and Power Commission shall be
deemed official members of the Delano Water, Light and Power Commission regardless
of the attendance requirements in this Section.
Subd. 2. Other Commissions. Unless otherwise provided by statute or this Code, the
salary of each official commission member appointed under Chapter 2 of the City Code shall be
as follows:
1. Each official commission member on a commission which meets once per month
or more frequently shall receive a salary of $150.00 per year.
2. Each official commission member on a commission which meets less frequently
than once per month shall receive a salary of $50.00 per year.
Subd. 3. Water, Light and Power Commission. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subd
2, the salary of each Water, Light and Power Commission member appointed pursuant to Minn.
Stat. §412.341 and to Delano City Code Section 205.01 shall be as follows:
1. $100 per month plus $50 for every general, special and emergency commission
meeting attended during the calendar year.
2. $200 per day of attendance at the following meetings upon Commission approval
(but only in the event that the meeting day occurs on a day which the Commission
member was regularly scheduled to work in his or her employment):
a. Meetings of the Minnesota Municipal Utilities Association;
b. Meetings of the Central Minnesota Municipal Power Agency;
c. Such other Commission-related meetings for which the Council authorizes
attendance prior to the meeting.
SECTION 213.01. INDEMNIFICATION.
To the extent required by state law, the City will defend and indemnify its officers and/or
employees against a claim resulting from the performance of their official duties. Any judgment
or settlement for a cost, disbursement, or award of attorneys’ fees in favor of the officer or
employee, to which this defense or indemnification obligation applies, will be assigned to the
City. This indemnification does not apply in cases of intentional torts, malfeasance in office, or
willful or wanton conduct. In those cases, the Council may indemnify the officer and/or
employee if it finds this to be in the public interest. Indemnification under this paragraph is
subject to the liability limits proposed by Minn. Stat. § 466.04 and any other relevant laws.
2-15
SECTION 214.01. PROHIBITIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYMENT
APPLICATIONS.
A person shall not make a false statement or offer false information relating to that person’s
application for employment, or current employment, with the City. A person seeking
employment or promotion in the municipal service must not directly or indirectly give any
money, service or other valuable consideration to a person who has the ability to influence or
make the employment or promotion decisions.
SECTION 215.01. ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS.
The following employees of the City, while in the course and scope of the performance of their
duties as an employee, may issue citations in lieu of arrest or continued detention:
1. Animal Control Officers;
2. Building Official;
3. Inspectors;
4. Public Works Director;
5. General Manager of Water, Light and Power Commission;
6. Fire Chief;
7. Tree Inspector;
8. Weed Inspector;
9. Clerk;
10. City Administrator.
SECTION 216.01. AUTHORITY TO OBTAIN CRIMINAL HISTORY.
Subd. 1. Authority to Obtain Criminal History Information.
Mandatory Reviews. The City Administrator or the City Administrator’s designee is authorized
and shall obtain Criminal History Information with respect to finalists for regular, full-time or
part-time employment and paid firefighter positions with the City.
Subd. 2. Consent of Subject Required.
Criminal History Information may be obtained only with a written consent of the person whose
Criminal History Information is sought to be obtained. If the individual refuses to consent, such
individual will be disqualified from work or service with the City.
Subd. 3. Compliance with the Minnesota Criminal Rehabilitation Act, Minn. Stat. §
364.01 through 364.10.
The use of Criminal History Information shall be subject to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes
§ 364.01 through 364.10.
2-16
SECTION 217.01. DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED, UNCLAIMED AND EXCESS
PROPERTY.
Subd. 1. Disposal of Abandoned Motor Vehicles.
A. Definitions.
1. “Abandoned motor vehicle” means a motor vehicle as defined in Minnesota
Statute § 169.01, Subd. 3, that has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on
public property illegally or lacking vital component parts, or has remained for a
period of more than 48 hours on private property without the consent of the
person in control of such property or in an inoperable condition such that it has no
substantial potential further use consistent with its usual function unless it is kept
in an enclosed garage or storage building. It shall also mean a motor vehicle
voluntarily surrendered by its owner to and accepted by the City. A classic car or
pioneer car, as defined in Minnesota Statute § 168.10, shall not be considered an
abandoned motor vehicle within the meaning of this Section if maintained on
private property. Vehicles on the premises of junk yards or automobile
graveyards, which are licensed and maintained in accordance with the City Code,
shall not be considered abandoned motor vehicles within the meaning of this
Section.
2. “Vital component parts” means those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to
the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, the motor,
drive train and wheels.
B. Custody. The City may take into custody and impound any abandoned motor vehicle.
C. Immediate Sale. When an abandoned motor vehicle is more than seven model years of
age, is lacking vital component parts, and does not display a license plate currently valid
in Minnesota or any other state or foreign country, it shall immediately be eligible for
sale at public auction and shall not be subject to the notification, reclamation, or title
provisions of this Section.
D. Notice.
1. When an abandoned motor vehicle does not fall within the provisions of
Subparagraph C of this Subdivision, the City shall give notice within 10 days of
the taking. The notice shall set forth the date and place of the taking; the year,
make, model and serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle, if such
information can be reasonably obtained; and the place where the vehicle is being
held; shall inform the owner and any lien holders of their right to reclaim the
vehicle under Subparagraph F of this Subdivision; and shall state that failure of
the owner or lien holder to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle and contents
will be deemed a waiver by them of all rights, title and interest in the vehicle and
2-17
a consent to the sale of the vehicle and contents at a public auction pursuant to
Subparagraph F of this Section.
2. The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if any, of the abandoned
motor vehicle and to all readily identifiable lien holders of record. If it is
impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of the
registered owner and all lien holders, the notice shall be published once in the
official newspaper. Published notices may be grouped together for convenience
and economy.
E. Right to Reclaim.
1. The owner or any lien holder of an abandoned motor vehicle shall have a right to
reclaim such vehicle from the City upon payment of all towing and storage
charges resulting from taking the vehicle into custody within 15 days after the
date of the notice required by this Section.
2. Nothing in this Subdivision shall be construed to impair any lien of a
garagekeeper under the laws of this State or the right of the lien holder to
foreclose. For the purposes of this subparagraph E “garagekeeper” means an
operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a motor vehicle
storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair, or
maintenance of motor vehicles.
F. Public Sale.
1. An abandoned motor vehicle and contents taken into custody and not reclaimed
under Subparagraph E of this Subdivision shall be sold to the highest bidder at
public auction or sale, following 1 published notice published at least 7 days prior
to such auction or sale. The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form
prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, which shall be sufficient title to
dispose of the vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to register the
vehicle and receive a certification of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of
ownership. Before such a vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must
receive a motor vehicle safety check.
2. From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, the City shall
reimburse itself for the cost of towing, maintaining and storing the vehicle, and all
administrative, notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to this Section.
Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the
vehicle or entitled lien holder for 90 days and then shall be deposited in the
General Fund of the City.
G. Disposal of Vehicles Not Sold. Where no bid has been received for an abandoned motor
vehicle, the City may dispose of it in accordance with this Section.
2-18
H. Contracts and Disposal.
1. The City may contract with any qualified person for collection, storage,
incineration, volume reduction, transportation or other services necessary to
prepare abandoned motor vehicles and other scrap metal for recycling or other
methods of disposal.
2. Where the City enters into a contract with a person duly licensed by the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, the Agency shall review the contract to
determine whether it conforms to the Agency’s plan for solid waste disposal. A
contract that does so conform may be approved by the Agency. Where a contract
has been approved, the Agency may reimburse the City for the costs incurred
under the contract which have not been reimbursed.
3. If the City utilizes its own equipment and personnel for disposal of the abandoned
motor vehicle, it shall be entitled to reimbursement for the cost thereof along with
its other costs as herein provided.
Subd. 2. Disposal of Unclaimed Property.
A. Definition. “Abandoned property” means tangible or intangible property, including cash
and negotiable instruments, but not including motor vehicle subject to Subd. 1 herein,
that has lawfully come into the possession of the City in the course of municipal
operations, remains unclaimed by the owner, and has been in the possession of the City
for at least 90 days and has been declared such by a resolution of the Council.
B. Preliminary Notice. If the City Administrator knows the identity and location of the
owner, the City Administrator shall service written notice upon the owner at least 30 days
prior to a declaration of abandonment by the Council. If the City acquired possession
from a prior holder, the identity and whereabouts of whom are known by the City
Administrator, notice shall also be served upon the prior holder. Such notice shall
describe the property and state that unless it is claimed and proof of ownership, or
entitlement to possession established, the matter of declaring it abandoned property will
be brought to the attention of the Council after the expiration of 30 days from the date of
such notice.
C. Retention of Property for City Use or Notice and Sale. Upon adoption of a resolution
declaring certain property to be abandoned property, the City Administrator shall publish
a notice thereof describing the same, together with the names (if known) and addresses (if
known) of prior owners and holders thereof, and including a brief description of such
property. The text of such notice shall also state (1) that the property will be retained by
the City for City use; or (2) that a sale of the property will take place and the time, place
and manner of the sale of all such property is designated in the notice; or (3) in the case
of cash or negotiable instruments, that the cash will be paid into the General Fund of the
2-19
City and negotiable instruments will be negotiated and the cash received therefore will be
paid into the General Fund of the City. In the case of a sale of the property, such notice
shall be published once at least 3 weeks prior to sale. In all other cases, the notice shall
be published once within 3 weeks after the Council resolution declaring the property to
be abandoned property. In the event of a sale of the property, sale shall be made to the
highest bidder at public auction or sale conducted in the manner directed by the Council
in its resolution declaring property abandoned.
D. In lieu of the procedures set forth in paragraph C of this Subdivision, abandoned property
may be disposed of by a private sale through a nonprofit organization that has a
significant mission of community service.
E. Funds and Claims Thereon. All such cash and cash from the negotiation of such
negotiable instruments and all proceeds from such sale by the City shall be paid into the
General Fund of the City and expenses thereof paid therefrom. In the event the property
is retained by the City for City use, the property shall be used by the City only for public
purposes of the City and not for any private use. The former owner, if he makes claim
within 8 months from the date of publication of the notice herein provided and upon
application and satisfactory proof of ownership, may, in the case of property retained by
the City, have the property returned to him or her; or may be paid the amount of cash or
negotiables; or, in the case of property sold, may be paid the amount received therefore,
less a pro rata share of the expenses of storage, publication of notice, and sale expenses,
but without interest. Such payment shall be also made from the General Fund. In the
case of property retained by the City for City use or in the case of property held for sale
by the City, the City will not be responsible for any diminution in value of or damage to
the property during the period of time in which the property is in the City’s custody or
control.
Subd. 3. Disposal of Excess Property.
A. Declaration of Surplus and Authorizing Sale of Property. The City Administrator may,
from time to time, recommend to the Council that certain personal property owned by the
City is no longer needed for a municipal purpose and should be sold. By action of the
Council, said property shall be declared surplus, the value estimated, and the City
Administrator authorized to dispose said property in accordance with law, including
compliance with any competitive bidding requirements imposed by the Municipal
Contracting Law, Minn. Stat. §471.345.
B. Receipts from Sales of Surplus Property. All receipts from sales of surplus property
under this Section shall be placed in the General Fund.
2-20
Subd. 4. Persons Who May Not Purchase - Exception.
A. Except as permitted by Minn. Stat. § 15.054, no employee of the City or a member of the
Council, or an advisor serving the City in a professional capacity may be a purchaser of
property under this Section.
B. It is unlawful for any person to be a purchaser of property under this Section if such
purchase is prohibited by the terms of this Section.
Subd. 5. Electronic Sale of Surplus Supplies.
Notwithstanding any other procedural requirements of this Section, the City Council may
authorize the City Administrator to contract to sell supplies, materials, and equipment which is
surplus, obsolete or unused using an electronic selling process in which purchasers compete to
purchase the surplus supplies, materials, or equipment at the highest purchase price in an open
and interactive environment.
SECTION 218.01. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.
Subd. 1. Emergency Management Act Adopted. The “Minnesota Emergency
Management Act of 1996,” Minnesota Statutes, 2008, Chapter 12, as amended herein from time
to time insofar as it relates to cities, is hereby adopted by reference as part of this Section, as
fully as if set forth explicitly herein.
Subd. 2. Establishment of an Emergency Management Agency. There is hereby created
within the City government an emergency management agency, which shall be under the
supervision of a Director to be appointed forthwith by the Council. The Director shall have
direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of said emergency
management agency, subject to the overall direction and control of the Council.
SECTION 219.01. REIMBURSEMENT OF CERTAIN EXPENSES.
Subd. 1. Applicable Reviews. This Section applies to the following:
A. requests for rezoning review and approval;
B. requests for planned unit development concept review and approval;
C. requests for planned unit development district review and approval;
D. requests for conditional use permit review and approval;
E. requests for Subdivision review and approval.
F. requests for site plan review and approval.
G. requests for flood plain permit;
H. requests for shore land permit;
I. requests for mining or land alterations permit;
J. requests for variances from any of the City’s land use regulations and Subdivision
regulations;
2-21
K. requests for tax increment financing or other forms of public assistance;
L. requests for annexations;
M. requests for concept site plan review and approval, and
N. requests for wetland related reviews and reports.
(Any requests in A through N are hereinafter referred to as “Application”).
Requests for building permits are covered by City Code Section 416.01 and its applicable fee
provisions.
Subd. 2. City Findings. The City finds that a significant amount of City personnel time
and expenses are used in reviewing Applications. The City has determined that the City’s
taxpayers have been sharing a disproportionate burden of these expenses, and that a more
equitable arrangement is for the applicant to incur those expenses.
Subd. 3. Applicant’s Reimbursement of City Expenses and Applicant Deposit
Agreements. All persons requesting an Application shall reimburse the City for all costs,
including administrative, legal, planning, engineering and consulting costs, incurred in
reviewing, investigating, administering and drafting legal documents related to the Applications
and all documents and issues related to the Applications. With respect to City staff time and
expenses, reimbursement shall be at such rates and amounts as the City, from time-to-time, shall
determine by ordinance. With respect to legal and consultant costs, Applicant shall reimburse
the City for all costs billed City. Reimbursements for all such costs are due within 30 days of
billing by City. Applicant shall, concurrent with submission of Applicant’s request for approval,
execute a deposit agreement in such form and on such terms as are approved by the Council.
This deposit agreement may require Applicant to make a deposit with the City sufficient to cover
City’s anticipated Application review costs.
Subd. 4. Failure to Comply with the Section. In addition to other remedies and penalties,
the City may discontinue the review process and deny a requested approval for an Application if
such person violates any requirement of this Section.
P:\Home\1500.309 -- Delano City Code\CHAPTER 2 OPERATIONS AND ADMINISTRATION\CHAPTER 2 (clean) 2009 02 09.doc
3-1
CHAPTER 3 PUBLIC PROPERTY AND SERVICE ASSESSMENTS.... 3-1
SECTION 301.01 RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT.................................... 3-2
SECTION 302.01 CURRENT SERVICES ASSESSMENTS ............................ 3-8
SECTION 303.01 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS .......................................... 3-10
SECTION 304.01 PUBLIC WATERS................................................................ 3-11
3-2
CHAPTER 3
PUBLIC PROPERTY AND SERVICE ASSESSMENTS
SECTION 301.01 RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT.
Subd. 1. Findings, Purpose and Intent. To provide for the health, safety, and welfare of
its citizens, and to ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-way,
the City strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and free from unnecessary
encumbrances.
Accordingly, the City hereby enacts this Section of the Code relating to right-of-way permits and
administration. This Section imposes reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance
of facilities and equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some
future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of State and Federal agencies.
Under this Section, persons excavating and obstructing the rights-of-way will bear financial
responsibility for their work. Finally, this Section provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and
projected costs from persons using the public rights-of-way.
This Section shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session Laws, Chapter 123, as amended
from time-to-time, substantially codified in Minnesota Statutes Sections 237.16, 237.162,
237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the “Act”) and the other laws governing applicable rights
of the City and users of the right-of-way. This Section shall also be interpreted consistent with
Minnesota Rules 7819.0050 – 7819.9950 where possible. To the extent any provision of this
Section cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota Rules, that interpretation most
consistent with the Act and other applicable statutory and case law is intended. This Section
shall not be interpreted to limit the regulatory and police powers of the City to adopt and enforce
general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
Subd. 2. Election to Manage the Public Rights-Of-Way. Pursuant to the authority
granted to the City under State and Federal statutory, administrative and common law, the City
hereby elects pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Section 237.163, Subd. 2(b), to manage rights-ofway
within its jurisdiction.
Subd. 3. Administration. The Public Works Director is the principal City official
responsible for the administration of the right-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the other
ordinances related thereto. The Public Works Director may delegate any or all of the duties
hereunder.
Subd. 4. Excavation Permit Required.
A. Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than authorized City
employees to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, drill, bore, undermine or in any manner
break up any right-of-way or to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the
surface of any right-of-way, or to place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or
excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the right-of3-
3
way unless such person shall first have obtained an excavation permit therefor from the
Public Works Director as herein provided.
B. Exception. A permit is not required for the following exceptions. These exceptions do
not relieve the property owner from fully complying with all provisions of this Code
relating to driveway use and construction in City boulevards.
1. No permit is required of the owner for gardening or sodding otherwise allowed in
the boulevard area adjacent to the paved portion of the public streets, or for
gardening or sodding in boulevard areas where a public easement exists for
underground purposes. Trees and shrubbery and any structures placed in the
boulevard by the property owner are permitted at sufferance only, and shall be
removed promptly by the owner at the owner’s expense upon a finding by the
Public Works Director that the existence of such encroachment upon the
boulevard interferes with maintenance or replacement of a utility or right-of-way
improvement, or constitutes a safety hazard.
2. No permit is required of the owner for driveway replacement or repair that does
not involve any of the following in the boulevard area:
a. Enlargement or reduction of the driveway area.
b. Any relocation of the driveway from its existing location.
c. Any change to the driveway grade.
d. Any repair to or change of the driveway curb, gutter or apron.
Subd. 5. Application for Permit. No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written
application for the issuance of an excavation permit, on forms provided for that purpose, is
submitted to the Public Works Director. The written application and supporting documentation
shall include:
A. Name and address of applicant.
B. Emergency contact person, phone numbers.
C. Nature, location and purpose of excavation.
D. Date of commencement.
E. Date of completion.
F. Right-of-way restoration plan.
3-4
G. Security deposit, letter of credit, or corporate bond.
H. Evidence of public liability insurance.
I. Plans showing the extent of the proposed excavation work, dimensions and
elevations of both existing ground prior to excavation and the proposed restored
excavation surfaces.
J. Location of any utilities within the excavation site.
K. All information referred to in Subdivision 11 herein, as well as any other
information that may be necessary to evaluate the excavation permit.
Subd. 6. Permit Fee. Upon submission of the application for the excavation permit, the
applicant shall pay a fee as prescribed by City ordinance to the Public Works Director to cover
reasonable costs for the review, issuance and enforcement of the excavation permit.
Subd. 7. Issuance of Permit. The Public Works Director shall issue such permit within 10
days after receipt of a complete application provided:
A. The proposed excavation project appears to comply with the applicable law.
B. The City has received the deposit of cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or corporate bond
in a form which complies with Subdivision 10.
C. The City has received an agreement in writing by the applicant to pay all actual costs of
repairs, including those costs that exceed the estimate.
D. Agreement in writing by the applicant to be bound by all of the provisions of this Section.
E. The Public Works Director may advance or delay the commencement date of an
excavation permit to coordinate excavation work within a City right-of-way with other
utility or right-of-way improvement projects.
Subd. 8. Posting Excavation Permit. Upon receipt of the excavation permit, the permit
shall be posted at the excavation site identifying the permittee’s name, permit number, and date
of expiration. It shall be the duty of any permittee hereunder to keep the permit posted in a
conspicuous place at the site of the excavation work. It shall be unlawful for any person to
exhibit such permit at or about any excavation not covered by such permit or to misrepresent the
permit number or the date of expiration.
Subd. 9. Term of Permit. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way beyond
the date or dates specified in the permit unless, before the expiration date of the initial permit, the
following requirements are completed:
3-5
A. The permittee makes a supplementary application for a right-of-way excavation
permit.
B. A new permit or permit extension is approved.
In accordance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1000, Subp. 3, the City shall establish and impose a
delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or
restoration. The delay penalty shall be established from time to time by Council resolution.
Subd. 10. Financial Security.
A. Requirement of Security. Before an excavation permit is issued, the applicant shall
deposit cash, submit an irrevocable letter of credit, or corporate bond in an amount
sufficient to cover expenses of excavation restoration, permit administration, and
enforcement in favor of the City. The Public Works Director may require additional
security in the amount necessary to assure the City that the street and base are restored to
a condition comparable to that in existence when the excavation commenced. The
required financial security must be:
1. Attorney Approval. The financial security must be satisfactory to the City
Attorney in form and substance.
2. Conditions of Security. Conditioned that the applicant will faithfully comply with
all the terms and conditions of this Code; all rules, regulations and requirements
pursuant thereto and as required by the Public Works Director, including payment
of the charge for street restoration work as set forth in the rules and regulations.
3. Hold Harmless. Conditioned that the applicant will secure and hold the City, its
elected and appointed officials, employees and agents, and its officers harmless
against any and all claims, judgments, or other costs arising from the excavation
permit or for which the City, its elected and appointed officials, employees, and
agents may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to persons or
property through the fault of the permittee.
B. Future Recovery. Recovery on such financial security for any injury, accident or Cityincurred
cost shall not exhaust the security, but it shall in its entirety cover any or all
future accidents, injuries and City-incurred costs for the excavation work for which it is
given. In the event there is a claim and draw down on the security, the City may require
the permittee to re-establish the security to the amount of the remaining project costs.
C. Suit Against City. In the event of any suit or claim against the City by reason of the
negligence or default of the permittee, upon the City giving written notice to the
permittee of such suit or claim, any final judgment against the City requiring it to pay for
such damage shall be conclusive upon the permittee and his security.
3-6
Subd. 11. Excavation Regulations. All work done pursuant to an excavation permit issued
under the provisions of this Section shall be performed under the direction and to the satisfaction
of the Public Works Director or his/her duly authorized agent. The permittee shall provide the
following information and plans for the review and approval by the Public Works Director or
his/her duly authorized agent prior to issuance of a permit:
A. Notification of Public Utilities. All public utilities shall be notified by the permittee of
permittee’s intent to make a street excavation giving notice of time, place and purpose of
such excavation.
B. Determination of Underground Facilities. The permittee shall have the duty of
determining the location and depth of all existing underground facilities.
C. Backfilling. The permittee shall describe the manner and method of backfilling street
excavation and the procedure to be followed in compacting backfilled material.
D. Material Specifications. The permittee shall describe the specifications as to material to
be used in backfilling street excavation.
E. Safeguards of Properties – Facilities. The permittee shall describe the manner and
method of making street excavation including procedure to safeguard and protect
adjoining and adjacent property and existing underground and above ground facilities.
The street restoration must be reviewed and approved by the Public Works Director.
Subd. 12. Right-of-Way Restoration. The permittee shall be responsible for restoration of
right-of-way excavation in accordance with the following standards:
A. Restoration shall be completed within the dates specified in the permit.
B. Restoration shall be according to the standards and materials specified by the City.
C. The permittee shall correct defects in patching, or restoration performed by permittee or
its agents. The permittee, upon notification from the City, shall correct all restoration
work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the City. Said work shall be
completed within 5 calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the City, unless
another period of time is approved by the Public Works Director.
D. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition
required by the City, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required
by the City, the City, at its option, may do such work. In that event, the permittee shall
pay to the City, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If
permittee fails to pay as required, the City may exercise its rights under the financial
security.
3-7
Subd. 13. Emergency Action. In the event of any emergency in which a main, conduit, or
utility facility in or under the street breaks, bursts, or otherwise is in such condition as to
immediately endanger the property, life, health, or safety of any individual, the person owning or
controlling such main, conduit, or utility facility, without first applying for and obtaining an
excavation permit hereunder, shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or
remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health and safety of
individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such facility shall apply for an
excavation permit no later than the end of the next succeeding day during which the City offices
are open for business, and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an
excavation permit hereunder.
Subd. 14. Non-Completion or Abandonment. Work shall progress in an expeditious
manner until completion in order to avoid unnecessary inconvenience to the general public. In
the event that the work shall not be performed in accordance with the applicable regulations of
the City or the provisions of this Section, or shall cease or be abandoned without due cause, the
City may, after 5 days’ notice in writing to the holder of said permit, correct said work or fill the
excavation, and repair the street, and in such event the entire cost to the City of such work shall
be a liability of and shall be paid by the person to whom the permit was issued and his financial
security.
Subd. 15. Indemnification. The permittee shall indemnify, keep and hold the City, its
agents, elected officials and employees free and harmless from liability on account of injury or
damage to persons or property arising or growing out of the permittee’s negligence or other
wrongful act in making any street excavation. In the event that suit shall be brought against the
City, its agents, elected officials and employees either independently or jointly with the permittee
on account thereof, the permittee, upon notice to it by the City, shall defend the City its agents,
elected officials and employees in any suit at the cost of the permittee, and in the event of a final
judgment being obtained against the City, its agents, elected officials and employees either
independently or jointly with the permittee, the permittee shall pay such judgment with all costs
and hold the City its agents, elected officials and employees harmless therefrom.
Subd. 17. Refusal of Permits. If any person shall fail, refuse or neglect to comply with the
provisions of this Section, or any rules or regulations of the City, or any reasonable orders or
directions of the Public Works Director in reference thereto, the Public Works Director may
refuse to issue further permits to such person until such conditions or orders are complied with,
may order such person to immediately stop all work within the right-of-way, and may revoke any
permit already issued.
Subd. 18. Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. In the event that any person shall make an excavation in any
street of the City without obtaining a permit therefor, the fee for such permit shall be doubled, in
addition to the other penalties provided in this Code.
Subd. 19. Appeal. A right-of-way user that (1) has been denied a permit; (2) has had a
permit revoked; or (3) believes that the fees imposed are invalid, may have the denial,
3-8
revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon written request, by the Council. A decision by the
Council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and supported by
written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
Subd. 20. Severability. If any portion of this Section is for any reason held invalid by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
thereof. Nothing in this Section precludes the City from requiring a franchise agreement with the
applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to requirements set forth herein.
SECTION 302.01 CURRENT SERVICES ASSESSMENTS.
Subd. 1. Definition of “Current Service Work”. The term “Current Service Work”
includes the following:
A. Snow, ice or rubbish removal from any sidewalk or other area within the public right-ofway
or adjacent to a public street.
B. Weed elimination from the right-of-way or from private property. For purposes of this
Section, “weeds” shall mean any plant vegetation that is noxious, as defined by law or
not, any vegetation that reaches a height greater than 10 inches, and any other vegetation
that constitutes a nuisance as defined in City Code Chapter 8.
C. Removal or elimination of public health or safety hazards from private property,
excluding any hazardous or substandard building included under the provisions of Minn.
Stat. §§463.15 to 463.26.
D. Installation and repair of water service lines, street sprinkling, and other dust treatment of
streets.
E The trimming and care of trees and the removal of unsound trees from any right-of-way.
F. The treatment and removal of insect infested or diseased trees on private property.
G. The repair of sidewalks and alleys.
H. The operation of a street lighting system
I. The operation and maintenance of a fire protection system.
Subd. 2. Primary Duty of Owners and Occupants. Primary responsibility for all Current
Service Work shall be the responsibility of the property owner and occupant (except in the case
of street sprinkling or other street dust treatment, alley repair, public right-of-way tree trimming
and the maintenance, removal or operation of a street lighting system).
3-9
Subd. 3 Inspections and Notice of Need for Current Service Work. The Council or the
City Administrator may designate such inspections as they deem necessary to determine owner
and occupant compliance with the requirements of this Section. If it is found that any Current
Service Work that is the primary responsibility of the owner and occupant is not being
performed, the City Administrator or the City Administrator’s designee shall cause a notice to be
served, by certified mail or personal service, upon the record owner of the property and the
occupant, ordering such owner and occupant to perform the Current Service Work within a
specified period of time, and stating that if the owner and occupant fail to do so, the City will do
so and all expenses of such Current Service Work shall be assessed against the property. Notice
by certified mail is complete upon mailing.
Subd. 4. City Performance of Work. In the event the owner or occupant do not perform
the Current Services Work within the time specified in the notice described in Subd. 3 herein, the
City may thereafter perform such work, at the owner’s expense, in accordance with the notice,
and assess all costs of doing such work pursuant to Subdivision 6 herein.
Subd. 5. Street and Right-of-Way Tree Care.
A. Notice. The Council may each year determine what streets and alleys shall be sprinkled,
flushed, or given other maintenance or cleaning treatment during the year, and the kind of
work to be done on each. The Council may also determine from time to time the rights of
way on which trees shall be trimmed and cared for and what unsound trees shall be
removed. Before any work is done, the Clerk shall, under the Council’s direction,
publish notice that the Council will meet to consider such projects. The notice shall be
published in the official newspaper at least once no less than 2 weeks prior to the
meeting. The notice shall contain the rights of way affected and the particular projects
proposed, and the estimated cost of each project, either in total or on the basis of the
proposed assessment per front foot or otherwise.
B. Hearing. The Council shall hear property owners concerning the scope and desirability
of any proposed projects set forth in this Subdivision. The Council shall thereupon adopt
a resolution confirming the original projects with such modification as it deems desirable,
and shall provide for completion of the work. The Clerk shall keep a record of the cost
and the portion of the cost properly attributable to each lot and parcel of property abutting
on the street or alley on which the work is done.
Subd. 5. Personal Liability. The owner of property on or adjacent to which Current Service
Work has been performed shall be personally liable for the cost of such service. As soon as the
service is completed and the cost determined, the Clerk shall prepare a bill and mail it to the
owner. Thereupon, the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the Clerk’s office.
Subd. 6. Assessment. On or before November 1 of each year, the Clerk shall list the total
unpaid charges for each type of Current Service Work against each separate lot or parcel to
which they are attributable. The Council may then levy the charges against property benefited as
a special assessment under Minnesota Statute, Chapter 429 and other pertinent statutes, for
3-10
certification by the Clerk and collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual
installments, not exceeding ten, as the Council may determine in each case.
Subd. 7. Owner Care. Property owners may undertake improvements to adjacent public
property only after submitting a proposal to the Public Works Director who shall recommend
approval or rejection to the Council who in turn shall approve or reject the proposed
improvement.
SECTION 303.01 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS.
Subd. 1. Purpose. The City parks and playgrounds shall be available for all of the people
in the area for organized sports and activities, recreation, relaxation and picnics.
Subd. 2. Regulations.
A. Overnight Use. The City parks, playgrounds, grandstand, and picnic shelters shall not
be used or occupied between one-half hour after dusk and one-half hour before dawn.
Except by special permit, overnight camping and parking is prohibited. The Council may
allow extended time or special use and occupancy by permit granted upon such
reasonable conditions relating to health, safety, and welfare as the Council shall
determine. Violation of such conditions shall be a misdemeanor, and shall be cause for
refusal to use or occupy on subsequent occasions. Use of trail systems within the City
shall not be subject to the time restrictions described in this Subdivision.
B. Vandalism. No person shall remove, break, destroy, injure, mutilate, deface or damage in
any way any structure, monument, statue, facade, fountain, bleacher, backstop, playing
field portion of the grandstand, fence, railing, flag pole, vehicle, bench, tree, shrub, fern,
plant, flower, fireplace, or other property in the City parks and playgrounds.
C. Noise. Noise or obnoxious behavior tending to annoy other persons within or throughout
the City parks and playgrounds is prohibited.
D. Beverage and Food Containers. Glass, plastic, metal and any food and beverage
containers of any kind shall be disposed of promptly in refuse receptacles. No alcoholic
beverages shall be consumed in City parks or playgrounds without a permit.
E. Open Burning Restricted. It shall be unlawful to light or maintain an open fire, in any
City park or playground, except that a charcoal grill may be used in an area designated
therefor.
F. Traffic and Parking. It shall be unlawful for any motorized vehicle or equipment to be
parked or operated in any City park or recreation area other than on established roadways
and designated parking areas.
3-11
G. Additional Regulations. The Council may, by ordinance, adopt additional rules and
regulations for the use of public parks and playgrounds, and post signs stating such rules
and regulations within those parks, playgrounds, recreational areas or athletic fields
where such rules and regulations apply, and it shall be unlawful for any person to violate
the same when such rules and regulations are so posted.
SECTION 304.01 PUBLIC WATERS.
Swimming and fishing are prohibited from all bridges within the City and in the Crow River
from the bridge and river areas at the following places: the Bridge Avenue and River Street
intersection; the Highway 12 intersection; and the railroad trestle on River Street. The Council
may further specify prohibited areas by posting.
P:\Home\1500.309 -- Delano City Code\CHAPTER 3 PUBLIC PROPERTY\CHAPTER 3 (clean) 2009 02 09.doc
4CHAPTER 4 PUBLIC PROTECTION AND GENERAL LICENSING................. 4-2
SECTION 401.01. LICENSING AND PERMIT PROVISIONS ...................................... 4-2
SECTION 402.01 SHOWS AND LARGE ASSEMBLIES ............................................... 4-3
SECTION 403.01 DANCES................................................................................................. 4-4
SECTION 404.01 SOLID WASTE AND MATERIALS…………………………….. 4-6
SECTION 405.01 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ............................................. 4-11
SECTION 406.01 ANIMAL REGULATIONS AND LICENSES.................................. 4-23
SECTION 407.01 KENNELS. ........................................................................................... 4-36
SECTION 408.01 PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS .. 4-36
SECTION 409.01 MOVING BUILDINGS....................................................................... 4-40
SECTION 410.01 NUMBERING OF HOMES AND BUSINESS PLACES................. 4-43
SECTION 411.01 PARADES............................................................................................. 4-44
SECTION 412.01 GAMBLING......................................................................................... 4-45
SECTION 413.01 ADULT USES ...................................................................................... 4-48
SECTION 414.01 SWIMMING POOLS.......................................................................... 4-55
SECTION 415.01 FIRE CODE AND OTHER FIRE REGULATIONS ....................... 4-56
SECTION 416.01 MINNESOTA STATE BUILDING CODE....................................... 4-60
SECTION 417.01 TEMPORARY OUTDOOR SALES.................................................. 4-61
SECTION 418.01 GARAGE AND YARD SALES.......................................................... 4-62
SECTION 419.01 PAWNBROKERS................................................................................ 4-62
SECTION 420.01 FIREWORKS ...................................................................................... 4-74
SECTION 421.01 CABLE ORDINANCE........................................................................ 4-77
CHAPTER 4
PUBLIC PROTECTION AND GENERAL LICENSING
SECTION 401.01 LICENSING AND PERMIT PROVISIONS.
Except as otherwise provided in this code, all licenses granted by the City shall be
governed by the provisions of this Section. For purposes of this Section, “license” means a
document issued by the City, including any permit, allowing the applicant to engage in the
conduct specified in the license.
Subd. 1. Application. Every application for a license shall be made to the Clerk on a form
the Clerk provides and shall include any other information required by the Council and this
Chapter. An application shall be accompanied by payment to the Clerk of the prescribed annual
fee to cover the cost to issue the license and to supervise, inspect and regulate licensees. Unless
otherwise specified herein or in the terms of the license, all license terms shall begin on July 1
and terminate on June 30 of the following year.
Subd. 2. Action on Application. The Clerk shall present the completed application to the
Council for action or, if the license does not require Council approval, the Clerk shall issue or
deny the license.
Subd. 3. Refusal and Revocation. The Council, or the Clerk where the license is used by
the Clerk, may, for any reasonable cause, refuse to grant any application and revoke any license.
Reasonable cause may include failure to submit a complete and accurate application, the failure
to comply with applicable code Sections or other applicable laws, the failure to follow any
conditions in the code for issuing a license, and failure to follow any conditions of the issuance
of the license. The Council may attach any reasonable conditions which an applicant must meet
before a license is issued. An applicant or licensee shall receive notice and a hearing prior to
revocation or suspension of a license. Summary suspension of a license is permitted where
emergency action is required or under such other reasonable circumstances where the Clerk
denies, suspends or revokes a license, the applicant may appeal the Clerk’s decision to the
Council. Where the Council denies, suspends or revokes a license, there is no further appeal of
the decision, unless otherwise provided by this Code or by law.
Subd. 4. Insurance Requirements. Whenever insurance is required by a Section of this
chapter, the applicant shall file with the Clerk a policy or certificate of public liability insurance
showing (1) that the limits are at least as high as required, (2) that coverage is effective for at
least the license term approved, (3) that such insurance will not be cancelled, terminated, or
materially altered without 30 days’ advance written notice served upon the Clerk, and (4) that the
City, its elected and appointed officials and employees are named insureds on the policy or
certificate. Cancellation, termination or material alteration of such coverage shall be grounds
for license revocation.
Subd. 5. Unpaid Claims. The Council may suspend, refuse to grant, or refuse to renew a
license for any property upon which taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the State,
County, School District, or City are delinquent or remain unpaid after due. In the event a legal
4-3
or administrative proceeding has been commenced, in good faith, questioning the amount or
validity of such taxes, assessments or other financial claims, the Council may, upon application,
waive strict compliance with this requirement.
Subd. 6. Disqualification Because of Prior Conviction. No person shall be disqualified
from obtaining a license solely or in part because of a prior conviction of a crime or crimes,
unless the crime or crimes for which convicted directly relate to the occupation or activity for
which the license is sought. In determining if a conviction directly relates to an occupation or
activity for which a license is sought, the City shall consider the factors and evidence of
rehabilitation referred to in Minn. Stat. §364.03.
Subd. 7. Fixing License Fees and Insurance/Bond Amounts. Except as otherwise herein
provided, all fees for licenses under this Chapter and all required insurance or bond amounts
shall be fixed and determined by the Council, adopted by resolution, and uniformly enforced.
Such fees and amounts may, from time to time, be amended by the Council by resolution. A
copy of the resolution setting forth currently effective fees and amounts shall be kept on file in
the office of the Clerk and open to inspection during regular business hours. For the purpose of
fixing such fees and amounts, the Council may subdivide and categorize licenses under a specific
license requirement, provided that any such Subdivision or categorization shall be included in the
resolution authorized by this Section.
SECTION 402.01. SHOWS AND LARGE ASSEMBLIES.
Subd. 1. License Required. No person shall present, sponsor, promote, participate in or
permit any public show, circus, theatrical or other performance or exhibition or assembly of 200
or more persons at one time in a single location, for any purpose, to which the public is invited,
(any of which is hereafter referred to as a “Large Assembly”) without first having obtained a
license therefor from the City.
Subd. 2. Application. The application for a license shall set forth the name and address of
the person who is to conduct and sponsor the Large Assembly, state the times and places where
the Large Assembly is to be held or conducted, and state the nature of the activity. The
application shall also contain such other information as is reasonably requested by the Council or
the Clerk.
Subd. 3. Maximum Size. It is unlawful for any licensee to admit a larger number of
people than the maximum fixed by the Council at the time of issuance of the license.
Subd. 4. Overnight Camping Prohibited; Food Preparation Restricted. It is unlawful
for any licensee to permit any participant, spectator or customer to camp or sleep overnight at the
location of a Large Assembly. It is also unlawful for any licensee to permit any participant
spectator or customer to prepare food at the location of the Large Assembly, unless that person is
a concessionaire. This Section does not apply to security officers performing their duties as
such.
4-4
Subd. 5. Investigation Fee. In addition to the license fee the Council may fix an
investigation fee commensurate with the cost of the investigation.
Subd. 6. Permitted Area; Factors. Large Assemblies shall be permitted only after a
finding by the Council that the character of the proposed Large assembly is compatible with the
character of the surrounding neighborhood considering the problems of noise, lighting, traffic,
sanitation, congestion and other factors affecting the public health, safety and welfare of the
entire area, and compliance with this code or ordinances.
Subd. 7. Exemptions. The following activities and performances are exempt from
compliance with this subchapter:
A. Performances of athletic, musical or theatrical events sponsored by public or private
schools, located on school-owned property, and utilizing only student athletes or
performers;
B. A performance sponsored by a bona fide religious or nonprofit organization located
within the City, provided that the organization shall have been incorporated for purposes
other than the performance, the performance is exclusively for the members of the
religious or nonprofit organization, and the performance occurs on organization-owned
property.
C. Any Large Assembly sponsored by the City.
Subd. 8. Display of License. Each license issued under this Section shall be kept
conspicuously posted at the location for which the license is issued and shall be exhibited to any
person upon request.
SECTION 403.01. DANCES.
Subd. 1. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings stated:
A. “Public dance” applies to any place where dancing may be or is carried on, other than a
private residence, whether an admission fee is charged or not.
B. “Incidental dance” means a public dance which is incidental to the regular business at
the premises.
C. “Single event dance” means any public dance which is not an incidental dance.
Subd. 2. Conditions Applicable to All Public Dances.
A. It is unlawful for any person to hold a public dance without a license issued by the City.
4-5
B. No license under this Section shall be granted if the applicant is not 18 years of age or
older on the date the license application is submitted to the issuing authority.
C. A licensee under this Section shall be responsible for the conduct of the public dance and
shall maintain conditions of safety, sobriety, noise and crowd control and order.
D. A license issued under this Section is effective only for the space specified in the
approved license application.
E. No public dance shall be held between the hours of one and ten o’clock a.m.
F. If applicable, a license for a Large Assembly must be obtained.
G. No Alcoholic Beverage shall be served, dispersed, sold or consumed, unless an
appropriate and separate license therefore has been obtained.
H. All persons conducting a public dance shall within 30 days prior to the scheduled dance,
submit to the Council a security agreement plan. Upon review of said plan, the Council
may require the licensee to have at the dance, at the licensee’s expense, security
precautions including but not limited to the presence of officers of the law.
I. Any person conducting a public dance shall obtain such insurance as is required by the
Council.
Subd. 3. Incidental Dances.
A. The application for an annual license for incidental dancing shall contain the following
information:
1. Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, partnership or other form
of organization;
2. Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due and payable for
the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid, the years and amounts
that are unpaid;
3. A description of the business for which the premises is licensed;
4. Such other information as the Council or issuing authority shall require.
B. Incidental dance licensing is restricted to premises located in the appropriate zoning
districts of the City.
C. Public dances conducted pursuant to an incidental dance license are restricted to the
indoor area of the licensed premises, or such other areas as the Council may allow.
4-6
D. The licensee is responsible for maintaining order at the incidental dancing business. In
the event the licensee fails to maintain order, the Council may undertake necessary
measures to ensure proper security.
Subd. 4. Single Event Dances.
In addition to the requirements for all public dances, single event license applications shall be
submitted at least 30 days prior to the scheduled dance and shall contain the following
information along with any additional information required by the Council:
A. The date, time and place of the dance;
B. The approximate number of persons expected to attend the dance;
C. A copy of any lease, agreement or letter allowing the dance to take place on the premises
if the applicant is not the owner of the premises;
D. A statement that the applicant is the person who will conduct, sponsor and be responsible
for the public dance.
SECTION 404.01. SOLID WASTE MATERIALS.
Subd. 1. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings stated:
A. “Apartment Buildings” means any building or structure or portion thereof used, designed,
or intended to be used for human habitation which is occupied as the home or residence
of four or more families or person living independently in separate dwelling units and for
which the owner receives, is entitled to receive or will receive consideration in the form
of money, goods, labor, or otherwise from or on behalf of the occupant.
B. “Garbage” means discarded material resulting from the handling, processing, storage,
packaging, preparation, serving, and consumption of food.
C. “Industrial waste” means all organic and inorganic wastes except garbage, resulting from
any manufacturing, building repairing, demolition, construction, processing, grain
cleaning, the operation of garages and service stations and other similar activities.
D. “Items to be composted” means decomposable items such as leaves, grass clippings, and
yard scraps. It does not include tree branches, limbs or trunks.
E. “Recyclable materials” or “recyclables” means newspaper, cardboard, computer paper,
ledger paper, glass, tin cans, bi-metal cans, aluminum cans, scrap aluminum, and
acceptable plastics under the recycling coding system as per the Society of the Plastics
Industry, Inc. (SPI) designates listed below:
4-7
1. PET – polyethylene teraphthalate
2. HDPE – high density polyethylene
3. V – Vinyl
4. LDPE – low density polyethylene
5. PP – polypropylene
6. PS – polystyrene
7. Other
F. “Refuse” means all non-combustible wastes including ashes, crockery, household
rubbish, and all combustible wastes including rags and old cloths; but does not include
any material such as earth, sand, brick, stone, plaster or other similar substances that may
accumulate as a result of construction operations; it also does not include appliances, auto
and auto parts, tree limbs, flammable material including gasoline and motor oil, and any
dangerous substance. .
G. “Residence” means a single-family dwelling, duplex or triplex connected with the City
water system and does not include trailer courts, business firms, religious institutions,
schools or farms.
H. “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste, including ashes, consisting of both
combustible and non-combustible waste, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and litter of any kind.
Subd. 2. Deposit of Refuse Restricted.
A. No person shall deposit, cause to be deposited or place garbage, refuse, industrial waste,
rubbish, items to be composted, recyclables or containers therefore upon any street, alley,
vacated lot or upon any ground appurtenant to any building in the City, except upon the
premises wherein the garbage, refuse, industrial waste, rubbish, items to be composted, or
recyclables originated.
B. No person, except as authorized and licensed by the City, shall transport garbage, refuse,
rubbish or industrial waste, with the exception of recyclable materials and items to be
composted, over any street or alley in the City. No person shall disturb, collect or in any
manner interfere with garbage, refuse, rubbish, or industrial waste placed in containers
for collection, or interfere in any manner with containers thereof.
C. No person shall disturb, collect or in any manner interfere with recyclable materials
placed in containers for collection, or interfere in any manner with containers for
recyclable materials, except as authorized by the City or by the person who placed the
recyclable materials in the containers for collection.
Subd. 3. Storage.
A. Containers used in the City for garbage, refuse, rubbish and recyclables must be:
4-8
1. Made of metal or other suitable material that is not easily corrodible or
combustible;
2. Watertight, insect and rodent-proof;
3. Kept tightly covered when containing garbage, refuse or rubbish;
4. Placed in such a manner as to prevent them from being overturned; and
5. Maintained in a sanitary and safe condition, free of a substance on the exterior
that attracts or breeds flies, other insects, or rodents, and free of ragged or sharp
edges or other defects that may impede or injure the person collecting the
contents.
B. In addition, garbage, refuse and rubbish containers for residential dwellings must be:
1. Equipped with suitable handles and tight fitting covers;
2. A size and weight that can be handled by one person;
3. Only those containers supplied by the City contractor in such volumes and weight
as specified in the City contract;
4. Provided in sufficient number to hold all garbage and refuse accumulating
between collections;
5. Washed and treated with disinfectant as often as necessary to prevent a nuisance;
6. Be vendor approved containers; and
7. All special containers must meet with the approval of the collector based on
sanitation safety, weight limitations and ease of handling.
C. In addition, waste containers for multiple dwellings and commercial establishments must
be:
1. At least one cubic yard in capacity;
2. Conveniently located with respect to the residential units or establishment; and
3. Placed in an enclosure complying with the requirements of paragraph D below.
4. Kept in an enclosure that conceals them from public view. The enclosure must
have a raised concrete floor and be kept in good repair at all times. The enclosure
must be constructed, or the containers must be located in the enclosure, so that the
contents of the containers are inaccessible for at least three feet about the base of
the enclosure.
5. In compliance with applicable provisions of the City Zoning Ordinance.
4-9
D. Containers not complying with the requirements of this Section must be promptly
repaired or replaced with ones that do comply. Whenever a container is in poor
condition, the collector may tag the container with a notice of the defects and the
requirement to repair or replace the container. A copy of the notice must be given to the
City, and if on the next collection date the container has not been repaired or replaced, the
collector may notify the City and discontinue collections from the premises.
E. The property owner or occupant shall have the garbage, refuse and rubbish removed at
regular intervals, being at least once each week, or as often as deemed necessary by the
City health officer. Pickup and removal of recyclable materials shall be at regular
intervals.
Subd. 4. Collection of Garbage, Refuse, Rubbish and Recyclables.
A. The City may provide for on-site collection once each week of all garbage, refuse,
rubbish and recyclables from all City residences connected with the City water system
and from City trash containers on streets and parks. The City may also provide for onsite
collection of recyclables from all City residences and apartment units connected with
the City water system.
B. Property owners and occupants shall make containers easily accessible to the collector for
on-site pickup on the days designated for collection.
C. The property owner or occupant of a restaurant, hotel, tavern or other commercial,
industrial or manufacturing establishment shall control the garbage, refuse, rubbish and
industrial waste on the premises. Furthermore, the property owner or occupant shall
provide for collection of the garbage, refuse, rubbish and industrial waste on the premises
as often as necessary to keep the premises in a clean and sanitary condition, but in no
event less frequently than one pickup per week, or as often as deemed necessary by the
City health officer.
D. All garbage, refuse and rubbish collected under City contract shall be transported on the
streets and alleys in the City only in leak-proof, packer trucks. All other garbage, refuse,
rubbish and industrial waste shall be transported on the streets and alleys in the City only
in vehicles with leak-proof bodies of easily cleanable construction designed not to
transmit odor, attract insects or rodents, or otherwise create a nuisance. Vehicles
carrying recyclable materials shall be so operated that contents do not spill or drip onto
streets or alleys or otherwise create a nuisance.
Subd. 5. Collection Contract.
A. The Council may contract for collection of garbage, refuse, rubbish and recyclables from
residences and apartment buildings in the City on such terms and for such periods as the
Council may determine. The Council may solicit proposals and award a contract based
4-10
on the amount of the proposal submitted as well as considerations of overall cost, general
safety, as well as the number and level of services offered.
B. Collectors shall have a registered office and notify the Clerk of any change in the office
address.
C. Collectors shall furnish the equipment and personnel necessary for the collection of
garbage, refuse, rubbish and recyclables.
D. If the City has entered into a collection contract under this Subdivision, only collectors
under contract with the City may collect the garbage, refuse, rubbish and recyclables
from residences and apartment buildings within the City, and no other person shall make
a business or collect a fee for collection of garbage, refuse, rubbish and recyclables from
residences and apartments within the City.
E. The garbage, refuse and recyclables collected by the collectors shall be transported and
disposed of in the manner provided by law.
F. Collectors shall furnish a performance bond or certificate of deposit in an amount
determined by the City, conditioned upon the satisfactory performance of the contract,
which designates the City as beneficiary and deposit the same with the Clerk.
G. Collectors shall maintain such insurance in such amounts as is determined by the
Council, and shall name the City and its elected and appointed officials and employees as
additional insureds under such insurance.
H. Collectors shall at all times maintain Worker’s Compensation insurance.
I. Collectors shall protect, defend, hold harmless and release the City, its elected and
appointed officials and employees from any and all claims, demands, judgments, fines,
penalties, assessments, settlements, costs and expenses, including attorney fees and costs,
arising out of, or relating to the contract and the performance of the contract and
collection activities.
Subd. 6. Service Charge.
A. The contract between the City and the collector shall specify whether the City or the
collector will send bills to the premises served. The City, or the City’s contractor, shall
charge each dwelling served on the basis of service rendered, as determined by the
Council. The bill for such charges shall be sent to the persons served.
B. Following 30 days notice to the property owner and/or occupant, any charge for
collection service not remitted in a timely manner may be collected by the Council as an
assessment against the property or pursuant to civil litigation.
4-11
Subd. 7 Licensing of Collectors.
A. No person shall collect garbage, refuse, rubbish, recyclables, or industrial waste from any
person, property, or business located within the City of Delano, unless a license therefor
shall first have been obtained from the City.
B. The Council shall consider any application for a collector’s license. If the Council finds
that the applicant is responsible, has a good record of operations, is in compliance with
applicable legal requirements, and has the proper equipment, facilities, resources and
personnel to provide good quality collection service, and that it would be in the public
interest to do so, it may direct the Clerk to issue the permit to the applicant.
C. The applicant shall submit to the Clerk a certificate of insurance containing such terms
and in such an amount as shall be determined by the Council.
Subd. 8 Composting. The contractor for residential and apartment garbage, refuse, and
rubbish collection shall provide no fewer than four annual collections of composting materials;
two collections shall occur in the spring and two in the fall.
Subd. 9. Recycling. In addition to the recycling which may be provided pursuant to City
contract, the City encourages collection of recyclable materials at restaurants, hotels, taverns,
commercial, industrial, religious, educational and health care facilities.
SECTION 405.01. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide minimum standards to
safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the use
and occupancy, construction and maintenance of all buildings, property and structures within the
City. The provisions contained herein are in addition to other applicable provisions of the code
and not in lieu thereof. Any provisions contained herein which are inconsistent or in conflict
with any other provision of the code shall supersede such other provisions. This Section shall be
referred to as the Delano Property Maintenance Code.
Subd. 2 Scope. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all buildings, structures and
property within the City.
Subd. 3. Enforcement.
A. Authority. The Building Official and the Council are hereby authorized to enforce all of
the provisions of this Section.
B. Right of Entry. The Building Official or an authorized representative may enter, examine
and survey all buildings at all reasonable times. In the event the owner or occupant of
the building does not consent to entry by the Building Official or an authorized
representative of the Building Official, and if there is probable cause to believe that a
violation of the Delano Property Maintenance Code exists in the building, then
4-12
application may be made for a warrant or Court order allowing for inspection of the
building. No person shall refuse entrance or impede the Building Official, chief of the
fire department, officer of the peace, or a designated representative, in the performance of
emergency duties. In the case of emergency, every such official or officer shall have the
right to enter, inspect, examine, survey and perform emergency operations in all
buildings without a warrant or court order.
C. Substandard Buildings. All buildings or portions thereof which are determined to be
substandard as defined in this Section constitute a violation of this Section and shall be
abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures
specified in this Section.
D. Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the
provisions of this Section, the Building Official may grant modifications for individual
cases, provided that the modification is in conformity with the intent and purpose of this
Section, does not differ from the requirements of the Minnesota State Building Code or
this Section and that such modification does not reduce the level of any safety protection
requirements or structural integrity. The details of any action granting modifications
shall be recorded and entered in the files of the building official.
E. Violations. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove,
convert or demolish, equip, rent or let to another, use, occupy or maintain any building or
structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this Section.
Subd. 4. Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, certain terms, phrases, words and
their derivatives shall be construed as specified in either this Section or as specified in the
Minnesota State Building Code or this Section.
A. “Apartment House” is any building which is intended or designed to be occupied or
which is occupied as the home or residence of four or more families living independently
in separate dwelling units and doing their own cooking in the rental building.
B. “Building Code” is the Minnesota State Building Code adopted by the City.
C. “Component” is a constituent part of a building.
D. “Dwelling,” is any building which is not an apartment house, lodging house or a hotel
and which contains one or more dwelling units.
E. “Dwelling unit” is a single unit situated within a building providing complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
F. “Efficiency dwelling unit” is a dwelling unit containing only one habitable room and
meeting the requirements of the Building Code.
4-13
G. “Family” is an individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption, including foster children.
H. “Guest room” is a habitable space in a hotel or lodging house designed or intended to be
used or occupied or which is used for sleeping purposes by guests.
I. “Habitable space” is a space or room in a rental building for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility space, and
similar areas, are not considered habitable space.
J. “Hotel” is any rental building or portion thereof containing six or more guest rooms.
K. “Hot water” is water supplied to plumbing fixtures at a temperature of not less than 110
degrees Fahrenheit.
L. “Lodging house” is any rental building containing not more than five guest rooms.
M. “Rental building” is any building or structure or portion thereof used, designed, or
intended to be used for human habitation and for which use the owner receives, is entitled
to receive or will receive consideration from an occupant or from someone on the
occupant’s behalf in the form of money, goods, labor, or otherwise. Consideration does
not include compensation received by a family member from another family member
living in the same dwelling unit.
N. “System” is a regularly interacting or interdependent group of items forming a unified
whole or a group of devices or artificial objects or an organization forming a network
especially for distributing something or serving a common purpose.
Subd. 5. Owner and Occupant Responsibilities and Responsibilities of Others.
A. Owner.
1. Owners of all buildings shall construct and maintain buildings in accordance with
the requirements of the Building Code and this Section.
2. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore the exterior and interior
surface of the owner’s building to a state of good maintenance and repair.
3. No person shall let to another for occupancy any building or dwelling unit which
does not comply with the Minnesota State Fire Code and Building Code, as
adopted by the City, this Section, or any other federal, state or local law or
regulation.
4-14
B. Occupants.
1. Each occupant of a building shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part
of the dwelling unit and premises thereof which that person occupies or controls.
2. Every occupant of a building shall dispose of garbage, refuse and rubbish in a
clean and sanitary manner by placing it in appropriate disposal facilities.
3. No person shall occupy any building or dwelling unit which does not comply with
the Minnesota State Fire Code, Building Code, as adopted by the City, this
Section or any other federal, state or local law or regulation.
C. Defacement of Property.
1. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior or
interior surface of any building by placing thereon any marking, carving or
graffiti.
Subd. 6. Components and Systems. The components and systems of buildings shall
comply with the Minnesota State Building Code.
Subd. 7. International Property Maintenance Code Adopted.
A. Adoption. The International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition, published by the
International Code Council. Inc., is hereby adopted as if set out in full in this Section,
with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as set forth in Subpart B below.
B. Revisions. The following Sections of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2006
addition are revised as follows:
1. Section 101.1: This Subsection is amended to read: Title. The regulations set
forth in this Code shall be known, cited, and referred to as the Delano Property
Maintenance Code.
2. Section 102.3: This Subsection is amended to read: Application of other codes.
Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy shall be
done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Minnesota State
Building Code and this Code.
3. Section 102.7: This Subsection is amended to read: Referenced codes and
standards. All references to other codes or standards within this Property
Maintenance Code shall mean the applicable provisions of the Delano City Code
or Minnesota State Building Code, whichever is the most restrictive requirement
permitted under statute or applicable law.
4. Section 103.1: This Subsection shall be deleted in its entirety and substituted with
the following: General. The Department of Building Inspections is hereby
4-15
charged with the administration and enforcement of the Property Maintenance
Code. The “Code Official” as that term is used in this Code, is the Director of
Building Inspections or the Director’s designee.
5. Section 103.2: Delete this Subsection in its entirety.
6. Section 103.3: Delete this Subsection in its entirety.
7. Section 103.5: This Subsection is amended to read: Fees/continuing violations.
A fee shall be payable for every inspection required by this Code. A single fee
shall be due and payable for the initial inspection and one re-inspection related to
the code compliance action.
a) Additional Fees. An additional fee as prescribed by Council shall be due
and payable for every required re-inspection subsequent to the first re-inspection
provided for in this Section.
b) Continuing Violation a Separate Misdemeanor. In addition to the
additional inspection fee for additional inspections for continuing violations, each
period of 10 days after the initial 60 day period of the violation shall constitute a
misdemeanor violation of this Code.
8. Section 104.5: Identification. This Subsection shall be amended as follows:
Insert after “Code Official”: “and employees of the Department of Building
Inspections.”
9. Section 106.1: Delete this Subsection and substitute the following: Unlawful
Acts. An owner, occupant or tenant may not erect, construct, alter, extend, repair,
remove, demolition, maintain, fail to maintain, provide, fail to provide, occupy,
permit another person to occupy any dwelling unit or structure regulated by this
Code or cause the same to be done in violation of any provision of this Code; or
fail to obey a lawful order of the Code Official.
10. Section 106.3: Delete this Subsection, rename, and substitute the following:
Enforcement of Penalties. Violation of any provision of this Code is hereby
deemed a municipal infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00.
Each day a violation continues is a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing,
the City may seek any other remedy available to it by law or equity to abate,
restrain or correct the violation, or to require the removal or termination of the
unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code
order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any costs incurred in connection with
any action taken by the City to abate, restrain or correct the violation on the
premises in violation of this Code shall be charged to the owner of the property.
Until the expenses are paid by the owner, they will constitute a lien upon the
property to be collected in the same manner as other City taxes.
4-16
11. Section 106.4: Delete this Subsection in its entirety.
12. Section 106.5: Delete this Subsection in its entirety.
13. Section 107.1: Delete this Subsection, rename and substitute the following:
Notice of Violation. When a Code Official or his/her designee has grounds to
believe that this Code has been violated, the Code Official or his/her designee
shall serve upon the person responsible a written notice of the violation.
14. Section 107.4: Delete this Section in its entirety.
15. Section 109.5: Delete this Subsection and replace with the following:
Costs of Emergency Repairs. Any cost incurred by the City in connection with
the emergency repairs performed pursuant to this Section shall be charged to the
owner of the property where the unsafe structure is located. Until the expenses
are paid by owner, they will constitute a lien on the property to be collected in the
same manner as other City taxes.
16. Section 111: Delete this Section in its entirety and substitute with the following:
Appeals. A person directly aggrieved by a notice of violation issued under this
Code is entitled to a full hearing before the City Administrator upon serving a
written request therefore upon the City Administrator within 30 days of receipt of
a notice of violation.
a) Request for hearing and hearing. The written request shall include
documents and written arguments serving as a basis for the applicant’s position.
At such hearing the applicant may present any evidence he deems pertinent to the
appeal, but the City shall not be required to keep a verbatim record of the
proceedings. If a request for hearing is timely received by the City Administrator,
the City Administrator or City Administrator’s designee shall set a hearing date
within 14 days from the date of the applicant’s request. At such hearing the
applicant may present any evidence he deems pertinent to the appeal. The City
Administrator or the City Administrator’s designee shall issue a written decision,
setting forth the reasons therefore within a reasonable period, in no case later than
10 days from the date of the hearing. The decision of the City Administrator or
the City Administrator’s designee shall be mailed to the applicant at the address
provided in the request for the hearing.
b) Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with the correction or
compliance order after the right of appeal has expired, and any person who fails to
comply with the modified correction or compliance order within the time set forth
therein, and any person who violated any provisions of this Property Maintenance
Code by doing any act or admitting to doing any act which constitutes a breach of
any Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
4-17
c) Alternative Sanctions. In the case of commercial facilities which require
licensing and multiple dwellings which require registration, said licensing or
registration may be revoked or renewal withheld until compliance with this
Property Maintenance Code.
d) Execution of Correction or Compliance Order by Public Authority.
Upon failure to comply with the correction or compliance order within the time
set forth therein and no appeal having been taken, or upon failure to comply with
a modified correction or compliance order within the time set forth therein, the
criminal penalty established herein notwithstanding, the Council may by
resolution cause the cited deficiency to be remedied as set forth in the correction
or compliance order. The cost of such remedy shall be a lien against the subject
real estate and may be levied and collected as a special assessment in a manner
provided by Minnesota Statutes.
17. Section 202. General Definitions. This Section is amended by adding the
following definitions:
a) Insanitary as applied to a structure means failure to maintain healthy
conditions and liable to be a danger or hazard to health of persons occupying or
frequenting it, or to the public if such danger arises from the methods or materials
of construction or from equipment installed therein for the purposes of lighting,
heating, ventilation, or plumbing or from existing conditions liable to cause rat
infestation, vermin infestation, accumulation of trash and debris in the building,
yards or accessory structure on the premises or from mold, causing conditions
(same as unsanitary).
b) Occupied. Occupied for dwelling units means occupied areas will include
those areas designated and utilized as habitable space as well and non-habitable
spaces which are easily accessible and normally utilized by the occupants. For
non-residential facilities, occupied areas will include all areas utilized in the
operation in whatever use occupies the building.
18. Section 302.4: Weeds. Insert “10 inches”.
19. Section 302: Exterior Property Areas. This section is amended by adding
Sections 302.10, 302.11 and 302.12 to read:
a) Section 302.10: Removal of Snow and Ice. The owner of a multiple
family residential or commercial building shall be responsible for the removal of
snow and ice from private parking lots, driveways, steps and walkways on the
premises within 48 hours of the cessation of snow fall causing the accumulation.
Snow and ice removal from public sidewalks shall be in accordance with City
Code Section 716.01(D).
4-18
b) Section 302.11: Illumination. The owner of a multiple occupancy
building shall be responsible for providing and maintaining all illumination in all
exterior parking lots and walkways with provisions to control glare affecting
surrounding properties.
c) Section 302.12: Landscaping in yards and setbacks. The owner of
any building shall be responsible for providing and maintaining landscaping in all
yards and/or setbacks and all areas not designed for buildings, circulation, parking
or storage on the premises.
20. Section 304.30: Delete this Subsection and replace it with the following:
Premises Identification. Premises Identification shall be in accordance with
Section 410.01 of the City Code.
21. Section 304.13: This Subsection is amended by adding Section 303.13.3 which
shall read as follows: Storm windows. All openable windows with a single layer
of glass must be provided with tight fitting storm windows. Storm windows may
be temporarily removed to allow for installation of screens during periods of
warm weather.
22. Section 304.15: This Subsection is amended by adding Section 303.15.1 which
shall read as follows: Multi-family dwelling security system. For the purpose of
providing a reasonable amount of safety and general welfare for persons
occupying multi-family an approved security system shall be maintained for each
multi-family building to control access. The security system shall consist of
locked building entrance or foyer doors and mock doors leading from hallways
into individual dwelling units. Lead-latch type door locks shall be provided with
levered knobs (or door knobs) on the inside building entrance doors and with key
cylinders on the outside of building entrance doors. Building entrance door
latches shall be of the type that are permanently locked from the outside and
permanently unlocked on the inside.
23. Section 304.18: This Subsection is deleted and replaced with the following:
Building Security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units or room
units shall be provided with devices that design to provide security for the
occupants of the property within.
24. Section 304.18.1: This Subsection is deleted and replaced with the following:
Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit or rooming unit that is rented,
leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock meeting specifications set
forth herein. Such deadbolt locks shall be operated only by turning a knob or key
and shall have a lock throw of not less than 1” (one inch). For purposes of this
Section a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock. Such
deadbolt lock shall be installed according to manufacturer’s specifications and
maintained in good working order. All deadbolt locks required by this Section
4-19
shall be designed and installed in such a manner so as to be operable inside of the
dwelling unit or rooming unit without the use of a key, tool, combination thereof
or any special knowledge or effort.
25. Section 304.18.2: This Subsection is deleted and replaced with the following:
Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within in 6’ above
ground level or a walking surface below that provides access to a dwelling unit or
rooming unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash
locking device.
26. Section 304.18.3: This Subsection is deleted and replaced with the following:
Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling
unit or rooming unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices
that secure the units from unauthorized entry.
27. Section 306: Handrails and guardrails. This Subsection shall be amended to
read as follows:
Section 306.1: General. Every interior and exterior flight of stairs having more
than 4 riser shall have a handrail on each side of the stair and every open portion
of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is
more than 30” above the ground or grate below shall have guards. Handrails shall
not be less than 30” high or more than 42” high measured vertically across the
nosing of the thread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces.
Guards shall not be less than 30” high above the floor of the landing, balcony,
porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface. Exceptions: Guards shall not be
required where exempted by the Minnesota State Building Code.
28. Section 402: Light. This Section is amended by adding Subsection 402.4 which
shall read as follows: Convenience switches. A convenient switch or equivalent
device for turning on a light in each dwelling unit shall be located near the points
of entrance to such unit.
29. Section 505.1: General. Delete the reference to the “International Plumbing
Code” and replace with “Minnesota State Building Code.”
30. Section 602.2: Residential occupancy. Delete the reference to Appendix D of
the “International Plumbing Code” and replace with the “Minnesota State
Building Code.” Also delete 65 degrees Fahrenheit (18 degree Celsius) and
replace with 68 degrees Fahrenheit (20 degrees Celsius).
31. Section 602.3: Heat supply. Insert “September 1 to June 1” and delete 65
degrees Fahrenheit (18 degrees Celsius) and replace with 68 degrees Fahrenheit
(20 degree Celsius). Delete the reference to Appendix D of the “International
Plumbing Code” and replace with the “Minnesota State Building Code.”
32. Section 602.4: Occupiable work spaces. Insert “September 1 to June 1.”
4-20
33. Section 604.2: Service. Delete the reference to the “ICC Electrical Code” and
replace with “Minnesota State Building Code.”
34. Section 702: Means of egress. Delete references to the “International Building
Code” and replace with the “Minnesota Building Code.”
35. Section 704. Fire Protection Systems. Delete all references to the “International
Fire Code” and replace with “Minnesota State Fire Code.”
36. Chapter 8. Referenced Standards. This Chapter shall be amended to read: “all
references to other code standards within this Code shall mean the applicable
provision of the Delano City Code or Minnesota State Building Code, whichever
has the most restrictive requirement permitted by law.
Subd. 8. Sanitation.
A. Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided in a hotel,
there shall be provided on each floor at least one water closet and lavatory and one bath
accessible from a public hallway for each sex. Additional water closets, lavatories and
baths shall be provided on each floor for each sex at the rate of one for every additional
10 guests, or fractional number thereof in excess of 10. Such facilities shall be clearly
marked for “Men” or “Women.”
B. Plumbing Fixtures. Plumbing Fixtures in all buildings shall be connected to the City
sanitary sewer system. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to the City water
system and provided with hot and cold running water necessary for their normal
operation. Said plumbing fixtures shall be made of an approved nonabsorbent material
that meets all health, safety and the Minnesota State building code.
Subd. 9. Substandard Buildings.
A. General. Any rental building or portion thereof, including any dwelling unit, guest room
or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the same is located, in which there exists any
of the following listed conditions in this Subdivision 9, B through J, to an extent that
endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants
thereof shall be deemed and hereby is declared to be a substandard rental building in
violation of this Section and a “hazardous building condition” as that term is defined in
Minnesota Statutes Chapter 463.
B. Inadequate Light and Ventilation. Inadequate light and ventilation shall include but not
be limited to the following:
1. Lack of required ventilating equipment or improper operation or maintenance of
the same.
2. Lack of required minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation or improper
operation or maintenance of the same.
4-21
3. Lack of required electrical lighting or improper operation or maintenance of the
same.
C. Inadequate Sanitation. Inadequate sanitation shall include but not be limited to the
following:
1. Lack of required water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower or improper operation
or maintenance of the same.
2. Lack of or improper operation or maintenance of the same.
3. Lack of required hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures or improper
operation or maintenance of the same.
4. Lack of required adequate heating facilities or improper operation or maintenance
of the same.
5. Dampness of habitable space.
6. Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents.
7. General dilapidation or improper maintenance of a rental building.
8. Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system or improper operation or
maintenance of the same.
9. Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities as
determined by the building official.
D. Structural Hazards. Structural hazards shall include but not be limited to the following:
1. Deteriorated or inadequate foundations.
2. Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports.
3. Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety.
4. Members of wall, partitions or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle
due to defective material or deterioration.
5. Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that are of insufficient size
to carry imposed loads with safety.
6. Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling, and roof supports or other horizontal
members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration.
7. Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal
members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety.
8. Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle, due to defective material or
deterioration.
9. Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed
loads with safety.
E. Hazardous Electrical Wiring. Electrical wiring hazards include but shall not be limited to
the following: Electrical wiring which was installed in violation of laws in effect at the
time of installation, not installed in accordance with generally accepted construction
practices in areas where no laws were in effect, has not been maintained in good
condition, or is not being used in a safe manner.
4-22
F. Hazardous Plumbing. Hazardous plumbing includes but shall not be limited to the
following: Plumbing which was installed in violation of laws in effect at the time of
installation, not installed in accordance with generally accepted construction practices in
areas where no laws were in effect, has not been maintained in good condition, is not
free of cross-connections or siphonage between fixtures, or is not being used in a safe
manner.
G. Hazardous Mechanical Equipment. Hazardous mechanical equipment includes but shall
not be limited to the following: Mechanical equipment which does not comply with the
mechanical requirements of this Section, installed in violation of laws in effect at the time
of installation, not installed in accordance with generally accepted construction practices
in areas where no laws were in effect, or has not been maintained in good condition or is
not being used in a safe manner.
Faulty Weather Protection includes but shall not be limited to the following:
1. Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster.
2. Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, foundations or
floors, including broken windows or doors.
3. Defective or insufficient weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including
lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved protective
covering.
4. Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings.
H. Faulty Materials of Construction includes but shall not be limited to all materials of
construction except those which are specifically allowed or approved under applicable
laws and which have been adequately maintained in good and safe condition.
I. Hazardous or Unsanitary Premises includes but shall not be limited to premises on which
an accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal,
rat harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials and similar materials or other
conditions exist.
J. Improper Occupancy includes but shall not be limited to all buildings or portions thereof
occupied for living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes which were not designed or
intended to be used for such occupancies or which are not being adequately maintained
for such purposes.
Subd. 10. Notices and Orders of Building Official.
A. Notice. Whenever the Building Official determines that a building is a substandard
building, or that any other violation exists under this Section, or that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that a violation exists, notice shall be given to the person or persons
responsible therefore or to the occupant or owner of the premises. Such notice shall:
1. Be in writing;
4-23
2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
3. Describe the conditions found to constitute the violation;
4. Specify the remedial action required;
5. Require that any permits necessary to effectuate remedial action be secured and
the work physically commenced within 20 days and completed within such time
as the building official shall determine is reasonable under the circumstances;
6. State that a motion for summary enforcement of the order will be made to the
District Court unless, within 20 days, work is physically commenced or an answer
is filed as provided for in Minnesota Statute § 463.18.
B. Emergency Orders. Whenever the Building Official finds that an emergency exists in
relation to the enforcement of the provisions of this Section which requires immediate
action to protect the health, safety or welfare of occupants of any building, the Building
Official or the Building Official’s designee may enter the premises in accordance with
Section 405.01, Subd. 3 and may issue an order reciting the existence of such emergency
and requiring that such action be taken as deemed necessary to meet the emergency,
notwithstanding any other provision of this Section. When any such emergency shall be
declared to exist the Building Official immediately shall report the same in writing to the
Council. Every notice of emergency shall include the following language:
“If you do not comply with this Order by the above date, the City
may remedy the violation and assess the costs to you or, if
applicable, allow the occupants to make the repairs and deduct the
expense from the occupant’s rent.”
Subd. 11. Appeal.
A. Right to Appeal. Any person entitled to service under this Section may appeal from any
notice and order served by the Building Official. The appeal shall constitute an answer to
the notice and order as provided for in Minnesota Statute § 463.18.
B. Procedure. Appeal shall be made to the Building Official within 15 days after the notice
and order is served. The appeal shall be made in writing and contain a brief statement of
the relief sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be
reversed, modified or otherwise set aside.
C. Scheduling and Noticing of Appeal Hearing. As soon as practicable after receiving the
written appeal, the Building Official shall fix a date, time and place for hearing of the
appeal by the Council. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given
at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the Council either by
causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing
copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his address shown on the
appeal.
4-24
D. Effect of Failure to Appeal. Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the
provisions of this Section shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative
hearing and administrative adjudication of the notice and order or to any portion thereof.
Subd. 12. Enforcement of the Order of the Building Official or the Council.
A. Compliance. After any order of the Building Official or Council made pursuant to this
Section shall have become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail,
neglect, or refuse to obey any such order. Any such person who fails to comply with any
such order is guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Failure to Obey Order. If, after any order of the Building Official or Council made
pursuant to this Section has become final, the person to whom such order is directed
shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the Building Official may (1) cause such
person to be prosecuted under subsection 1 of this Subdivision or (2) commence an
appropriate action in District Court.
SECTION 406.01. ANIMAL REGULATIONS AND LICENSES.
Subd. 1. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings stated:
A. “Dog” means both the male and female of the canine species, commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets, and other domesticated animals of a dog kind.
B. “Owner” means any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog.
C. “Tag” means a license tag required hereunder to be procured by every owner of each
dog.
D. “At large” means off the premises of the owner and not under the custody and control of
the owner or other person, either by lease, cord, chain, or otherwise restrained or
confined.
Subd. 2. License Required. All dogs over the age of 6 months kept, harbored, or
maintained by their owners in the City, shall be licensed and registered with the City. Dog
licenses shall be issued by the Clerk upon payment of the license fee. The owner shall state, at
the time application is made for the license, the owner’s name and address and the name, breed,
color, and sex of each dog owned or kept by the owner.
Subd. 3. Tag and Collar.
A. Upon presentment of the required certification and payment of the license fee, the Clerk
shall provide and furnish to the owner of each licensed dog a metallic tag. Every owner
shall provide each dog with a collar to which the license tag must be affixed and shall see
that the collar and tag are worn constantly. In case a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a
4-25
duplicate or new tag will be issued by the Clerk upon proof that such dog was licensed.
Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another and no refunds shall be made.
B. It is unlawful for any person, except the owner or authorized agent, to remove a collar
from a dog in the City, except under circumstances where it is necessary to free a dog
from an entanglement which threatens its health and life or by a licensed veterinarian to
whom the dog has been brought for care and treatment.
Subd. 4. Barking and Running at Large.
A. Running at Large. It shall be unlawful for the dog of any person who owns, harbors, or
keeps the dog, or the parents or the guardians of any such person under 18 years of age,
to run at large.
B. Habitual Barking. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor a dog which
habitually barks or cries. Habitual barking shall be defined as barking for repeated
intervals of at least 3 minutes with less than one minute of interruption. Such barking
must also be audible off of the owner’s or caretaker’s premises.
C. Damage to Property. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor a dog
that damages any lawn, garden, or any other property, whether or not such person has
knowledge of the damage.
D. Cleaning Up Litter. The owner or person having the custody or control of any dog shall
be responsible for cleaning up the feces of the dog and disposing of such feces in a
sanitary manner whether on their own property, on the property of others, or on public
property.
E. Any animals kept contrary to this Subdivision are subject to impoundment as provided in
this Section.
Subd. 5. Confinement in Motor Vehicle.
A. It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow a dog to be placed or confined in a motor
vehicle without adequate ventilation when the atmospheric temperature, humidity, and
sun rays can be reasonably expected to cause suffering, disability or death to the dog.
Evidence that the dog is suffering from heat is prima facie evidence of a violation of this
Section.
B. Authorized City personnel who find a dog in a motor vehicle in violation of this Section
may break and enter into the vehicle if necessary to remove the dog. Neither the
personnel nor the City will be liable for vehicle damage that results. Any dog removed
may be taken immediately to the animal impounding facility to be evaluated by a licensed
veterinarian. The personnel must leave with the vehicle a written notice giving their
name and position and the address where the dog may be redeemed. The owner of the
dog is responsible for all medical and boarding expenses incurred.
4-26
Subd. 6. Wild/Exotic Animals Prohibited. No person shall keep, maintain or harbor
within the City any of the following animals:
A. Any animal or species prohibited by Minnesota or Federal law;
B. Any non-domesticated animal or species including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Any skunk, whether captured in the wild, domestically raised, de-scented,
vaccinated against rabies or not vaccinated against rabies;
2. Any large cat of the family Felidae, such as lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards,
cougars and ocelots, except commonly accepted domesticated house cats;
3. Any member of the family Canidae, such as wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes and
jackals, except commonly accepted domesticated dogs;
4. Any crossbreed, such as the crossbreeds between dogs and coyotes and coyotes or
dogs and wolves, not including crossbred domesticated animals;
5. Any poisonous pit viper, such as a rattlesnake, coral snake, water moccasin or
cobra;
6. Any raccoon;
7. Any other animal not listed above, but which is not naturally tame or gentle, but is
a wild nature or disposition and which, because of its size, vicious nature or other
characteristics would constitute a danger to human life or property. Included
herein are animals for which no rabies vaccination has been approved by the State
Health Department. Provided, however, that this Section shall not apply to
falconers or bird banders licensed by the Department of Natural Resources and
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife permit.
Subd. 7. Dog Pound. The Council shall designate a selected facility as the City dog pound
for keeping and maintaining any dogs which are seized pursuant to this Section. The selected
facility shall comply with all applicable State statutes.
Subd. 8. Impounding. A peace officer, animal control officer, or any other duly
appointed person, may take and deliver for impoundment to the selected facility designated by
the City, any dog found in the City which is without a tag or running at large. The peace officer,
sheriff or sheriff’s deputy animal control officer or other duly appointed person may enter upon
private premises in pursuit of a dog running at large. Regardless of whether the dog is claimed,
the owner shall be responsible to the City for all costs relating to the seizure and impoundment of
the dog.
Subd. 9. Destruction of Dogs in Certain Circumstances. Pursuant to the requirements
under Minnesota Statute §347.56, a dog may be destroyed in a proper and humane manner by the
City or its authorized agent if the dog:
4-27
1. inflicted substantial or great bodily harm on a human on public or private
property without provocation;
2. inflicted multiple bites on a human on public or private property without
provocation; or
3. bit a human on public or private property without provocation in an attack
where more than 1 dog participated in the attack.
Subd. 10. Muzzling Proclamation. Whenever the prevalence of rabies renders such action
necessary to protect the public health and safety, the mayor may issue a proclamation ordering
every person owning or keeping a dog to confine it securely on the person’s premises unless it is
muzzled so that it cannot bite, or requiring a vaccination for rabies for all dogs in the City. No
person shall violate such proclamation and any unmuzzled dog running at large during the time
fixed in the proclamation shall be exterminated by the poundmaster or any peace officer without
notice to the owner.
Subd. 11. Animal Bite. Whenever any person owning, possessing or harboring any dog
within the corporate limits of the City learns that such dog has bitten any human being, such
person shall immediately quarantine such dog for at least 10 days.
A. If the dog owner does not show proof of current rabies vaccination, such dog shall be
quarantined in a veterinary hospital or impounded by the peace officer, sheriff or
sheriff’s deputy, animal control officer, or other duly appointed person for a period of
10 days.
B. If the owner cannot be advised of the dog bite within 2 hours following the bite, or if
the owner fails to impound the dog as required by this Subdivision, a peace officer,
sheriff, sheriff’s deputy, animal control officer or other duly appointed person shall
cause such dog to be impounded for the quarantine period. If the animal is found to be
rabid, it shall be destroyed. If the animal is found not to be rabid, it shall be returned to
the owner after payment of the impoundment and examination fee. If the owner does
not pay such fee within 5 days after notification to claim or retrieve the animal, the
animal may be destroyed pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 35.71, Subd. 3.
Subd. 12. Rabies Vaccination. No license shall be granted for a dog which has not been
vaccinated against rabies during the 90-day period preceding the making of an application for
such license, unless applicant furnishes a certificate of a veterinarian that the dog is effectively
vaccinated, except that when a dog is first licensed for an entire year hereafter, the license may
be issued if the dog has been vaccinated within a period of 6 months preceding the application
for a license. Vaccination shall be performed and written certificates executed only by a doctor
licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state in which the dog is vaccinated.
Subd. 13. Seizure of Dogs. Any peace officer, sheriff or sheriff’s deputy, animal control
officer or any other duly appointed person may enter upon private property and seize any dog
provided that the following exist:
4-28
A. There is an identified complainant making a contemporaneous complaint about the
animal;
B. The peace officer, sheriff or sheriff’s deputy, animal control officer, or other duly
appointed person reasonably believes that the dog meets either the barking dog criteria
set out in Subd. 4; the criteria for an at large dog set out in Subd. 1; or is not receiving the
basic care or is being mistreated as provided in Subd. 18;
C. The peace officer, sheriff or sheriff’s deputy, animal control officer, or other duly
appointed person has made a reasonable attempt to contact the owner of the dog and
those attempts have been unsuccessful;
D. The seizure will not involve the forced entry into a private residence. Use of a pass key
obtained from a property manager, landlord, innkeeper, or other authorized person to
have such key shall not be considered unauthorized entry; and
E. Written notice of the seizure is left in a conspicuous place if personal contact with the
owner of the dog is unsuccessful.
Subd. 14. Diseased Animals.
A. Keeping of Diseased Animals. No person shall keep or allow to be kept on his or her
premises, or on premises occupied by them, nor permit to run at large in the City, any
animal which is diseased, rabid or exposed to rabies so as to be a danger to the health and
safety of the City, even if the animal is properly licensed under this Section.
B. Dogs Bitten By A Rabid Animal. The following rules shall apply in the case of dogs
known to have been bitten by rabid animals. For the purposes of this Subdivision, any
bat, skunk, civet cat, raccoon or fox that bites a dog shall be deemed a rabid animal,
unless proven otherwise.
1. If the bitten (exposed) dog has not been vaccinated in accordance with the
provisions of this Section, said bitten exposed dog shall be destroyed
immediately. If the owner is unwilling to destroy the bitten (exposed) dog, said
dog shall be placed in strict isolation in a veterinary hospital under veterinary
supervision for a minimum period of 6 months at the owner’s expense. Before
release of the dog, it shall be vaccinated against rabies 1 month prior to its release
at the owner's expense.
2. If the bitten (exposed) dog has been vaccinated in accordance with the
provisions of this Section, said bitten dog shall be revaccinated immediately and
shall be placed in strict isolation in a veterinary hospital under veterinary
supervision for a minimum period of 40 days following revaccination at the
owner’s expense. If the bitten (exposed) dog is not revaccinated immediately, it
shall be placed in strict isolation in a veterinary hospital under veterinary
supervision for a minimum period of 6 months at the owner’s expense.
4-29
C. Disposition of Certain Animals. If any animal in the City is diseased, rabid or exposed to
rabies, vicious, dangerous or believed to be mortally wounded, and if such animal cannot
be impounded after reasonable effort, or cannot be impounded without serious risk to the
person attempting to impound such animal, it may be immediately killed by an animal
control officer, sheriff or sheriff’s deputy, peace officer or other duly appointed person
without notice to the owner..
Subd. 15. Dangerous and Potentially Dangerous Dogs.
A. Attack by A Dog. It shall be unlawful for any person’s dog to inflict or attempt to inflict
bodily injury to any person or other animal whether or not the owner is present. This
Section shall not apply to an attack by a dog under the control of an on-duty law
enforcement officer or to an attack upon an uninvited intruder who has entered the
owner’s home with criminal intent.
B. Definitions.
1. A dangerous dog is a dog that has:
i) without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a human
being on public or private property;
ii) killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's
property; or
(iii) been found to be potentially dangerous, and after the owner has
notice that the dog is potentially dangerous, the dog aggressively
bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
2. A potentially dangerous dog means any dog that:
i) when unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human or domestic animal on
public or private property;
(ii) when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person, including a person
on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private
property, other than the dog owner's property, in an apparent attitude
of attack; or
(iii) has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack
unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of
humans or domestic animals.
4-30
3. Provocation. Provocation means an act that an adult could reasonably expect may
cause a dog to attack or bite.
C. Designation as Potentially Dangerous Dog. The animal control officer, sheriff or
sheriff’s deputy, or other duly appointed person shall designate any dog as a potentially
dangerous dog upon receiving evidence that such dog has met 1 or more of the conditions
stated in Subpart B(2) of this Subdivision. When a dog is declared potentially dangerous,
the Clerk or his/her designee shall cause the owner of the potentially dangerous dog to be
notified in writing pursuant to Subpart E. Every owner of a potentially dangerous dog
shall also be required to meet the criteria set forth in Subpart F(1)(a), (d), (g), (h) and (i)
of this Subdivision. The owner of a dog declared potentially dangerous may appeal the
declaration in accordance with and subject to the requirements of Subpart E. The owner
must request the appeal hearing within 14 days of the date of the notice or the owner’s
right to appeal is waived.
D. Designation as a Dangerous Dog. The animal control officer, sheriff or sheriff’s deputy,
or other duly appointed person shall designate any dog as a dangerous dog upon receiving
evidence that the dog has met 1 or more of the conditions stated in Subpart B(1) if this
Subdivision. When a dog is declared dangerous, the Clerk or his/her designee shall cause
the owner of the dangerous dog to be notified in writing pursuant to Subpart E. The
owner of a dog declared dangerous may appeal the declaration in accordance with and
subject to the requirements of Subpart E. The owner must request the appeal hearing
within 14 days of the date of the notice or the owner’s right to appeal is waived.
E. Notice and Appeal Procedures for Determination of Potentially Dangerous and
Dangerous Dogs.
1. When the animal control officer, sheriff, sheriff’s deputy or other duly appointed
person has determined that a dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, the
Clerk or his/her designee shall notify the owner in writing of that determination.
The notice shall include:
(i) a description of the dog; the authority for and purpose of the potentially
dangerous or dangerous dog declaration and seizure, if applicable; the
time, place, and circumstances under which the dog was declared
potentially dangerous or dangerous; and, if the dog has been seized, the
telephone number and contact person where the dog is kept;
(ii) a statement that the owner of the dog may request a hearing concerning
the potentially dangerous or dangerous dog declaration and, if applicable,
prior potentially dangerous dog declarations unless a hearing was
previously held on a prior potentially dangerous dog declaration or waived
either by the owner or by operation of law, and that failure to do so within
4-31
14 days of the date of the notice will terminate the owner's right to a
hearing;
(iii) a statement that if a request for a hearing to appeal a dangerous dog
declaration is made within 14 days of the notice, the owner must
immediately comply with the requirements of Minnesota Statute § 347.52,
paragraphs (a) and (c), and until such time as the hearing officer issues an
opinion;
(iv) a statement that if the hearing officer affirms the potentially dangerous or
dangerous dog declaration, the owner will have 14 days from receipt of
that decision to comply with all other applicable requirements under this
Section and Minnesota Statutes §§ 347.51, 347.515, and 347.52;
(v) a statement that in the event the potentially dangerous or dangerous dog
declaration is upheld by the hearing officer, the actual expenses of the
hearing, up to the maximum of $1,000 will be the responsibility of the
owner;
(vi) a form to request a hearing under this Subpart; and
(vii) a statement, when applicable, that all actual costs of the care, keeping, and
disposition of the dog are the responsibility of the person claiming an
interest in the animal, except to the extent that a court or hearing officer
finds that the seizure or impoundment was not substantially justified by
law.
2. If the owner requests a hearing, the date for the hearing shall be set not more than
14 days after receipt of the request for hearing. The hearing shall be held by a
hearing officer, who shall be appointed by the City Administrator. The hearing
officer shall be an impartial employee of the City, or an impartial third party
chosen by the City Administrator. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the hearing
officer shall, within ten (10) days, make his/her decision which reverses or affirms
the determination that the dog is potentially dangerous or dangerous. The City
shall notify the owner in writing of the hearing officer’s decision ("hearing
officer's Notice of Decision") by either hand delivery or registered mail. If the
hearing officer's decision is to affirm the determination, he/she shall include in the
hearing officer's Notice of Decision his/her findings and conclusions supporting
his/her decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. In the event
the potentially dangerous or dangerous animal declaration is upheld, actual
expenses of the hearing up to $1,000.00 will be the responsibility of the owner.
The City shall within 30 days of delivery of the hearing officer’s Notice of
Decision mail an invoice to the owner outlining the actual expenses of the
hearing.
4-32
3. No person shall harbor a dog after it has been found to be potentially dangerous or
dangerous and ordered into custody until the requirements of this Section are met.
4. Beginning 6 months after a dog is declared potentially dangerous or dangerous
hereunder, an owner may request annually that the Council review the designation
by serving upon it a written request for review that includes the full name, address
and telephone number of the requestor, a list of names and addresses of all owners
of the dog, the requestor’s ownership interest in the dog, and a summary of the
basis for the claimed change in the dog’s behavior. The request for review shall
be accompanied by all documents in support of the contention that the dog’s
aggressive behavior has been modified. If the declaration is rescinded, the
Council may impose other limitations or conditions on the dog or dog owner as it
sees fit.
F. Dangerous Dog Requirements. Owners of dogs declared dangerous by the City shall
comply with the following requirements:
a. Requirements as set forth in Minnesota Statute § 347.52, et al.;
b. Post the front and rear of the owner’s premises with clearly visible
warning signs, including a warning symbol to warn children, that there is a
dangerous animal on the property as specified in Minnesota Statute §
347.51;
c. Provide and show proof annually of a surety bond issued by a surety
company authorized to conduct business in Minnesota in a form
acceptable to the City in the sun of at least $300,000.00, payable to any
person injured by the dangerous dog, or a policy of liability insurance
issued by an insurance company authorized to conduct business in
Minnesota in the amount of at least $300,000.00, insuring the owner of
any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog;
d. If the animal is a dog and is outside the proper dog enclosure, the dog
must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash (not to
exceed 6’ in length) and the under the physical restraint of a person 16
years of age or older. The muzzle must be of such a design as to prevent
the dog from biting any person or animal, but will not cause injury to the
dog or interfere with its vision or respiration;
e. If the animal is a dog, it must have an easily identifiable, standardized tag
identifying the dog as dangerous affixed to its collar at all times as
specified in Minnesota Statute § 347.51;
f. All animals deemed dangerous by the City shall be registered and
specifically licensed as a dangerous dog along with payment of an
appropriate fee established by the City. The animal shall be registered and
4-33
licensed within 14 days after the date the animal is so deemed and provide
statutory proof thereof to the Clerk. Animals declared dangerous by
another jurisdiction must be registered and licensed with the City prior to
the animal being brought into the City.
g. If the animal is a dog, the dog must be licensed and up to date on rabies
vaccination.
h. The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog must have a
microchip implanted in the dog for identification, and the name of the
microchip manufacturer and the identification number. The microchip
must be provided to the Clerk as required under Minnesota Statute §
347.515.
i. The dog must be kept in a proper dog enclosure as defined in Subdivision
23 of this Section.
G. Seizure. The animal control officer, sheriff or sheriff’s deputy or other duly appointed
person shall immediately seize any dangerous animal if the owner does not appeal the
City’s dangerous dog declaration or meet each of the above requirements within 14 days
after the date notice is sent to the owner that the animal is dangerous. Any dangerous
animal being relocated to the City that has been declared in another jurisdiction may be
seized immediately if the owner has not complied with the standard set forth in this
Section prior to the animal being brought into the City. Seizure may be appealed
pursuant to Subpart E.
H. Reclaiming Animals. A dangerous animal seized under Subpart G may be reclaimed by
the owner of the animal upon payment of impounding and boarding fees and presenting
proof that each of the requirements under Subpart F are fulfilled. An animal not
reclaimed under this Subpart within 14 days may be disposed of as provided under
Minnesota Statute § 35.71, Subd. 3, and the owner shall be liable to the City for costs
incurred in confining the animal.
I. Subsequent Offenses.
1. If a person has been convicted of a misdemeanor for violating a provision of
Minnesota Statute §§ 347.51, 347.515 or 347.52, and the person who is charged
with the subsequent violation relating to the same dog, the City shall seize the dog
and the provisions of Minnesota Statute § 347.54, Subd. 3 shall apply.
2. If an owner of an animal other than a dog has subsequently violated the provisions
under Subpart B with the same animal, the animal must be seized by the City.
The owner may request a hearing as defined in Subpart E. If the owner is found
to have violated the provisions for which the animal was seized, the City shall
order the animal destroyed in a proper and humane manner and the owner shall
pay the cost of confining the animal. The persons found not to have violated the
4-34
provisions for which the animal was seized, the owner may reclaim the animal
under the provisions of Subpart H. If the animal is not yet reclaimed by the
owner within 14 days after the date the owner is notified that the animal may
reclaimed the animal may be disposed of pursuant to Minnesota Statute § 35.71,
Subd. 3, and the owner shall be liable to the City for costs incurred in confining,
impounding and disposing of the animal.
J. Exemption. An animal may not be declared dangerous if the threat, injury, or damage
was sustained by a person;
1. Who was committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other tort upon the
premises occupied by the owner of the animal;
2. Who was provoking, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or who can be
shown to have repeatedly, in the past, provoked, tormented, abused or assaulted
the animal; or
3. Who is committing or attempting to commit a crime.
Subd. 17. Restrictions on Dog Ownership.
A. Except as provided in Subpart C of this Subdivision no person may own a dog if the
person has:
1. Been convicted of a third or subsequent violation of Minnesota Statute §§ 347.51,
347.515, or 347.52;
2. Been convicted of a violation under Minnesota Statute § 609.205, clause (4);
3. Been convicted of a gross misdemeanor under Minnesota Statute § 609.226,
Subdivision 1;
4. Been convicted of a violation under Section 609.226, Subdivision 2; or
5. Had a dog ordered destroyed under Section 247.56 and been convicted of one or
more violations of Minnesota Statute §§ 347.51, 346.515, 347.52, or 609.226,
Subdivision 2.
B. If any member of a household is prohibited from owning a dog in Subpart A above,
unless specifically approved by the Council, no person in the household is permitted to
own a dog.
C. Beginning 3 years after a conviction under Subpart A, that prohibits a person from
owning a dog, and annually thereafter, the person may request that the Council review the
prohibition. The Council may consider such facts as the seriousness of the violation or
violations that led to the prohibition, any criminal convictions, or other facts that the
Council deems appropriate. The Council may rescind the prohibition entirely or rescind
4-35
it with limitations. The Council also may establish conditions a person must meet before
the prohibition is rescinded, including, but not limited to, successfully completing dog
training or dog handling courses. If the Council rescinds a person’s prohibition and the
person subsequently fails to comply with any limitations imposed by the Council or the
person is convicted of any animal violation involving unprovoked bites or dog attacks,
the Council may permanently prohibit the person from owing a dog in this state.
Subd. 18. Basic Care. All animals shall receive from their owners or keepers kind
treatment, housing in the winter, and sufficient food and water for their comfort. No person shall
permit feces, urine or food scraps to remain in an area for a period that is longer then reasonable
and inconsistent with health and sanitation and the prevention of odors. No person shall beat,
treat cruelly, torment or otherwise abuse any animal or permit any animal fights. No owner of an
animal shall abandon such animal. Any person not treating animals in a humane manner will be
subject to the penalties provided in this Section.
Subd. 19. Breeding Moratorium. Every female dog or female cat in heat shall be confined
in a building or other enclosure in such manner that it cannot come in contact with another dog
or cat except for planned breeding. Upon capture and failure to reclaim the animal, every dog or
cat shall be neutered or spayed prior to being transferred to a new owner.
Subd. 20. Enforcing Officer. The Council is hereby authorized to appoint an animal
control officer(s) to enforce the provisions of this Section. In the officer’s duty of enforcing the
provisions of this Section, he or she may from time to time, with the consent of the Council,
designate assistants.
Subd. 21. Pound. Every year the Council shall designate an official pound to which
animals found in violation of this Section shall be taken for safe treatment, and if necessary, for
destruction.
Subd. 22. Interference with Officers. No person shall in any manner molest, hinder, or
interfere with any person authorized by the Council to capture dogs, cats or other animals and
convey them to the pound while engaged in such operation. Nor shall any unauthorized person
break open the pound, or attempt to do so, or take or attempt to take from any agent any animal
taken up by him or her in compliance with this Section, or in any other manner to interfere with
or hinder such officer in the discharge of his or her duties under this Section.
Subd. 23. Dog Enclosures.
A. As used in this Subdivision, the term “dog enclosure” means any enclosure constructed
for shutting in or enclosing dogs and having an area less than 2,000 square feet.
B. Dog enclosures must be screened from view of adjacent property. Screening must consist
of a solid fence, or equivalent, as approved by the Building Official or his/her designee,
not less than 5 feet in height. The screening must include in its design provision for air to
circulate under and through the screening material. Such screening must be constructed in
4-36
a structurally sound and physically attractive manner, and the screening must be
maintained so as not to create a blighting influence to the neighborhood.
C. A dog enclosure shall not be placed closer than 10 feet to any lot line, except no dog
enclosure shall be placed in a front yard, and in no event shall a dog enclosure be placed
closer than 50 feet of any dwelling unit other than the owner’s property.
D. No person shall permit feces, urine, or food scraps to remain in an enclosure for a period
that is longer than reasonable and consistent with health and sanitation and the prevention
of odors.
E. This Subdivision shall be applicable to all dog enclosures constructed after the effective
date hereof. Any owner of an existing dog enclosure which is a nuisance or source of
filth may be required to comply with this Section by notice of compliance given by the
Clerk or his/her designee. Failure to comply with such a notice within 30 days of
issuance shall be a violation of this Subdivision.
SECTION 407.01. KENNELS.
Subd. 1. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings stated:
A. “Private kennel” means a place where 3 or more dogs over 6 months of age are kept by
their owner for no commercial purpose.
B. “Commercial kennel” means a place where any number of dogs of any age are kept,
confined, or congregated for the purpose of selling, boarding, breeding, training, treating
or grooming.
Subd. 2. License Required. No person shall operate or maintain either a private or
commercial kennel without a license therefor from the City.
Subd. 3. License Restriction. Kennel licenses shall be granted by the Council in only
those instances where it finds the location and operation of the kennel will not adversely affect
the public health, safety and general welfare. No commercial kennel shall be established or
maintained on any residentially zoned property nor shall any private kennel be established or
maintained in any area where the lot is less than one acre.
SECTION 408.01. PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND SOLICTORS.
Subd. 1. Purpose. This ordinance is not intended to interfere with the legitimate business
activities of peddlers as the same are defined herein, whether the same be local or interstate.
These provisions are intended only to, as nearly as possible, pursue all illegitimate or confidence
operators and to regulate and control all those who, in person, would use their unique presence
on property within the City, or their unique proximity to its residents, for purposes of
harassment, nuisance, theft, or other unlawful activities.
4-37
Subd. 2. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings stated:
A. “Peddler” means any person, whether a resident of the City or not, who goes from house
to house, from place to place, or from street to street, conveying or transporting goods,
wares or merchandise or offering or exposing the same for sale, or making sales where
payment is received immediately for future delivery to purchasers. It does not include
vendors of milk, bakery products or groceries who distribute their products to regular
customers on established routes.
B. “Peddling” means the act of being a peddler.
C. “Solicitor” means any person, whether a resident of the City or not, who goes from house
to house, from place to place, or from street to street with the intention of taking
immediate orders for services or goods for future delivery and payment. All solicitors
dealing with merchandise of any kind to be delivered to customers directly from points
outside the State shall be exempt from payment of the license fee.
D. “Transient merchant” includes any person, firm, individual, corporation, limited liability
company, and corporation, both as principal and agent, who engage in, do, or transact any
temporary and transient selling and delivering of goods, wares and merchandise within
the City, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any
building, structure, motor vehicle, trailer, tent, railroad car, boat, public room in hotels,
lodging houses, apartments, shops, or any street, alley or other place within the City, for
the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at
public auction, provided that such definition does not include any person, firm or
corporation who, while occupying such temporary location, does not sell from stock, but
exhibits samples or the purpose of securing orders for future delivery only.
Subd. 3. Permit Required. It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or transient merchant
to engage in any such business within the City without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
City in compliance with the provisions of this Section.
Subd. 4. Exemptions. The terms of this ordinance do not include the acts of persons
selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such articles, nor to newspaper carriers, nor
to the acts of merchants or their employees in delivering goods already sold in the regular course
of business, nor to the sale of farm or garden products by the person producing the same, which
production shall be proven by the vendor, nor sales of admissions by local school students to a
school function, nor a seller or exhibiter in a firearms collector show involving 2 or more sellers
or exhibiters. Nothing contained in this ordinance prohibits any sale required by statute or by
order of any court, or prevents any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law.
Nor shall Subd. 5 apply to solicitations by any organization for philanthropic, religious or
educational causes if the following procedure has been accomplished: the requesting entity must
file a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the Clerk which shall give the
following information:
4-38
A. Name and purpose of the cause for which exemption is sought;
B. Names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization;
C. Period during which solicitation is to be carried on;
D. Whether or not any commission, fee or wages are to be expended in connection
with such solicitation and the amount thereof.
Upon being satisfied of the philanthropic, religious or educational cause of such organization, the
Clerk shall issue a permit without charge to such organization, association or corporation to
solicit in the City. Such organization, shall furnish all of its members, agents, or representatives
conducting solicitation credentials in writing stating the name of the organization, name of agent
and purpose of solicitation.
Subd. 5. Application. Applicants for a permit under this ordinance shall file with the City
Clerk a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the Clerk. The applicant shall
furnish the following information:
A. Name and physical description of applicant;
B. Complete permanent home and local address of the applicant and, in the case of transient
merchants, the local address from which proposed sales will be made;
C. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold;
D. The name and address of the employer, principal or supplier of the applicant, together
with credentials therefrom establishing the exact relationship;
E. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
F. The source of supply of the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the
sale thereof, where such goods or products are located at the time said application is filed,
and the proposed method of delivery;
G. A recent photograph of the applicant which picture shall be approximately 2” by 2”
showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;
H. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor,
or violation of any municipal ordinance, other than petty misdemeanor traffic violations,
the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
I. The most recent 3 municipalities where applicant carried on business and the addresses
from which such business was conducted in those municipalities.
4-39
Subd. 6. Investigation and Issuance.
A. Upon receipt, each application shall be referred to the Council which shall institute such
investigation of the applicant as is deemed necessary for the protection of the public
good. An applicant may be found to be unsatisfactory for reasons including, but not
limited to:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or an incorrect statement contained in the application for
permit;
2. Past fraud, misrepresentation or an incorrect statement made in the course of
carrying on business as a solicitor, canvasser, peddler, transient merchant,
itinerant merchant, or itinerant vendor;
3. Past conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving fraud, theft or moral
turpitude;
4. Conducting the business of a peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, itinerant
merchant, or itinerant vendor, as the case may have been, in an unlawful manner
or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of peace or to constitute a menace to
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. Each peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant must secure a personal permit. No permit
shall be used at any time by any person other than the one to whom it is issued. The
Clerk shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued.
Subd. 7. Restrictions.
A. Loud Noises and Speaking Devices. No permittee, nor any person on behalf of the
permittee, shall shout, cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any sound amplifying
device upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the City or upon
private premises where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be
capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks, or other public
places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which
such permittee proposes to sell.
B. Signs. Any resident of the City who wishes to exclude peddlers or solicitors from
premises occupied by him/her may place upon or near the usual entrance to such
premises a printed placard or sign bearing the notice: “Peddlers and Solicitors
Prohibited.” Such placard shall be at least 3-3/4 inches long and 3-3/4 inches wide and
the printing thereon shall not be smaller than 48-point type. No peddler or solicitor shall
enter in or upon any premises or attempt to enter in or upon any premises, where such
placard or sign is placed and maintained. No person other than the person occupying
such premises shall remove, injure or deface such placard or sign.
C. Use of Streets. No permittee, nor any person on behalf of the permitee, shall have any
exclusive right to any location in the public streets, nor shall any be permitted in a
4-40
stationary location in the public streets or public right-of-way, nor shall any be permitted
to operate in a congested area where such operation might impede or inconvenience
public use of such streets. For the purpose of this Section, the judgment of a county
sheriff’s deputy, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the
area is congested and the public impeded or inconvenienced.
D. Exhibition of Permit. Permitees are required to exhibit their permit at the request of any
person.
Subd. 8. Revocation of License.
A. Permits issued under the provisions of this ordinance may be revoked by the Council of
the City after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement contained in the application for
permit;
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement made in the course of carrying on
his business as solicitor, canvasser, peddler, transient merchant, itinerant
merchant or itinerant vendor;
3. Any violation of this Section;
4. Conviction of any crime;
5. Conducting the business of a peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, itinerant
merchant, or itinerant vendor, as the case may be, in an unlawful manner of in
such a manner as to constitute a breach of peace or to constitute a menace to
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a permit shall be given by the Clerk in writing,
setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing.
Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee to his last known address at
least five days prior to the date set for hearing, or shall be delivered by a peace officer in
the same manner as a summons at least three days prior to the date set for hearing.
C. No permitee whose license has been revoked shall make further application until at least
6 months have elapsed since the last previous revocation.
Subd. 9. Expiration of Permit. All annual permits issued under the provisions of this
Section shall expire at midnight on December 31 in the year when issued. Permits that are not
issued on an annual basis, shall expire at midnight on the dates specified in the license.
SECTION 409.01. MOVING BUILDINGS.
Subd. 1. Definitions. As used in this Section, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings stated:
4-41
A. “Building” means any permanent structure that is at least 16 feet wide or 20 feet long
designed, built or occupied primarily as a shelter for persons or property, and generally
used or intended to be used for residential, business, mercantile, storage, religious,
recreational or educational purposes.
B. “Street” means all streets, highways, roads, alleys, and right-of-ways in the City.
Subd. 2. Moving Permit.
A. No person shall move a building on any street unless and until the owner of said building
obtains a moving permit from the City. No such permit shall be granted to the owner
unless it is endorsed by a building mover licensed by the State, acknowledging that the
building mover knows the contents of this Chapter and agrees to be bound hereby and by
all conditions placed upon the permit.
B. Application for a moving permit shall be made in writing upon a form provided by the
City, and shall be accompanied by a copy of the building mover’s State license. The
Building Official shall review the application and make a recommendation as to whether
to grant or deny the permit and, if granted, what conditions shall attach to the granting of
the permit. The Clerk shall then submit the application, along with the Building
Official’s recommendations, to the Planning Commission, or, in the Clerk’s discretion,
directly to the Council. If the application is first submitted to the Planning Commission,
the Planning Commission shall review the application and make a recommendation on
the application to the Council.
Subd. 3. Submissions to Accompany Permit Application. The application for a moving
permit shall include the following:
A. State the approximate size and weight of the building proposed to be moved, the street
address and legal description the place from which and to the building is proposed to be
moved; the proposed route to be followed; the proposed dates and time of moving and
parking; the name and address of the proposed mover; the municipal utility, street, and
public property repairs or alterations that will be required by reason of such movement;
and a site plan illustrating that the proposed location to which the building will be moved
is in conformance with City zoning standards.
B. Written evidence from the owner of the building that the applicant is entitled to move the
building.
C. Written evidence of arrangements with all public utility companies whose wires, lamps,
poles or the like are required to be removed or otherwise altered in order to move the
building.
D. If the building is to be moved over any state, county or township roadways located within
the City, written evidence of permission to so move issued by the appropriate state,
county or township department, or the issuance of a permit if required.
4-42
E. If the building is to be moved over any railroad tracks within the City, written evidence
of permission to so move issued by proper railroad officials, or the issuance of a permit if
so required, the specific time during which the buildings may be transported across any
railroad tracks, the and location of said crossing.
F. Written evidence of adequate insurance for all risks related to moving the building.
G. The issuance of a permit hereunder shall be conditioned on applicant’s filing with the
City a performance surety bond or cash deposit in the sum to be fixed by the Council,
which bond or deposit shall guarantee the performance of all of the conditions of the
permit and the conditions provided in this ordinance.
H. Written evidence that all taxes, assessments and any other charges against the building
and lot from which a building located within the City is to be removed are paid in full.
Subd. 4. Duties of the Building Mover. In every case where a building is to be moved on
or over City streets, the building mover shall:
A. Notify the Council in writing of damage caused to property belonging to the City or any
public utility within 24 hours after the damage or injury has occurred.
B. Cause such lights to be displayed and such barriers to be erected as are required by law,
or by law enforcement officers.
C. Not park the building on any City street at any time during the moving process, unless
specifically permitted in the permit application and approved by the City.
D. Pay the expense of any traffic officer ordered by the City to accompany the movement of
the building to protect the public from injury.
E. Comply with the State Building Code, all provisions of the City Code, all conditions of
the permit issued hereunder, and any other applicable law or permit.
F. Notify the Building Official within 24 hours after the move is completed.
Subd. 5. Duties of the Owner. The owner of the building to be moved shall comply with
the following requirements:
A. If the original or final location of the building to be moved is located within the City, the
owner shall provide proof of ownership of the land and the building prior to issuance of
the permit.
B. The owner shall remove all rubbish and materials at the original building site, if within
the City, so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition. In addition, the
owner shall remove foundation structures, fill excavations, and grade the premises in
accordance with a plan approved by the Building Official.
4-43
C. The owner shall seal all utilities, including but not limited to causing any sewer lines to
be plugged with a concrete stopper, and the water to be shut off at the originating site of
the building if it is located within the City. The owner shall notify gas, electric and other
utilities to remove their services.
D. The owner shall take all reasonable precautions to secure the building and to reduce
danger to members of the public until the building is set on its foundation and any
remodeling, additions or repairs described in the application have been completed,
including but not limited to, (1) locking all doors and windows; (2) providing sufficient
support or bracing so as to stabilize the building to prevent it or any part thereof from
sliding, slipping, falling or moving, and (3) adequately preventing access to any
excavation or hole.
E. The owner shall obtain an inspection from the Building Official for any buildings being
moved into the City.
Subd. 6. Liability.
A. The holder or holders of a permit shall be liable, jointly and severally, for any expenses,
damages, fines, penalties, attorney fees and costs, injunctions, settlements or other costs
paid or incurred by the City as a result of the issuance of a permit or the taking or failure
to take any action by the holder or holders of the permit, or as a result of moving the
building.
B. Upon completion of the moving of a building pursuant to a permit, the amount which the
applicant has deposited or bonded in conjunction with the permit shall be returned to the
applicant, less all amounts for which any holder of a permit shall or may become liable to
the City, which the City may retain under any provision of this Section. The permit fee
paid upon filing of the application shall not be returned.
Subd. 7. Denial of a Permit. Any permit under this Section may be denied or revoked
upon a finding of any one of the following:
A. Applicant has not complied with any requirement of this Section;
B. Persons or property in the City would be endangered by moving the building, because of
shape, size, route, stability, equipment or for any other reason;
C. The building or its use would not be in compliance with zoning, building codes or other
law.
D. Any other reasonable cause.
SECTION 410.01. NUMBERING OF HOMES AND BUSINESS PLACES.
Subd. 1. Display. The current addresses of all homes, other buildings occupied for living
purposes, and business buildings shall be displayed on the exterior of the structure facing the
4-44
street. The display of the address shall be located on the side of the building for which its
address is assigned.
Subd. 2. Size of Numbers. Each number of the address attached to the home or business
shall be plainly visible and legible from the street or road fronting the property. For residential
properties, the numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches high and a minimum stroke width of 0.5
inch. For commercial properties, the numbers shall be a minimum of 6 inches high with a
minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch. The number shall be of a color that contrasts to the color of
the building to which it is attached. The number of the address shall be in Arabic numbers,
Roman numerals, or numbers written in English.
Subd. 3. Location. All numbers attached to a home or business place shall be located in a
position near the front door of said building so it may be seen from the street or road clearly at
night with a spotlight or a porch light attached to the building.
SECTION 411.01. PARADES.
Subd. 1. Definition. The term “parade” means any movement of vehicles, persons or
animals, or any combination thereof, which either moves together so as to impede or affect the
free and unobstructed flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or which moves so that some part
thereof is in violation of one or more traffic laws or regulations, if such movement is without a
permit hereunder.
Subd. 2. Permit Required. No person shall sponsor or participate in a parade for which
no permit has been obtained from the City.
Subd. 3. Permit Procedure.
A. Application. Application for a parade permit shall be made to the Clerk at least 30 days
in advance of the date on which it is to occur and shall state the sponsoring organization
or individual, the route, the length, the estimated time of commencement and termination,
the appropriate number of individuals participating, the number and types of vehicles
participating, and anticipated safety and security issues, a description of any amplified
sound to be used, and the general composition. Such application shall be executed by the
individuals applying therefor or the duly authorized agent or representative of the
sponsoring organization. The application shall be accompanied by proof of adequate
insurance applicable to the parade, a security/safety plan, and a certification by the
Wright County Sheriff that the proposed parade will not present undue risks to the safety
of parade participants or the general public.
B. Investigation. The Clerk shall forthwith refer all applications for parades to the Council
for its consideration. The Council, in conjunction with the appropriate public safety
authorities, shall investigate the application to determine whether the proposed parade
will create a risk of harm to persons or property, cause inconvenience to the public and
whether adequate arrangements have been or can be made for necessary direction and
control of traffic. The Council may either (1) deny the permit, (2) grant the permit, or (3)
4-45
grant the permit on certain additional conditions, including but not limited to that the
parade occurs on a date, time or route that differs from that stated in the application, or
the different safety precautions be employed. The applicant shall have three days within
which to communicate acceptance of any such additional terms to the Clerk.
Subd. 4. Unlawful Acts.
A. No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any parade, parade assembly
or any person, animal or vehicle participating in a parade, for which a permit has been
issued hereunder.
B. No person shall drive a vehicle between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade
when such parade is in motion, unless so directed by appropriate law enforcement
authorities.
C. No person shall enter into a parade without prior authorization from the parade
chairperson.
D. No parade participant who is riding on any vehicle, animal or other parade unit shall hand
out, throw, or forcibly eject any substance or article of any kind, including but not limited
to candy and other edible items, balloons, novelties and flowers. This prohibition also
applies to any participant in the parade who is not riding on a vehicle, animal or parade
unit, unless the participant is walking in a safe manner within five feet of the street curb.
In no event shall any such substance or article be distributed in such a manner as to
encourage minors or other parade viewers to leave the curb and enter the traveled portion
of the roadway.
Subd. 5. Exception. This Section shall not apply to funeral processions, or a governmental
agency acting within the scope of its functions.
SECTION 412.01. GAMBLING.
Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to regulate and control the conduct of
lawful gambling pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 349.
Subd. 2. Definitions. For the purposes of this Section the terms used herein shall have the
meanings defined or used in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 349. “Gambling organization” means
an organization licensed for charitable gambling by the State or issued a permit for charitable
gambling by the City.
Subd. 3. Additional Regulations. The following regulations shall apply to the conduct of
lawful gambling within the City in addition to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 349.
Subd. 4. Unlicensed or Unpermitted Bingo or Lawful Gambling Prohibited. Any
organization eligible under State law to conduct lawful gambling may do so only after applying
for and receiving a license from the State Charitable Gambling Control Board after approval of
4-46
the Council or, if exempt from State licensing, after applying for and receiving a permit from the
Council.
Subd. 5. Application. Organizations exempt from State licensing under Minnesota Statute
Chapter 349 that wish to conduct lawful gambling shall make application for a permit with the
Clerk on a form the Clerk provides. The application shall be verified by a duly authorized
officer of the organization and by the designated gambling manager. No application shall be
accepted unless accompanied by the required investigation fee. The Council shall act upon a
permit application within 90 days from the date of application, and the permit shall be issued not
less than 30 days following approval.
Subd. 6. Investigation Fee. The Council by resolution may assess an investigation fee of
up to $100.00 on organizations applying for or renewing a state license for local permit to
conduct lawful gambling in the City.
Subd. 7. Conditions Governing Issuance of Permit.
A. Permits shall be issued only where the applicant and all of its owners, managers,
employees, or agents are free of convictions for offenses which relate directly to such
person’s ability, capacity or fitness to perform the duties and discharge the
responsibilities of the gambling activities.
B. No permit shall be issued to an applicant which has, within the State, during the one-year
period prior to the date of application, (1) been denied a gambling permit, (2) had a
gambling permit revoked, canceled or suspended, or (3) whose owners, managers, or
agents have had a permit similarly denied, revoked or suspended.
C. Permits shall be issued only to applicants who have fully and truthfully provided all of
the information requested in the application, who have paid the permit fee in full as well
as the fee for investigation, and who have cooperated fully and truthfully with the City in
the review of the application.
D. Permits shall be issued only to fraternal, religious, veteran or other non-profit
organizations which have been in existence within the City for at least three years, and
have at least 15 present, active members in good standing.
E. Permits shall be issued only to applicants who can satisfactorily show that they either
own or lease the premises where the gambling activity would be conducted. If gambling
activity is to be conducted on leased premises, the applicant must satisfactorily show that
the lease will exist for a term at least equal in length to the term of the anticipated permit.
F. The permit applicant shall designate one person to be gambling manager who shall be
responsible for the conduct of the business. The gambling manager shall remain
responsible for the conduct of the gambling devices, raffles, pull-tabs, and their operation
until any other suitable person has been designated in writing as the gambling manager,
and an investigation fee and application for a change of manager has been filed, and the
proposed successor to the gambling manager shall have been approved by the Council.
4-47
The gambling organization shall promptly notify the Council in writing of any such
change indicating the address and name of the new gambling manager and the effective
date of such change.
G. Any permit which would result in inconsistency with the City’s development plans, land
use regulations, or that would otherwise have a detrimental affect upon other persons or
properties in the vicinity, shall not be granted.
H. Upon approval and issuance of a permit, the applicant shall display the permit in a
prominent place on the gambling premises at all times.
I. All permits granted herein are non-transferable with regard to persons, organizations or
location.
J. The permit fee and investigation fee must be tendered with each new application for a
permit, and must also be tendered at any time when there is a proposed change of
ownership, change of gambling manger or reapplication for a permit. In the event that a
permit is denied, revoked, canceled, suspended or surrendered, for whatever reason,
neither the annual permit fee or investigation fee will be refunded to the applicant.
Subd. 8. Conditions Governing all Charitable Gambling.
A. The operation of gambling devices or conduct of gambling is not permitted between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. The time limitations specified herein shall be
prominently posted on the premises where gambling occurs.
B. Each gambling organization shall allow all City officials to inspect the premises and
gambling operations at all times when gambling operations are open and at any other
reasonable times.
C. Violation of the terms and provisions of this ordinance may be cause for the revocation,
suspension or cancellation of other permits or licenses issued by the City to a gambling
organization.
D. Upon request by a City official, any person employed in or by any gambling organization
shall furnish identification and correct address.
E. No natural person under 18 years of age shall be permitted to gamble or be employed in
the operation of gambling devices, pull-tabs or raffles, except that those persons under 18
years of age may sell raffle tickets but only while off the gambling premises.
F. Gambling devices, pull-tabs, raffles and all equipment related to gambling activities shall
be kept, maintained, operated or conducted only upon the premises owned or leased by
gambling organizations, except that tickets for raffles may be sold off the premises.
4-48
Subd. 9. Expenditures for Lawful Purposes.
A. Each organization licensed to conduct lawful gambling within the City must contribute
10% of its net profits derived from lawful gambling in the City to a fund administered
and regulated by the City, without cost to such fund, for disbursement by the City of such
receipts for (1) charitable contributions as defined in Minnesota Statutes § 349.12, Subd.
7a, or (2) police, fire, and other emergency or public safety related services, equipment
and training, excluding pension obligations. For purposes of this Subdivision, “net
profits” means gross profits less amounts expended for allowable expenses and paid in
taxes assessed on lawful gambling.
B. Each organization licensed to conduct lawful gambling within the City must expend 30%
of its expenditures on lawful purposes conducted or located within the county’s trade
area. This 30% of its expenditures shall be in addition to the 10% of its net profits
contributed to the City pursuant to Subdivision 9A. The county’s trade area is hereby
defined to be the geographical limits of Wright County, Minnesota. Franklin Townships,
and the City of Independence.
SECTION 413.01. ADULT USES.
Subd. 1. Definitions. When used in this Section, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings stated:
A. “Adult uses” includes adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult DVD or CD
sales or rentals, adult on-line web services, adult motion picture sales or rentals, adult
mini-motion pictures theaters, adult massage parlors, adult steam room/bathhouse/sauna
facilities, adult companionship establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult
health/sport clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades,
adult modeling studios, adult hotels/motels, adult body painting studios, and other
premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses or places open to some or all members
of the public, at or in which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or
description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” which are
capable of being seen by members of the public. Activities classified as obscene as
defined by Minnesota Statutes § 617.241 are not included.
B. “Specified anatomical areas” includes:
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; and
2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
C. “Specified sexual activities” includes:
4-49
1. Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal
copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals,
flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of
excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the
following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy,
coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism,
sapphism, zooerastia; or
2. Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
tumescence; or
3. Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or
masturbation; or
4. Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female
breasts; or
5. Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in
undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in
activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical
restraint of any such persons; or
6. Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact with an
animal by a human being; or
7. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
D. “Accessory adult uses” includes the offering of goods and/or services which are classified
as adult uses on a limited scale, as defined in City zoning provisions, and which are
incidental to the primary activity and goods and/or services offered by the establishment.
Examples of such items include the sale of adult magazines and the sale or rental of adult
motion pictures, DVDs or CDs.
E. “Principal adult uses” includes the offering of goods and/or services which are classified
as adult uses and which do not meet the definition of accessory adult uses, including but
are not limited to the following:
1. Adult Use – Body Painting Studio. An establishment or business which provides
the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or nontransparent,
to the body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in
terms of “specified anatomical areas.”
2. Adult Use – Bookstore. A building or portion of a building used for the barter,
rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio
tape, videotape, DVD’s, CD’s, or motion picture film if such building or portion
of a building is not open to the public generally but only to one or more classes of
the public excluding any minor by reason of age and if a substantial or significant
4-50
portion of such items are distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on the
depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas.”
3. Adult Use – Cabaret. A building or portion of a building used for providing
dancing or other live entertainment, if such building or portion of a building
excludes minors by virtue of age and if such dancing or other live entertainment is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display,
depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas.”
4. Adult Use – Companionship Establishment. A companionship establishing which
excludes minors by reason of age, and which provides the service of engaging in
or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an employee of the
establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished and characterized
by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
5. Adult Use – Conversation/Rap Parlor. A conversation/rap parlor which excludes
minors by reason of age, and which provides the service of engaging in or
listening to conversation, talk, or discussion, if such services is distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”
6. Adult Use – Health/Sport Club. A health/sport club which excludes minors by
reason of age, if such club is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
7. Adult Use – Hotel or Motel. A hotel or motel from which minors are specifically
excluded from patronage and wherein material is presented which is distinguished
and characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
8. Adult Use – Massage Parlor, Health Club. A massage parlor or health club which
restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of massage, if
such service is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
9. Adult Use – Mini-Motion Picture Theater. A building or portion of a building
with a capacity for fewer than 50 persons used for presenting material if such
building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by
reason of age, and if such material is distinguished and characterized by an
emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for
observation by patrons therein.
10. Adult Use – Modeling Studio. An establishment, if such establishment excludes
minors by reason of age, which provides to customers, figure models who are so
4-51
provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation of sexual gratification to
such customers and who engage in “specified sexual activities” or display
“specified anatomical areas” while being observed, painted, painted upon,
sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such
customers.
11. Adult Use – Motion Picture Arcade. Any place, which excludes minors by reason
of age, to which the public is permitted or invited wherein credit or debit card,
coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled or
operated still or motion picture machines, DVDs or CDs projectors or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer person
per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished
and characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
12. Adult Use – Motion Picture Theater. A building or portion of a building with a
capacity of 50 more persons used for presenting material if such building or
portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age and
if such material is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation by patrons
therein.
13. Adult Use – Novelty Business. A Business, which excludes minors by reason of
age, which has, as a principal activity, the sale of devices which stimulate human
genitals or devices which are designed for sexual stimulation.
14. Adult Use – Sauna. A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, and which
provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing,
relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or
reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”
15. Adult Use – Steam Room/Bathhouse/Whirl Pool/Hot Tub Facility. A building or
portion of a building used for providing a steam bath, heat bathing room, whirl
pool or hot tub, used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing,
utilizing steam or hot air or water if such building or portion of a building restricts
minors by reason of age and if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse
facility is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on “specific sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
Subd. 2. License Required. No person, firm, or corporation shall operate a principal or
accessory adult use without having first secured a license.
Subd. 3. Applications. In addition to such information as the City may require, the
application shall also include:
4-52
A. The name, residence, phone number and birthdate of the applicant, if an individual; and if
a corporation, partnership or other business entity, the names, residences, phone number
and birthdates of those owners holding more than five percent of the equity interest in the
corporation, partnership or other business entity;
B. The name, address, phone number and birthdate of the manager of such operation, if
different from the owners;
C. The location of the premises where the adult use is to be located;
D. A statement detailing each misdemeanor, gross misdemeanor and felony relating to a sex
offense and/or the operation of adult uses, the keeping of a disorderly house or disorderly
conduct, prostitution, or nuisance and related activities of which the applicant or, in the
case of a corporation, partnership or business entity, the owners of more than five percent
of the equity has been convicted, and whether or not the applicant has ever applied for or
held a license to operate a similar type of business in other communities;
E. The activities and types of business to be conducted; Applicant shall provide a
description of product line on sale in the premises;
F. The hours of operation;
G. The provisions made to restrict access by minors;
H. A building plan of the premises detailing all internal operations and activities.
Subd. 4. Granting of License.
A. The Council shall investigate all information supplied by the applicant. Opportunity shall
be given to any person to be heard supporting or opposing the granting of the license.
After such investigation and hearing, the Council shall grant or refuse the application.
Criteria for evaluating a license shall include the following:
1. The Application is completed in full and accurate in all respect;
2. The Applicant is in all respects eligible for license;
3. the Location is eligible for license;
4. The Applicant has proven that it can restrict access by minors and will not employ
minors on the adult use premises;
5. The Applicant has provided property owner’s name and address and business
owner’s name and address;
6. The Applicant has proven that the use is in compliance with all applicable code
regulations;
4-53
7. Guarantying the license will not create a risk of harm to the health, safety or
welfare of the residents of Delano.
B. Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not be transferable to another
holder. Each license shall be issued only for the premises described in the application.
No license may be transferred to another place without Council approval.
Subd. 5. Persons Ineligible for License. No license shall be granted to or held by any
person or entity:
A. Under 21 years of age.
B. Convicted of violating any federal, state or local law or ordinance relating to sex offenses
and/or adult uses, prostitution, nuisance, the keeping of a disorderly house or disorderly
conduct.
C. Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license is issued.
D. Where the owner, manager, or employee have been convicted of a sex crime, as
identified in Minnesota Statute §§ 609.293 through 609.352, 609.746 through 609.749,
609.79, 518B.01, or related statute dealing with sexual assault, sexual conduct,
harassment, obscenity, or domestic assault within the past five years, or of any federal,
state or local law or ordinance relating to sex offenses and/or adult uses, prostitution,
nuisance, the keeping of a disorderly house or disorderly conduct.
E. Any other person or entity determined to be not in compliance with the Chapter or
unsuitable to hold such a license because of legitimate concerns for the health, safety or
welfare of Delano residents.
Subd. 6. Places Ineligible for License.
A. No license shall be granted for adult uses on any premises where a licensee has been
convicted of a violation of this Chapter, or where any license hereunder has been revoked
for cause, until one 1 year has elapsed after such conviction or revocation.
B. No license shall be granted for any adult use which is not in compliance with the City’s
zoning regulations.
C. No license shall be granted for any premises not in compliance with this Chapter or that
is determined by the Council to be unsuitable based upon legitimate health, safety or
welfare concerns.
D. No licensed premises may exceed 10,000 square feet in gross floor area.
4-54
Subd. 7. Conditions of License.
A. All licensed premises shall be operated in compliance with this Code and all other
applicable city or state laws and regulations.
B. All licensed premises shall have the license posted in a conspicuous place at all times.
C. No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted on the licensed premises for any
purpose.
D. Any designated inspection officer of the City shall have the unqualified right to enter,
inspect and search the premises of a licensee during business hours.
E. Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of the licensee’s place of business and
shall maintain conditions of order.
F. No owner, manager, or employee of a licensed premises may allow sexually oriented
materials or entertainment to be visible or perceivable in any manner, including aurally,
at any time from outside of the business.
G. No owner, manager, or employee may allow a patron, employee, or other person on the
premises to physically contact a specified anatomical area of himself or herself, or of
another person, except that a live performer may touch himself or herself if the
performance is otherwise in compliance with law.
H. A live performer must remain at all times a minimum distance of 10 feet from members
of the audience, and must perform on a platform intended for that purpose, that must be
raised at least two feet from the level of the floor on which the audience is located. No
performer may solicit or accept money, a tip, or other item or article from a member of
the audience.
I. No licensed premises may have booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room, or
individual rooms, except as follows:
1. Restrooms are allowed as long as they are no larger than reasonably necessary to
serve the purposes of a restroom, no other activities are provided or allowed in the
rest rooms, and there are no chairs, benches or reclining surfaces in the rest room;
and
2. Storage rooms and private offices are allowed, if the storage rooms and offices are
used solely for running the administrative functions of the business and no person
other than the owner, manager, and employees is allowed in them.
J. A licensee must not be open for business to the public:
1. Between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., on the days of Monday through Saturday; and
4-55
2. Between 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon, on Sundays.
SECTION 414.01. SWIMMING POOLS.
Subd. 1. Definition. For purposes of this Section a swimming pool is defined as any
structure, basin, chamber or tank containing an artificial body of water for swimming, diving or
recreational bathing and having a depth of more than 24 inches at any point and a surface area
exceeding 150 square feet.
Subd. 2. Fencing Required Around Outdoor Residential Swimming Pools.
A. All outdoor swimming pools existing and hereafter constructed shall be completely
enclosed by a security fence or wall at least four, but not more than six, feet high and
located at least four feet from the edge of the pool. The bottom of the fence or wall shall
be no higher than four inches above the surface of the ground. Fence openings or points
of entry to the pool area shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching lockable
gates.
B. The enclosure for outdoor swimming pools may utilize a wall or walls of a house or
building as a part thereof provided the wall or walls are at least six feet high and the
enclosure is completed by a fence or wall conforming to the provisions of subparagraph
A hereof.
C. This Subdivision and the fencing requirements contained herein do not apply to: (1)
above-ground outdoor swimming pools having at least four foot high, vertical or outward
inclined sidewalls, provided sole access is by means of a removable ladder, ramp, or
stairs which must be removed when the pool is not in use; (2) swimming pools which are
wholly enclosed within a building or structure.
Subd. 3. Electrical Requirements.
A. All electrical installations provided for, installed and used in conjunction with residential
swimming pools shall be in conformance with this code.
B. No electrical conductors carrying current shall cross residential swimming pools, or be
installed underground within 15 feet of such pools.
C. All metal fences, enclosures, or railings near or adjacent to residential swimming pools,
which might become electrically alive as a result of contact with broken overhead
conductors, or from any other cause, shall be effectively grounded.
D. Lighting for the pool shall be directed toward the pool and not toward adjacent property.
Subd. 4. Location. No portion of a swimming pool or appurtenances thereto shall be
located at a distance less than 10 feet from any side or rear property line, nor in front of the
building line, nor in a location that does not conform with applicable setback standards,
whichever is more restrictive.
4-56
Subd. 5. Heaters. Electric, oil burning or gas fired heaters and heating equipment shall be
underwriter’s laboratory (UL) approved and must be installed pursuant to the manufacturer’s
installation instructions.
Subd. 6. Water Supply. Water supplies serving swimming pools shall be of a safe,
sanitary quality. The installation of the pool water, supply piping and connection to the source of
the supply shall be under the supervision of a licensed plumber. Disposal of water from
swimming pools shall take place in accordance with applicable law.
Subd. 7. Chemical Treatment. Gaseous chlorination systems may not be used as a
disinfection method of pool water. Residential swimming pools shall meet the following
standards:
A. Free chlorine. A free chlorine content shall be maintained between five-tenths and one
parts per million. (High-free residual chlorine may be used.)
B. Alkalinity. A pH level of between seven and one-tenth and seven and eight-tenths shall
be maintained. (A higher pH is permitted if high-free residual chlorination is used.)
C. Bacteriological quality. A sample of swimming pool water shall be considered
satisfactory when the total bacteria count at 35 degrees centigrade does not exceed 200
colonies per milliliter and no organism of the E. coli group are present in a 10 milliliter
portion or 100 milliliter portion as determined by the membrane filter method. If more
than one such sample out of seven collected on different dates is unsatisfactory, the
bacterial quality of the pool water will be considered unsatisfactory. Procedures and
interpretations relating to bacteriological quality shall be done in accordance with the
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage and Industrial Waste, 11th
Edition (1960).
Subd. 8. Operation. The pumps, filter, disinfectant and chemical feeders and related
appurtenances shall be kept in operation at all times the swimming pool is in use and for such
additional periods as needed to keep the pool water clear and of satisfactory bacterial quality.
Subd. 9. Inspection. The Building Official and a representative of the Water, Light and
Power Commission are authorized to conduct inspections of swimming pools as they deem
necessary to insure compliance with all provisions of this Section.
Subd. 10. Public Swimming Pools. All public swimming pools within the City shall
comply with the Minnesota Pool Code pursuant to Minnesota Rules, Parts 4717.0150 to
4717.3975.
SECTION 415.01. FIRE CODE AND OTHER FIRE REGULATIONS.
Subd. 1. Adoption. The Minnesota State Fire Code, hereinafter “MSFC,” as adopted
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Chapter 299F.011, including all amendments, rules and
regulations established, adopted and published from time to time by the Minnesota
Commissioner of Public Safety, through the Fire Marshall Division, is hereby adopted by
4-57
reference. When used in this Section, words and phrases shall have the same meaning as defined
in the Minnesota State Fire Code unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is
intended.
Subd. 2. Enforcement.
A. The MSFC and any State statutes pertaining to fire and fire safety shall be enforced by
the Fire Department of the City which shall be operated under the supervision of the City
Fire Chief, the Council, and the Building Official under the supervision of the Council.
B. The City may employ inspectors in order to provide additional enforcement support.
Subd. 3. Storage of Flammable or Combustible Liquids in Outside, Above Ground
Tanks.
A. Pursuant to the MSFC, storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside, above
ground tanks is prohibited in all districts except where allowed as permitted by the
Chapter 34, Flammable and Combustible Liquids, of the MSFC.
B. Temporary installations of flammable or combustible liquid tanks, used for construction
purposes, may be allowed with a permit obtained from the City Fire Chief or the Building
Official.
Subd. 4. Storage of Explosives and Blasting Agents. Pursuant to the MSFC, storage of
explosives and blasting agents is prohibited in all districts except where permitted by Chapter 33,
Explosives and Fireworks, of the MSFC.
Subd. 5. Liquified Petroleum Gases. No liquified petroleum gases shall be stored except
as follows:
A. Where a single container or the aggregate of interconnected containers is 500 or more
gallons of water capacity, the installer shall obtain a permit and plan approval from the
City Fire Chief or Building Official.
B. A single container installation with a total water storage capacity of 2,000 gallons water
capacity or greater, or where the aggregate of interconnected containers is greater than
2,000 gallons, shall be protected by one or more of the following methods:
1. Buried in an approved manner.
2. Mounded in an approved manner.
3. Protected by an approved system for application of water.
4. Protected by other approved means.
C. In accordance with Chapter 38, Liquified Petroleum Gases, of the MSFC.
4-58
Subd. 6. Appeals. Whenever the City Fire Chief shall disapprove an application or refuse
to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the MSFC do not apply
or that the true intent and meaning of the MSFC have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted,
the applicant may appeal from the decision to the Council within 30 days from the date of the
decision.
Subd. 7. Modifications. The City Fire Chief, upon approval obtained from the Council,
shall have the authority to modify any of the provisions of the MSFC upon application in writing
by the owner or licensee or a duly authorized agent, where difficulties exist in carrying out a
strict interpretation of the MSFC, provided that the spirit of the MSFC shall be observed, public
safety secured, and substantial compliance achieved. The reasons for each such modification
when granted or allowed, and the decision of the City thereon shall be entered upon the records
of the City and a copy thereof furnished to each such applicant.
Subd. 8. Central Fire Alarm System. Every school building, dormitory, hospital, nursing
or rest home, hotel, motel, or boarding home, and such other premises similarly used, which are
designated in writing by the City Fire Chief upon notice to the owners thereof, shall install and
maintain a fire alarm system which is connected directly to a central alarm station. Any such
structure erected or established hereafter shall be connected to the above described system before
the commencement of any such use, or uses, therein.
Subd. 9. False Alarm.
A. Definitions. The following terms as used in this Subdivision shall have the meanings
stated:
1. “Alarm user” means the person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind which is in control of any alarm system.
2. “Fire communications center” is the facility used to receive emergency requests
for service and general information from the public to be dispatched to respective
emergency response units.
3. “Alarm System” means and includes any alarm installation designed to be used
for the prevention or detection of burglary, robbery or fire on the premises which
contain the alarm installation. Automobile alarm devices shall not be considered
an alarm system under the terms of this ordinance.
4. “False alarm” means an audio, visual, computer-generated, or electronically
transmitted alarm signal eliciting a response by fire, rescue or other emergency
response personnel when a situation requiring a response does not, in fact, exist,
and which is caused by the activation of the alarm system through mechanical
failure, alarm malfunction, improper installation or the actions of the owner or
lessee of an alarm system or of his or her employees, agents, or invitees, or the
actions of any person on the premises where the alarm system is located. False
4-59
alarms do not include alarms caused by climatic conditions such as tornadoes,
thunderstorms, or violent conditions of nature.
B. False Alarm Fees.
1. An alarm system which reports to the fire communications center more than two
false alarms within any consecutive 12 month period will cause the alarm user to
be charged a user fee for each false alarm in excess of 2 per consecutive 12 month
period. The user fee shall be $250.00 per false alarm and shall be charged for the
third false alarm and for each subsequent false alarm within a consecutive12
month period.
2. Any alarm user which is required by the City to pay a user fee as the result of a
false alarm may make a written appeal of the false alarm charge to the City Clerk
through the Fire Chief within 10 days of notice by the City of the false alarm
charge. The City Clerk will have authority to make a final determination as to
whether the appellant is to be charged.
C. Payment of fees.
Payment of false alarm user fees must be paid to the City Clerk within 30 days from the
date of notice by the City to the alarm user. Failure to pay the fee within 30 days will
cause the alarm user to be considered delinquent and subject to a late payment charge in
an amount not to exceed six percent per annum or as the Council shall determine.
D. False Alarm Report Required.
When an alarm user has incurred five false alarms or more within a consecutive 12 month
period, the alarm user shall submit a written report to the City Clerk within ten days after
being charged with the fifth false alarm, describing actions taken or to be taken to
discover and eliminate the cause of the false alarms.
E. Automatic Dialing Devices Prohibited.
No automatic dialing devices initiating a pre-recorded emergency alarm message shall be
connected to the fire communications center through any telephone, cable line or other
means, except when authorized by the City Clerk or the Clerk’s designee.
F. Intentional False Alarms Prohibited.
No person shall intentionally make, turn in, or give a false alarm of fire, or of need for
police or ambulance assistance or aid or abet in the commission of such act.
Subd. 10. Notification of Fire Department.
A. The manager or person in control of any school, theater, place of worship, institutional
building, hotel, public assembly unit, cafe, restaurant, factory, warehouse, mercantile
4-60
building, or any multiple dwelling capable of housing eight or more families or having 24
or more sleeping rooms above the first floor, or any other person who discovers a fire,
smoke, heat or gases indicating that there is a fire in such building, shall immediately call
the Fire Department upon the discovery of such fire, smoke, heat or gases in any such
building.
B. No manager or person in control of any structure referred to in this Section shall issue
any instructions directing employees not to notify the Fire Department, or instructing
them to delay in calling the Fire Department immediately upon the discovery of a fire,
smoke, heat or gases indicating that there is or may be a fire.
C. Each owner, manager or person in control of any structures referred to in this Section
shall post, and keep posted, in conspicuous places in the building, a notice in a form
approved by the City Fire Chief directing employees and others to call the Fire
Department immediately upon the discovery of fire, smoke, heat or gases indicating that
there is or may be a fire.
SECTION 416.01. MINNESOTA STATE BUILDING CODE.
Subd. 1. Building Code Adopted by Reference. The Minnesota State Building Code, as
adopted by the Minnesota Department of Labor and Industry pursuant to Minnesota Statutes §
326B.101 through 326B.194, including all of the amendments, rules and regulations established,
adopted and published from time to time by the Minnesota Department of Labor and Industry, is
hereby adopted by reference with the exception of the optional chapters, unless specifically
adopted in this Section or amendments to this Section. The Minnesota State Building Code is
hereby incorporated in this Section as if fully set forth. The following optional chapters are
hereby adopted and incorporated in this Section as if fully set forth in 1306: Special Fire
Protection Systems: 1306.0020, Subdivision 3 – New Buildings.
Subd. 2. Application, Administration and Enforcement. The application,
administration, and enforcement of the Code shall be in accordance with the Minnesota State
Building Code. The code shall be enforced within the extra territorial limits permitted by
Minnesota Statutes 16B.62, Subd. 1, but only if established by an amending ordinance.
The Code Enforcement Agency of Delano is the Delano City Council.
This Code shall be enforced by the Delano Building Official, or the Building Official’s designee.
The Delano Building Official is the Minnesota Certified Building Official designated by Delano
to administer the Code (Minnesota Statute 326B.133).
Subd. 3. Permits and Fees. The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as
authorized in Minnesota Rules Parts 1300.0120 and 1300.0160 and accordance with the Delano
fee ordinance, No.O-05-11. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued
for work governed by this Code in accordance with Minnesota Statute 326B.148.
Subd. 4. Building Code Optional Chapter Regarding Fire Suppression Systems. The
Minnesota State Building Code permits Delano to adopt by reference and enforce optional
4-61
chapters of the most current addition of the Minnesota State Building Code. Delano elects to
adopt by reference and enforce Minnesota Rules, Chapter 1306, regarding special fire protection
systems, as amended from time to time, Delano selects Subpart 3 of Minnesota Rules Section
1306.0020.
SECTION 417.01. TEMPORARY OUTDOOR SALES.
Subd. 1. Definition. As used in this Section, the term “temporary outdoor sales” means a
short-term sidewalk sale, holiday tree sale, seasonal supply sale, or special event sale, conducted
by businesses, civic organizations or nonprofit organizations that does not meet the definition of
a “transient merchant” under Section 409.01, Subd. 2D
Subd. 2. License Required. No person, business, civic organization or nonprofit
group shall engage in the operation of a temporary outdoor sale without first procuring a
license to engage in such business as herein provided.
Subd. 3. Application, Fee and License Period. Application for a temporary
outdoor sale license shall be made to the Clerk of the City on a form to be provided by
the Clerk. Each person or private business may be issued only two such permits per year.
Civic organization or nonprofit groups are not limited in the number of permits they may
receive. Should an individual or private business participate in a sale organized by a
civic organization or nonprofit group, it will not count against the limit of two permits per
year. Each permit shall be valid for not more than fourteen consecutive days. The fee for
such license shall be established by City Resolution.
Subd. 4. Operation. No license shall be issued unless the applicant provides proof
of the following.
A. The temporary outdoor sale is ancillary and subordinate to the principal use of the
property.
B. The temporary outdoor sale is compatible with the principal use of the property.
C. The sales/activity area shall be located on a single lot, and shall be geographically
defined on a site plan.
D. The Sales/activity area, including temporary structures such as tents may not be
located within any easement area, and must be set at least five feet back from all
property lines within all zoning districts, with the exception to the B-5 district,
where there are no such setback requirements.
E. There shall be no interference with on-site circulation, parking or loading.
F. All signage must comply with the City Sign Ordinance.
G. The applicant must provide proof of insurance to cover the temporary outdoor
sale.
4-62
H. The applicant must provide a plan for garbage handling.
I. If food is served at the temporary outdoor sale it shall comply with all applicable
health regulations and shall be prepared with the least possible manual contact
and in such a manner as to prevent cross-contamination of products. Only
suitable utensils or equipment, which prior to use have been cleaned, rinsed and
sanitized to prevent cross-contamination, shall be used in food preparation.
J. In the event that food is served, restroom facilities must be provided.
Subd. 5. Responsibility of Operation. All licensees shall comply with the terms
of their license and with the provisions of this Section. Any licensee hereunder shall be
held responsible for nuisances emanating from the licensed operation and the licensee
shall not permit waste or debris to be deposited on any public or private property or on
the licensee’s own property.
SECTION 418.01 GARAGE AND YARD SALES
The following rules shall apply to garage and yard sales located within City limits:
1. Each residential property is limited to 4 garage sales during any consecutive 12
month period.
2. No garage or yard sale shall exceed a period of 72 consecutive hours.
3. Garage or yard sale signs shall not be affixed to utility poles, traffic sign poles, or
street signs and shall not be located on medians or in any public right-of-way.
4. The operator of any garage or yard sale shall be allowed 8 off-site signs and 1 onsite
sign during the garage or yard sale which must be removed when the sale is
complete.
5. Garage or yard sale signs may be up to 6 square feet and 4 feet high. Signs must
be located five feet from the curb or shoulder of a road.
6. Items sold at any garage or yard sale shall not include motor vehicles, new
merchandise, consignment items or resale items.
SECTION 419.01. PAWNBROKERS
Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to prevent pawnbroking businesses from
being used as facilities for the commission of crime and to assure that such businesses comply
with basic consumer protection standards thereby protecting the public health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the City. The City Council finds that consumer protection regulation is
warranted in transactions involving pawnbrokers.
4-63
Subd. 2. Definitions. The following words and terms when used in this Section shall have
the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
A. Pawnbroker. (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b), “pawnbroker” means a person
engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged
goods left in pawn, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property to be left
in pawn on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed
price within a fixed period of time.
(b) The following are exempt from the definition of “pawnbroker:” any bank
regulated by the State of Minnesota, the comptroller of the currency of the United
States, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the board of governors of the
Federal Reserve System, or any other federal or state authority and their affiliates;
any bank or savings association whose deposits or accounts are eligible for
insurance by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or any successor to it and
all affiliates of those banks and savings associations; any state or federally
chartered credit union; and any industrial loan and thrift company or regulated
lender subject to licensing and regulation by the Department of Commerce.
B. Pawnshop. “Pawnshop” means the location at which or premises upon which a
pawnbroker regularly conducts business.
C. Pawn transaction. “Pawn transaction” means any loan on the security of pledged goods
or any purchase of pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods are left with
the pawnbroker and may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for fixed price within
a fixed period of time.
D. Person. ”Person” means an individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity, however organized.
E. Pledged goods. “Pledged goods” means tangible personal property other than choses in
action, securities, bank drafts, or printed evidence of indebtedness, that are purchased by,
deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in
connection with a pawn transaction.
F. Minor. Any individual person under the age of 18 years.
Subd. 3. License Required. No person, firm or corporation shall conduct or operate the
business of pawnbroker or own or operate a pawnshop without having first obtained a license
therefor as herein provided or in violation of any of the provisions herein contained. No
pawnbroker license may be transferred to a different location or a different person. A separate
license is required for each place of business. The City may issue more than one license to a
person if that person complies with this Section for each license.
Subd. 4. Application for License. Every application for a license under this Section,
whether for a natural person, partnership, corporation or other organization, shall be made on a
form supplied by the City and shall contain all information as required on that form by law.
4-64
Subd. 5. Application Execution. All applications for a license under this Section shall be
signed and sworn to. Any license obtained by use of false or incomplete information shall result
in the denial or revocation of a license.
Subd. 6. Application Verification. All applications shall be referred to the Sheriff
Department for verification and investigation of the facts set forth in the application. The Sheriff
Department shall make a written report and recommendation to the Council as to issuance or
non-issuance of the license. The City may order and conduct such additional investigation as it
deems necessary.
Subd. 7. Application Consideration. If an application is granted for a location where a
building is under construction or not ready for occupancy, the license shall not be delivered to
the licensee until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the licensed premises.
Subd. 8. Fees.
A. Application Fee:
1. The application fee shall be set by resolution of the Council.
2. The application fee shall be paid in full before the application for a license shall
be accepted.
B. Investigation Fee: An applicant for any license under this Section shall pay the City, at
the time an original application is submitted, a nonrefundable fee at a rate set by Council
resolution (or an established fee for investigation) for the following:
1. To cover the costs involved in verifying the license application and;
2. To cover the expense of any investigation needed to assure compliance with this
Section.
C. License Fee:
1. The license fee shall be paid annually to be determined at the date of issuance of
the annual license.
2. The annual license fee shall be set by Council resolution. The application fee shall
be credited to the first annual license fee, if the application is approved.
Upon withdrawal, rejection, denial, suspension, or revocation of any application for a
license only the annual license fee, or a proportionate amount thereof, shall be refunded
in full, but not the investigation fee.
Subd. 9. Bond. A pawnbroker license will not be issued unless the applicant files with the
Clerk a bond a with corporate surety, cash, or a United States Government Bond in the amount
of $5,000.00. The bond must be conditioned on the licensee obeying the laws and ordinances
4-65
governing the licensed business and paying all fees, taxes, penalties and other charges associated
with the business. The bond must provide that it is forfeited to the City upon violation of law or
ordinance.
Subd. 10. Application Renewal. All licenses issued pursuant to this Section shall be
effective for one year from the date of approval by the City. An application for the renewal of an
existing license shall be made prior to the expiration date of the license and shall be made in such
form as the City requires. No expiration of any license shall impair or affect the obligation of
any pre-existing lawful contract between the licensee and any pledgor.
Subd. 11. License Refund. The City may, in its judgment, refund a pro rata share of the
license to the licensee or the licensee’s estate if the licensee dies.
Subd. 12. Death of a Licensee. In the case of the death of a licensee, the personal
representative of the licensee may continue operation of the business for not more than 90 days
after the licensee’s death.
Subd. 13. Conditions for Approval of License. To be eligible for or to maintain a
pawnbroker license, a person must operate lawfully and fairly within the purposes of this
Section:
A. No license under this Section shall be issued or renewed for an applicant who is a natural
person if such applicant:
1. Is a minor at the time the application is filed;
2. Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as
prescribed by Minnesota Statutes § 364.03, Subd. 2, unless the person has shown
competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the
duties of a licensee under this Chapter as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes §
364.03, Subd. 3;
3. Holds an intoxicating liquor license under this Code;
4. Is not of good moral character or repute; or
5. Is not in compliance with any provision of this Section.
B. No license under this Section shall be issued or renewed for an applicant that is a
partnership if such applicant has any general partner or managing partner who:
1. Is a minor at the time the application is filed;
2. Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as
prescribed by Minnesota Statutes § 364.03, Subd. 2, unless the person has shown
competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the
duties of a pawnbroker, as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes § 364.03, Subd. 3;
3. Holds an intoxicating liquor license under this Code;
4. Is not of good moral character or repute; or
5. Is not in compliance with any provision of this Section.
4-66
C. No license under this Section shall be issued or renewed for an applicant that is a
corporation or other organization if such applicant has any manager, proprietor, or agent
in charge of the business to be licensed who:
1. Is a minor at the time the application is filed;
2. Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as
prescribed by Minnesota Statutes § 364.03, Subd. 2, unless the person has shown
competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the
duties of a pawnbroker, as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes § 364.03, Subd. 3;
3. Holds an intoxicating liquor license under this Code;
4. Is not of good moral character or repute; or
5. Is not in compliance with any provision of this Section.
D. Any change, directly or beneficially, in the ownership of any licensed pawnshop shall
require the application for a new license and the new owner must satisfy all current
eligibility requirements.
E. The following locations shall be ineligible for a license under this Section:
1. No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any property on which
taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the State, County, School District,
or City are due, delinquent or unpaid. In the event a suit has been commenced
under Minnesota Statutes § 278.01-278.03, questioning the amount or validity of
taxes, the City Council may on application waive strict compliance with this
provision; no waiver may be granted, however, for taxes or any portion thereof
which remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming due.
2. No license shall be granted or renewed if the property on which the business is to
be conducted is owned by a person who is ineligible for a license under any of the
requirements of this Code, except that a property owner who is a minor or who
has been convicted of a crime, other than a crime involving theft or falsehood,
shall not make the premises ineligible under this Sub-section so long as all other
requirements for a license are met.
3. Where operation of a licensed premise would violate zoning ordinances or other
applicable land use laws.
4. Where the applicant’s present license was issued conditioned upon the applicant
making specified improvements to the licensed premise or the property of the
licensed premises which improvements have not been completed.
5. Any property within 10 driving miles of any gambling casino.
Subd. 14. General License Restrictions.
A. Recordkeeping. At the time of making the pawn or purchase transaction, the pawnbroker
shall immediately record in English the following information by using ink or other
4-67
indelible medium or forms or in a permanent computer record approved by the City, the
following information:
1. A complete and accurate description of the item of property including, but not
limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number,
brand name, or other identifying mark on such item.
2. The date and time of pawn or purchase transaction.
3. The full name, residence address, residence telephone number, business address,
date of birth and reasonably accurate description (including approximate height,
sex and race) of the pledgor or seller.
4. The identification number and state of issue from one of the following forms of
identification of the seller or pledgor.
a. A current valid Minnesota driver’s license;
b. A current valid Minnesota identification card; or
c. A current valid photo identification card issued by the state of residence or
a province of Canada.
5. The amount advanced or paid.
6. The maturity date of the pawn transaction and the amount due; and
7. The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees and charges.
B. Printed Record Keeping. The following shall be printed on all pawn tickets:
1. The statement that “any personal property pledged to a pawnbroker within this
City is subject to sale or disposal when there has been no payment made on the
account for a period of not fewer than 60 days past the date of the pawn
transaction, renewal, or extension; no further notice is necessary. There is no
obligation for the pledgor to redeem pledged goods.”
2. The statement that “the pledgor of this item attests that it is not stolen, it has no
liens or encumbrances against it, and the pledgor has the right to sell or pawn the
item.”
3. The statement that “this item is redeemable only by the pledgor to whom the
receipt was issued, or any person identified in a written and notarized
authorization to redeem the property identified in the receipt, or a person
identified in writing by the pledgor at the time of the initial transaction and signed
by the pledgor. Written authorization for release of property to persons other than
the original pledgor must be maintained along with the original transaction
record.”
4-68
4. A blank line for the pledgor’s signature.
C. Inspection of Records. The pawnbroker shall make available the information required in
Subpart A of this Section during business hours for inspection by the County Sheriff
Department and/or issuing authority. If the pawnbroker provides the records in a
computerized format, they must be provided in the most recent current version of the
Minneapolis pawn system interchange file specification format. The information
required in Subpart A of this Section shall be retained by the pawnbroker for at least three
years. These records shall be a correct copy of its entries made of the pawn transactions.
D. Items for Which Weekly Reports to the Sheriff are Required. For the following items,
whether sold or pawned, the pawnbroker shall complete forms approved by the Wright
County Sheriff Department or issuing authority and send the forms weekly to the Wright
County Sheriff Department:
1. Any item with a serial number, identification number, or “Operation
Identification” number;
2. Cameras;
3. Electronic audio, computer or video equipment;
4. Precious jewelry, gems and metals;
5. Artist-signed or artist-attributed works of art;
6. Firearms; and
7. Any item not included in 1-6 above, except furniture and kitchen or laundry
appliances, which the pawnbroker intends to sell for more than $200.00.
E. Weekly Report Forms. The weekly report forms submitted to the Wright County Sheriff
Department, delivered by the pawn broker, shall contain the following information in a
legible manner:
1. An accurate description of the item of property including, but not limited to, any
trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or
other identifying mark on such item;
2. The price of the item paid by the pawnbroker, and whether the item was
purchased or pawned;
3. The date, time, and place of receipt of the item;
4. The name, address, and date of birth of the person from whom the item was
received; and
5. The identification number from one of the following forms of photo identification
of the person from whom the item was received:
a. a valid driver’s license;
b. a Minnesota identification card; or
c. A photo identification issued by the state of residency or province of
Canada of the person from whom the item was received, and current
Minnesota address.
4-69
F. County Sheriff Order to Hold Property. Whenever the Wright County Sheriff
Department notifies the pawnbroker not to sell an item, the item shall not be sold or
removed from the licensed premises until authorized to be released by the Wright County
Sheriff Department.
G. Holding period for Pawnbrokers. Any item sold or pawned to a pawnbroker for which a
report to the police is required under Subpart D of this Section shall not be sold or
otherwise transferred for 60 days after the date of the sale or pawn. However, an
individual may redeem an item pawned 72 hours after the item was received on deposit
by the pawnbroker excluding Sundays and legal holidays.
H. Receipt. The pawnbroker shall provide a receipt to the seller or pledger of any item of
property received, sold or owned which shall include:
1. The name, address, and phone number of the pawnbroker business.
2. The date on which the item was received by the pawnbroker.
3. A description of the item received and amount paid to the pledger or seller in
exchange for the item pawned or sold.
4. The signature of the pawnbroker agent.
5. The last regular business day by which the item must be redeemed by the pledger
without risk that the item will be sold and the amount necessary to redeem the
pawned item on that date.
6. The annual rate of interest charged on pawned items received.
7. The name and address of the seller or pledger.
I. Hours of Operation. No pawnbroker shall keep the pawnbroker business open for the
transaction of business on any day of the week before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m.
J. Minors. The pawnbroker shall not purchase or receive personal property of any nature or
deposit or pledge from any minor.
K. Inspection of Items. The pawnbroker shall, at all times during the term of the license,
allow the City, county attorney, state attorney general, and any duly authorized state or
federal law enforcement officer to enter the premises where the pawnbroker is located,
for the purpose of inspecting such premises and inspecting the items, wares, merchandise
and pawn books and records for the purpose of locating items suspected or alleged to
have been stolen or otherwise improperly disposed.
L. License Display. A license issued under this Section must be posted in a conspicuous
place in the premises for which it is used.
M. Maintenance of Order. A licensee under this Section shall be responsible for the conduct
of the business being operated and shall maintain conditions of order.
N. Gambling. No licensee under this Section may operate or permit the operation on the
licensed premises of any gambling activities including but not limited to dice, slot
machines, roulette wheels, punch boards, blackjack tables, pinball machines which
4-70
return coins or slugs, chips, or tokens of any kind, which are redeemable in merchandise
or cash, or any other gambling. No gambling equipment referred to in Minnesota
Statutes § 349.11 through 349.40, may be operated and no raffles may be conducted on
the licensed premises and/or adjoining rooms. The purchase of lottery tickets may take
place on the licensed premises as authorized by the director of the lottery pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes § 349A.01 through 349A.15.
O. Prohibited Goods. No licensee under this Section shall accept any item of property
which contains an altered or obliterated serial number or “Operation Identification”
number or any item of property whose serial number has been removed.
P. Proper Identification. A licensee under this Section shall not accept items of property
unless the seller or pledger provides to the pawnbroker one of the following forms of
photo identification:
1. A valid driver’s license;
2. a Minnesota identification card; or
3. a photo identification issued by the state of residency or province of Canada of the
person from whom the item was received, and current Minnesota address.
No other forms of identification shall be accepted.
Q. Redemption Period. The date by which an item of property that has been pawned must
be redeemed by the pledger without risk that the item will be sold must be a day on which
the pawnbroker is open for regular business.
R. Effect of Non-Redemption.
1. A pledgor shall have no obligation to redeem pledged goods or make any
payment on a pawn transaction. Pledged goods not redeemed within at least 60
days of the date of the pawn, transaction, renewal, or extension shall
automatically be forfeited to the pawnbroker, and qualified right, title, and interest
in and to the goods shall automatically vest in the pawnbroker.
2. The pawnbroker’s right, title, and interest in the pledged goods under paragraph
(1) is qualified only by the pledgor’s right, while the pledged goods remain in
possession of the pawnbroker and not sold to a third party, to redeem the goods by
paying the loan plus fees and/or interest accrued up to the date of redemption.
3. A pawn transaction that involves holding only title to property is subject to
Minnesota Chapter 168A or 336.
S. Photograph Requirement for Pawnbrokers. A pawnbroker shall take either a photograph
or a still video of each person selling or pawning any item of property. If a photograph is
taken, it shall be at least 2 inches in length by 2 inches in width and shall be immediately
developed and referenced with the information regarding the person and the item sold or
pawned. The major portion of the photograph shall include a front facial pose. The
4-71
pawnbroker shall notify the person of the photography requirement prior to taking his or
her photograph. If a still video photograph is taken a video camera shall zoom in on the
person pawning or selling the merchandise so as to include a close-up of the person’s
face. The video photograph shall be referenced by time and date so as to correspond to
the merchandise sold or pawned by the person. The pawnbroker shall, by adequate
signage, inform the person that he or she is being videotaped. The photographs and
videotapes shall be kept by the pawnbroker for four months.
T. Payment by Check. When a pawnbroker accepts an item for purchase or as security for a
loan, payment for any article deposited, left, pledged or pawned in excess of $100.00,
shall be made only by a check, draft or other negotiable instrument or order of
withdrawal which is drawn against funds held by a financial institution. This policy must
be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.
U. Business Only at Licensed Location. A license under this Section authorizes the licensee
to carry on its business only at a permanent place of business designated in the license. A
municipality may issue more than one license to a person if that person complies with
this Section for each license.
V. Restrictions on Weapons.
1. A pawnbroker may not receive as a pledge or otherwise, or accept for
consignment or sale any revolver, pistol, rifle, shotgun or other similar firearms
unless said dealer also maintains a federal firearms dealers license.
2. A pawnbroker may not receive as a pledge or otherwise, or accept for
consignment or sale, any sawed off shotgun, automatic rifle, black jack,
switchblade, or other similar illegal weapons or firearms.
Subd. 15. Restrictions Regarding License Transfer. Each license under this Section shall
be issued to the applicant only and shall not be transferable to any other person. No licensee
shall loan, sell, give or assign a license to another person.
Subd. 16. Suspension or Revocation of License.
A. The Council may suspend or revoke a license issued under this Section upon a finding of
a violation of:
1. Any of the provisions of this Section; or
2. Any state or federal law regulating pawnbrokers.
Any conviction of the pawnbroker for theft, receiving stolen property, or any other crime
or violation involving stolen property shall result in the immediate suspension pending a
hearing on revocation of any license issued hereunder.
B. Except in the case of a suspension pending a hearing or revocation, a revocation or
suspension by the Council shall be preceded by written notice to the licensee and a public
4-72
hearing. The written notice shall give at least 10 days’ notice of the time and place of
the hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the pawnbroker. The Council
may, without any notice, suspend any license pending a hearing on revocation for a
period not exceeding 30 days. The notice may be served upon the pawnbroker by the
United States mail addressed to the most recent address of the business in the license
application.
Subd. 17. Permitted Charges.
1. Notwithstanding any other ordinance, a pawnbroker may contract for and receive
a pawnshop charge not to exceed 3 percent per month of the principal amount
advanced in the pawn transaction plus a reasonable fee for storage and services.
A fee for storage and services may not exceed $20.00 dollars if the property is not
in the possession of the pawnbroker.
2. The pawnshop charge allowed under paragraph (1) shall be deemed earned, due,
and owning as of the date of the pawn transaction and a like sum shall be deemed
earned, due, and owing on the same day of the succeeding month. However, if
full payment is made more than 2 weeks before the next succeeding date, the
pawnbroker shall remit one-half of the pawnshop charge for that month to the
pledgor.
3. Interest shall not be deducted in advance, nor shall any loan be divided or split so
as to yield greater interest or fees than would be permitted upon a single,
consolidated loan or for otherwise evading any provisions of this Section.
4. Any interest, charge, or fees contracted for or received, directly or indirectly, in
excess of the amount permitted under this Section, shall be uncollectible and the
pawn transaction shall be void.
5. A schedule of charges permitted by this Section shall be posted on the pawnshop
premises in a place clearly visible to the general public.
Subd. 18. Prohibited Acts.
A. No pawnbroker, or clerk, agent, or employee of a pawnbroker licensed under this Section
shall:
1. Make any false entry in the records of pawn transaction;
2. Falsify, obliterate, destroy, or remove from the place of business the records,
books, or accounts relating to the licensee’s pawn transaction;
3. Refuse to allow the appropriate law enforcement agency, attorney general, or any
other duly authorized state or federal law enforcement officer to inspect the pawn
records or any pawn goods in the person’s possession during the ordinary hours of
business or other times acceptable to both parties;
4. Fail to maintain a record of each pawn transaction for three years;
5. Accept a pledge or purchase property from a person under the age of 18 years;
4-73
6. Make any agreement requiring the personal liability of a pledgor or seller, or
waiving any provision of this Section, or providing for a maturity date less than
one month after the date of the pawn transaction;
7. Fail to return pledged goods to a pledgor or seller, or provide compensation as set
forth in Subd. 19, upon payment of the full amount due to the pawnbroker unless
either the date of redemption is more than 60 days past the date of the pawn
transaction, renewal, or extension and the pawnbroker has sold the pledged goods
pursuant to Subd. 14®, or the pledged goods have been taken into custody by a
court or a law enforcement office or agency.
8. Sell or lease, or agree to sell or lease pledged or purchased goods back to the
pledgor or seller in the same, or a related transaction;
9. Sell or otherwise charge for insurance in connection with a pawn transaction; or
10. Remove pledged goods from the pawnshop premises or other storage place
approved by a municipality at any time before unredeemed, pledged goods can
legally be sold pursuant to Section Subd. 14(R).
B. No licensee may receive any goods, unless the seller presents identification in the form of
a valid driver’s license, a valid State of Minnesota identification card; or a photo
identification issued by the State of residency or province of Canada of the person from
whom the item was received, and current Minnesota address.
C. No licensee may receive any item of property that possess an altered or obliterated serial
number or “operation identification” number or any item of property that has had its
serial number removed.
Subd. 19. Redemption; Risk of Loss. Any person to whom the receipt for pledged goods
was issued, or any person identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem the
pledged goods identified in the receipt, or any person identified in writing by the pledgor at the
time of the initial transaction and signed by the pledgor shall be entitled to redeem or re-purchase
the pledged goods described on the ticket. In the event the goods are lost or damaged while in
possession of the pawnbroker, the pawnbroker shall compensate the pledgor, in cash or
replacement goods acceptable to the pledgor, for the fair market value of the lost or damaged
goods. Proof of compensation shall be a defense to any prosecution or civil action.
Subd. 20. Motor Vehicle Title Pawn Transactions; Special Provisions.
A. In addition to the other requirements of the chapter, a pawnbroker who holds a title to a
motor vehicle as part of the pawn transaction shall:
1. be licensed as a used motor vehicle dealer under Minnesota Statute § 168.27, and
post such license on the pawnshop premises;
2. verify that there are no liens or encumbrances against the motor vehicle with the
Department of Public Safety; and
4-74
3. verify that the pledgor has automobile insurance on the motor vehicle as required
by law.
B. A pawnbroker may not sell a motor vehicle covered by a pawn transaction until 90 days
after recovery of the motor vehicle.
Subd. 21. Penalty. A violation of this Section shall be a misdemeanor under Minnesota
law.
SECTION 420.01. FIREWORKS.
Subd. 1. Purpose and Findings. Due to the inherent risks of fire and injury to persons and
property associated with the sale, possession and use of fireworks, the Council has determined
that it is necessary and in the interest of public health, safety and welfare to establish reasonable
regulations concerning fireworks.
Subd. 2. Definition. For the purpose of this Section, “consumer fireworks” are defined as
wire or wood sparklers of not more than 100 grams of mixture per item, other sparkling items
which are non-explosive and nonaerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical mixture per tube
or a total of 200 grams or less for multiple tubes, snakes and glow worms, smoke devices, or
trick noisemakers which include paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers, and
drop pops, each consisting of not more than twenty-five hundredths grains of explosive mixture.
Subd. 3. License Provisions.
A. Sale of Fireworks. It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, expose for sale, or
sell at retail or wholesale, any consumer fireworks in the City without a license.
B. Provisions of State Law Adopted. The sale, use and possession of all fireworks in
violation of Minn. Statute § 624.20 through 624.25 inclusive, which statutory provisions
are adopted herein by this reference, are prohibited.
C. License Application. The applicant shall completely fill out and submit an application
form for a consumer fireworks license prepared by the City. Information to be submitted
as a part of the license application includes, but is not necessarily limited to, the
following information: name, address and telephone number of the applicant; address of
location where the consumer fireworks will be sold; a description of the consumer
fireworks to be sold; estimated quantity of consumer fireworks that will be stored on the
premises; description of the premises and facility from which the consumer fireworks are
to be sold, including a floor plan designating the area for storage or display; and approval
from the property owner, if different from the applicant.
Prior to the issuance of a license, the City may conduct a criminal records check. The
application shall include a certification by the applicant that the location where the
consumer fireworks are to be stored or sold is not hazardous to property and does not
endanger any person, and that the persons in charge of selling or storing the consumer
4-75
fireworks are competent and trained to handle such fireworks. Applications must be
made a minimum of 10 days prior to operating.
D. License and License Fee. Licenses shall be issued for a calendar year. Permit fees shall
not be prorated. The annual license fee for a retail seller that is in the business of selling
only consumer fireworks shall be $350.00, and for all other retail sellers, $100.00.
E. Revocation of License. Following written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, the
City Council may revoke a license for violation of this Section or state law concerning
the sale, use, or possession of consumer fireworks. If a license is revoked, neither the
applicant nor the licensed premises may obtain a license for at least 12 months.
F. Terms and Conditions of License. A license to sell consumer fireworks shall be issued
subject to the following conditions:
1. The license is non-transferable, either to a different person or location.
2. The license must be publicly displayed on the licensed premises.
3. Neither the applicant nor the responsible party for the license shall have been
convicted of a felony, or a fire/fireworks-related crime of any kind within 3
years of the date of the filing of the application.
4. The applicant shall procure and maintain a policy or policies of public general
liability as specified in Section 401.01 Subd. 4.
5. No display or sale of consumer fireworks shall violate the National Fire
Protection Association Standard 1124 (2003 edition) (the “NFPA”).
6. Consumer fireworks storage or sales areas shall provide approved “no smoking”
signs in red letters not less than two inches in height on white background. All
signs shall be conspicuously posted at each entrance and shall be maintained in
legible condition.
7. Smoking shall be prohibited within 50 feet of any building, stand or nonpermanent
place of business in which consumer fireworks are sold at retail or
stored.
8. Each permit holder shall have not less than two water-type or equivalent
extinguishers of not less than two and one-half gallon capacity.
9. The premises must be in compliance with the State Building Code and State Fire
Code. There shall be at least 2 exits from all buildings from which fireworks are
manufactured, stored or sold.
10. All facilities that obtain a permit shall post in a conspicuous location a list of all
consumer fireworks displayed and stored on the property. The list shall document
4-76
the name, weight, and quantity of the consumer fireworks and be accompanied by
the material safety data sheets. Upon request, samples of the consumer fireworks
shall be made available to the City for testing.
11. No one under the age of 18 years of age may sell retail consumer fireworks.
12. Photo identification must be checked with each sale. Purchasers must be 18 years
of age or older.
13. The sale of consumer fireworks shall occur only where permitted by the City’s
zoning ordinance and must comply with all zoning ordinance requirements
including signs. No manufacturing, sales or storage of consumer fireworks shall
occur on property zoned residential, and on property used for educational
purposes.
14. The premises are subject to inspection by City employees, the Sheriff’s office and
fire and building officials during normal business hours.
15. Displays specifically permitted by State law shall be allowed so long as they
otherwise comply with this Section.
16. The building, stand or other non-permanent place of business from which
consumer fireworks are sold at retail or stored shall comply with all requirements
found in Chapter 7 of the NFPA, as amended, which requirements are herein
incorporated by reference.
Subd. 4. Discharge Rules and Regulations.
A. It is unlawful to use, fire or discharge consumer fireworks along the route of and during
any parade or at any place of public assembly, in any business zoning district and on any
public property.
B. It is unlawful at any time to throw or toss consumer fireworks at any person, animal,
vehicle or other thing or object.
C. Smoking shall be prohibited within 50 feet of any building, stand or other non-permanent
place of business in which consumer fireworks are sold at retail or stored.
D. The discharge of consumer fireworks shall be prohibited within 300 feet of any building,
stand or other non-permanent place of business in which consumer fireworks are sold at
retail or stored.
E. Consumer fireworks may only be discharged in an area with a water source connected to
a hose or other acceptable means of extinguishing a fire.
F. The City may ban fireworks displays and the use of consumer fireworks if a drought is
evident.
4-77
G. Juveniles under the age of 18 may not possess consumer fireworks unless under the direct
supervision of a responsible adult.
Subd. 5. Public Display. The public display of fireworks shall require a permit issued by
the Fire Chief in accordance with Minnesota Statute § 624.22.
SECTION 421.01. CABLE ORDINANCE.
Subd. 1. Findings and Intent. The City finds that the delivery of Cable Service and related
communications services may contribute significantly to the communication needs and desires of
residents of the City, benefit local economic development, and improve public and municipal
services. The City’s intent in adopting this Cable Ordinance is to encourage further development
of Cable Service and related communications services in the City, and to ensure that all Cable
Service providers are subject to comparable obligations and burdens.
Subd. 2. Short Title. This Ordinance will be known and cited as the “Cable Ordinance.”
Subd. 3. Definitions. For the purposes of this Cable Ordinance, the following terms, phrases,
words, and their derivations have the meaning given herein. Unless otherwise provided herein,
terms, phrases and words contained in this Cable Ordinance shall have the meaning ascribed in
the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. Sec. 521, et. seq., or if not defined herein or in the Cable Act will have
their normal and customary meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the
singular number include the plural number. The words “must” and “will” are always mandatory
and not merely directory. The word “may” is directory and discretionary and not mandatory.
A. “Basic Cable Service” has the meaning ascribed in Cable Act Section 522(3) and
543(b)(7).
B. “Cable Communications System,” “Cable System” or “System” has the meaning ascribed
in Cable Act Section 522(7) and Minnesota Statutes § 238.02, Subd. 3.
C. “Cable Programming Service” has the meaning ascribed in Cable Act Section 543(1)(2).
D. “Cable Service” has the meaning ascribed in Cable Act Section 522(6).
E. “Channel” has the meaning ascribed in Cable Act Section 522(4).
F. “City” means the City of Delano, Minnesota, a municipal corporation, in the State of
Minnesota.
G. “Commission” means the Sherburne/Wright Counties Cable Communications
Commission, a municipal joint powers entity consisting of the following municipalities:
Big Lake, Buffalo, Cokato, Dassel, Delano, Elk River, Maple Lake, Monticello,
Rockford and Watertown.
4-78
H. “Drop” means the cable that connects the ground block on the Subscriber’s Terminal
Device to the nearest feeder cable of the System.
I. “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission, or its lawful successor.
J. “Franchise”, “Cable Franchise” or “Franchise Agreement” means an agreement between
the City and any provider of Cable Service pursuant to this Cable Ordinance granting
authorization to construct, operate and maintain a System and provide Cable Service in
the City.
K. “Franchise Fee” has the meaning ascribed in Cable Act Section 542(g).
L. “Grantee” is any recipient of a Franchise, and its agents and employees, lawful
successors, transferees or assignees.
M. “Gross Revenues” means all revenues, as determined in accordance with Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”), received by a Grantee or its affiliates from
the operation of a Cable System to provide Cable Service in the City. By way of example
and not limitation, Gross Revenues shall include any advertising revenues received by a
Grantee or its affiliates in connection with the provision of Cable Service. Gross
Revenues shall not include revenues received by a Grantee or its affiliates from the
provision of Telecommunications Services or other non-Cable Services in the City, bad
debt, credits, refunds and deposits paid to Subscribers, or any taxes, fees or assessments
of general applicability collected by a Grantee which are imposed directly on a
Subscriber and which are collected by a Grantee for such governmental unit including
any PEG Capital Fees. A Franchise Fee is not such a tax, fee or assessment.
N. “Installation” means the connection of a System with the Subscriber Terminal Device.
O. “MPUC” means the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission, or its lawful successor.
P. “Normal Business Hours” has the meaning ascribed in the FCC’s rules, 47 C.F.R.
76.309(c)(4).
Q. “Normal Operating Conditions” has the meaning ascribed in the FCC’s rules, 47 C.F.R.
76.309(c)(4).
R. “PEG Access Facilities” means public, educational, and governmental programming
channels, or any equipment or facilities for use of such Channels.
S. “Person” has the meaning ascribed in Cable Act Section 522(15).
T. “Right-of-Way” or “Rights-of Way” means the area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, and public sidewalk in which the local
government unit has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel
purposes and utility easements of local government units. Right-of-Way does not include
4-79
the airwaves above a Right-of-Way with regard to wireless or other nonwire
telecommunications or broadcast service.
U. “Right-of-Way Ordinance” means an ordinance of general applicability adopted by the
City establishing requirements regarding regulation, management and use of Rights-of-
Way, including registration and permitting requirements.
V. “Standard Installation” means any residential installation that can be completed using a
Drop of 150 feet or less.
W. “Subscriber” means any Person who lawfully receives Cable Service via a System.
X. “Telecommunications Services” shall have the meaning ascribed in 47 U.S.C. § 153(46).
Y. “Terminal Device” means an electronic device that converts signals to a form accessible
by the Subscriber.
Subd. 4. Franchises.
A. Generally.
1. No person may construct, operate, or maintain a Cable System or provide Cable
Service in the City unless and until such Person is granted a Franchise. All
Franchises must be granted pursuant to the provisions of this Cable Ordinance.
2. Any Franchise granted hereunder will authorize a Grantee to deliver Cable
Services and construct, operate and maintain a Cable System in the Rights-of-
Way in the City.
3. All Franchises shall be nonexclusive and City may grant additional Franchises at
any time. The City will not grant an additional Franchise on terms and conditions
more favorable or less burdensome than those in an existing Franchise. The City
may impose additional terms and conditions in any additional Franchise.
4. In the event the City grants an additional Franchise that a Grantee believes is
more favorable or less burdensome than its existing Franchise, the Grantee shall
have a right to petition for Franchise amendments to relieve the Grantee of
provisions making its Franchise less favorable or more burdensome. The Grantee
shall file a petition that:
a. Identifies the competitor(s);
b. Identifies the basis for Grantee’s belief that certain provisions of the
additional Franchise are more favorable or less burdensome than its
existing Franchise;
c. Identifies the Franchise provisions to be amended.
4-80
d. The City shall not unreasonably deny such a petition.
5. This Cable Ordinance and Franchises granted pursuant hereto are intended to
comply with Minnesota Statutes Chapter 238. Any applicable requirement
established by Minn. Stat. 238.084 not expressly incorporated in this Cable
Ordinance or a Franchise shall be deemed incorporated by reference in the
Franchise as though fully set forth therein.
6. The performance of any Grantee is subject to periodic evaluation by the City upon
reasonable notice to the Grantee.
B. Use of Rights-of-Way.
1. Use of Rights-of-Way to operate a Cable System and provide Cable Service must
not be inconsistent with the terms and conditions by which such Rights-of-Way
were created or dedicated. Use of Rights-of-way is subject to all applicable legal
requirements including any Rights-of-Way Ordinance enacted by the City,
provided however that to the extent that rights, duties and obligations regarding
the use of Rights-of-Way are specifically addressed in a Franchise, such Franchise
terms shall prevail over any conflicting provisions of a Right-of-Way Ordinance.
2. The City may construct, maintain, repair or relocate sewers; grade, pave,
maintain, repair, relocate and/or alter any Right-of-Way; construct, repair,
maintain or relocate water mains; or construct, maintain, relocate, or repair any
sidewalk or other public work.
3. All System facilities, lines and equipment in the City must be located so as not to
obstruct or interfere with the proper use of Rights-of-Way, alleys and other public
ways and places, and cause minimum interference with the rights of property
owners who abut any of these Rights-of-Way, alleys and other public ways and
places, and not interfere with existing public utility installations.
4. To the extent required in a Right-of-Way Ordinance, a Grantee must file with the
City strand maps, plats, or other record of the location of all facilities constructed
in the City, including underground facilities. A Grantee must update such maps,
plats and permanent records annually if changes have been made in the System.
Consistent with applicable state law, Grantee may identify such maps, plats or
other records as “confidential trade secret,” and City shall comply with all state
laws regarding the protection and dissemination of such materials.
5. If the City alters the grade or location of any Right-of-Way, alley or other public
way, a Grantee shall, at its own expense, upon reasonable notice by City, remove
and relocate poles, wires, cables, conduits, manholes and other System fixtures,
and in each instance comply with the standards and specifications of City. If City
reimburses other occupants of the Right-of-Way, the affected Grantee will be
likewise reimbursed.
4-81
6. A Grantee shall not place poles, conduits, or other System fixtures where the
same will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone, water or other utility fixtures.
Any poles, conduits, or other fixtures placed in any Right-of-Way shall be so
placed as to comply with all lawful requirements of City.
7. A Grantee will, on request of any Person holding a moving permit issued by the
City, temporarily move wires or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings with
the expense of such temporary removal to be paid by the Person requesting the
same, and the Grantee will be given no less than 10 business days advance notice
to arrange for such temporary changes.
8. A Grantee will be liable for the failure to exercise reasonable care during
construction, operation or maintenance of a System.
C. Tree Trimming. A Grantee is authorized to trim any trees upon and overhanging the
Rights-of-Way, alleys, sidewalks, or public easements of City so as to prevent the branches of
such trees from coming in contact with wires and cables of a System. The City may supervise
tree trimming activities and condition the authority to trim trees as it deems appropriate.
D. Franchise Term. Franchises will be granted for a term established in the Franchise
Agreement. No Franchise may be granted for a period exceeding 15 years from the date of
acceptance by Grantee.
E. Regulation of Cable Service. Any Franchise Agreement adopted pursuant to this Cable
Ordinance will define the contractual rights and obligations of the City and Grantee,
provided however that a Grantee remains subject to the lawful exercise of the City’s
police power, ordinance-making authority, and power of eminent domain.
F. Initial Franchise Applications.
1. Upon request or its own initiative, the City may initiate the cable franchise
application process required by Minnesota Statutes § 238.081. Any Person
desiring an initial Franchise must file an application with the City.
2. The City will establish an application fee in an amount to offset the costs of
processing applications and awarding an initial Franchise. Such application fees
will not constitute a Franchise Fee.
3. Upon receipt of any application for an initial Franchise, City staff will prepare a
report and recommendations to the City Council regarding the application(s).
4. A public hearing concerning applications will be held prior to rejection or
acceptance of applications, and award of any initial Franchises.
G. Franchise Renewal. Franchise renewals will be conducted in accordance with applicable
laws. To the extent authorized by applicable laws, the City may require reimbursement
of its expenses incurred in processing the renewal.
4-82
Subd. 5. CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
A. Registration, Permits and Construction Codes.
1. Within 90 days of acceptance of an initial Franchise, a Grantee shall apply for any
necessary governmental permits, licenses, certificates, and authorizations to
construct, repair, replace, relocate, operate, maintain or reconstruct a System. A
Grantee may submit permit applications as construction progresses, as agreed
upon with the City. A Grantee must strictly adhere to all state and local laws and
building and zoning codes currently or hereafter applicable to location,
construction, installation, operation or maintenance of the facilities used to
provide Cable Service in the City.
2. The City may inspect any construction or installation work performed pursuant to
the provisions of a Franchise. The City may make such tests as it must find
reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this Cable
Ordinance, the Franchise, and applicable provisions of local, state and federal
law.
B. Repair of Rights-of-Way and Property.
1. Any Rights-of-Way or other property disturbed or damaged during the
construction, repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance or
reconstruction of a Cable System shall be promptly and fully restored by the
Grantee performing such work, at its expense, to a condition as good as that
prevailing prior to such work.
2. If a Grantee fails to promptly perform the restoration required herein, the City
shall have the right, following 10 business days written notice to Grantee, to
restore Rights-of-Way and other public property to a condition as good as that
prevailing prior to the Grantee’s work. The City shall be fully reimbursed by the
Grantee for its actual costs relating to such restoration.
C. Undergrounding of Facilities.
1. In all areas of the City where utility facilities are required to be placed
underground, or where all other utility lines are underground, a Grantee must
construct and install System facilities underground.
2. A Grantee must bury new Drops within a reasonable time period, subject to
weather conditions. In the event the ground is frozen, a Grantee will be permitted
to delay burial until the ground is suitable for burial which in no event must be
later than June 30th.
4-83
D. Erection, Removal and Joint Use of Poles.
1. In any area of the City where facilities may be located above ground, a Grantee
must make use of existing poles and other facilities to the extent technically and
economically feasible.
2. No poles, above-ground conduits, amplifier boxes, similar structures, or other
wire-holding structures may be erected or installed by the Grantee on public
property without prior approval of the City with regard to location, height, type
and other pertinent aspects.
3. All facilities are subject to applicable zoning and other land use regulations.
E. Safety Requirements.
1. A Grantee must at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care in the
construction, installation and maintenance of System facilities and must use
ordinary and reasonable methods and devices for preventing failures and
accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public.
All System facilities must at all times be kept and maintained in good condition,
order and repair so that the same must not menace or endanger the life or property
of the City or any Person.
2. A Grantee must install and maintain equipment and facilities in accordance with
all applicable federal and state laws and regulations, any Right-of-Way
Ordinance, and the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code and in such
manner that they will not interfere with private radio, police and fire
communications or any installations of City or of any public utility serving City.
Subd. 6. System Design and Extension Provisions.
A. System Capacity and Channels. At a minimum, any Franchise granted hereunder shall
describe the Grantee’s network in terms of the total System capacity such as the total
number of analog and digital video channels that can be provided.
B. Cable Service Availability.
1. Each Franchise will identify a required service area in which a Grantee will be
required to offer Cable Service to all dwellings, homes and businesses, subject to
a reasonable density threshold. Any additional Franchise will include a service
area that is no more favorable or less burdensome than the service area in an
existing Franchise.
2. Any Franchise granted hereunder may establish requirements for the extension of
the System and provision of Cable Service to areas that may be annexed by the
City beyond the initially required service area.
4-84
3. Cable Service shall not be denied to any group of potential residential cable
Subscribers because of the income of the residents of the area in which such
group resides.
C. Non-Standard Installations. A Grantee must provide Cable Service to any Person
requesting other than a Standard Installation except that a Grantee may charge for the
incremental increase in material and labor costs incurred above the cost of making a
Standard Installation.
D. Technical Standards. Any System offering Cable Service in the City must comply, at
minimum, with the technical standards promulgated by the FCC relating to Cable
Systems pursuant to Title 47, Section 76.601 to 76.617, as may be amended or modified
from time to time.
E. System Testing.
1. A Grantee shall perform all System testing required pursuant to the FCC’s
technical standards and requirements. In the event the City identifies signal or
System performance difficulties which may constitute violations of applicable
FCC technical standards, the Grantee will be notified and afforded 10 days to
correct problems or complaints. If the performance difficulty is not resolved
within 10 days in the City’s sole determination, the City may require the Grantee
to demonstrate compliance via testing or other means selected by the Grantee.
2. The City may test any System or facilities used to provide Cable Service in the
City. The City will seek to arrange its testing so as to minimize hardship or
inconvenience to Grantee and Subscribers. In the event that testing reveals that
the source of the technical difficulty is within the Grantee’s reasonable control,
the cost of the testing must be borne by the Grantee. If the testing reveals the
difficulties to be caused by factors that are beyond Grantee’s reasonable control,
the cost of the testing must be borne by the City.
F. FCC Reports. A Grantee must, upon written request from City, file all required FCC
technical reports with the City.
G. Emergency Alert System. A Grantee must provide an emergency alert system (EAS) that
complies with FCC requirements. A Grantee must further ensure that City can insert, or
direct the insertion of, brief audio and video emergency messages simultaneously on all
Channels or a signal Channel to which Subscribers are directed. The City shall
indemnify Grantee for City’s use of a Cable System for emergency messages.
Subd. 7. Consumer Protection and Customer Service Standards.
A. Regulation of Cable Services Rates. The City may regulate rates for the provision of
Cable Service to the extent allowed under federal or state law(s). A Grantee must file a
list of current Subscriber rates and charges with the City, which will be maintained on
file with City and will be available for public inspection. A Grantee must give the City
4-85
and Subscribers written notice of any change in a Cable Service rate no fewer than 30
days prior to the effective date of the change.
B. Sales Procedures. A Grantee may not exercise deceptive sales procedures that violate
state laws when marketing any of its Cable Services within City. A Grantee may conduct
marketing consistent with local ordinances and other applicable laws and regulations.
C. Telephone Inquiries and Complaints.
A Grantee must maintain local, toll-free or collect call telephone access lines which will
be available to its Subscribers 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. A Grantee must comply
with the FCC’s customer service standards.
D. Complaint and Other Service Records.
1. Upon written request by the City, and subject to a Grantee’s obligation to
maintain the privacy of certain information, a Grantee must prepare and maintain
written records of all written complaints received and the resolution of such
complaints, including the date of such resolution.
2. Written complaint records must be on file at the office of a Grantee. Upon written
request by the City, a Grantee must provide the City with a written summary of
such complaints and their resolution in a form mutually agreeable to the City and
Grantee.
3. Upon written request by the City, a Grantee must provide detailed compliance
reports on a quarterly basis with respect to the objectively measurable service
standards required in this Section. A Grantee will not be required to acquire
equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone
answering standards contained in this Section unless a historical record of
complaints indicates a failure to comply.
E. Subscriber Contractors. A Grantee must provide to the City upon request any standard
form Subscriber contract utilized.
F. Video Programming. All Franchises will comply with 47 U.S.C. § 544(b), regarding the
broad categories of video programming provided. Individual programming decisions
may be made in the Grantee’s sole discretion.
G. Billing and Subscriber Communications.
1. A Grantee must give the City and Subscribers 30 days advance written notice of
any changes in rates, programming services, or channel alignments.
2. Bills must be clear, concise, and understandable. Bills must clearly delineate all
activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates, and credits.
4-86
In case of a billing dispute, the Grantee must respond to a written complaint from
a Subscriber within 30 days.
H. Refunds and Credits.
1. Credits must be issued no later than the Subscriber’s next billing cycle following
the determination that a credit is warranted.
2. In the event a Subscriber establishes or terminates Cable Service and receives less
than a full month’s Cable Service, the Grantee must prorate the monthly rate on
the basis of the number of days in the period for which Cable Service was
rendered to the number of days in the billing. Refund checks will be issued
promptly, but no later than the next billing cycle following the return of the
equipment supplied by the Grantee if Cable Service is terminated.
I. Additional Customer Service Requirements. The City may adopt additional or modified
customer service requirements to address subscriber concerns or complaints to the extent
permitted by law.
Subd. 8. Community Services.
A. PEG Access Facilities. Franchises will establish obligations to provide PEG Access
Facilities to meet the community’s needs and interests. The City will operate, administer
and manage PEG Access programming and the City may delegate its PEG Access
authority and responsibilities to the Commission. All franchises must contain equivalent
PEG Access obligations on any franchised provider of Cable Services.
B. Service to Public or Educational Institutions.
Franchises will establish obligations for the provision of free or reduced cost Cable Services to
identified public or educational institutions.
Subd. 9. Administration Procedures.
A. Administration of Franchise. The City will have continuing regulatory authority over
Cable Systems, Cable Services, and Franchise compliance. The City may delegate any
and all regulatory authority to the Commission. A Grantee must fully cooperate with the
Commission in the exercise of regulatory authority delegated by the City.
B. Franchise Fee.
1. A Grantee must pay to the City a Franchise Fee in the amount established in the
Franchise Agreement.
2. Each Franchise Fee payment must be accompanied by a report certified by an
authorized representative of the Grantee, in form reasonably acceptable to City,
detailing the computation of the payment. All amounts paid must be subject to
4-87
audit and recomputation by the City and acceptance of any payment must not be
construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount.
3. A Grantee may designate that portion of a Subscriber’s bill attributable to the
Franchise Fee as a separate line item on the bill.
C. Access to Records.
1. The City may, upon reasonable notice and during Normal Business Hours, and
subject to the privacy provisions of 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., inspect at a mutually
convenient location any records of System operations maintained by a Grantee
that relate to a Grantee’s compliance with its Franchise, including specifically
Grantee’s Gross Revenue records. A Grantee may identify and label documents
as “confidential trade secret” in accordance with this ordinance.
2. A Grantee must prepare and furnish to the City such reports as City may
reasonably request with respect to operation of the System and provision of Cable
Services in the City, or any other operations, affairs, transactions or property
subject to this Franchise.
Subd. 10. Indemnification and Insurance.
A. Indemnification of the City.
1. A Grantee must indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its officers,
boards, committees, commissions, elected officials, employees and agents from
and against any loss or damage to any real or personal property of any Person, or
for any injury to or death of any Person, arising out of or in connection with the
construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of a System or other
facilities used by a Grantee to deliver Cable Service.
2. A Grantee must indemnify, defend, and hold the City, its officers, boards,
committees, commissions, elected officials, employees and agents, harmless from
and against all lawsuits, claims, actions, liability, damages, costs, expenses or
penalties incurred as a result of the award or enforcement of its Franchise.
3. A Grantee shall not be required to provide indemnification or defense for any
intentional misconduct, willful neglect or negligence by an Indemnified Party, for
any enforcement action taken by the City against a Grantee, or for any claim
based solely on the City’s operation of PEG Access Facilities, delivery of PEG
Access programming, or EAS messages originated by the City. Subject to the
limitations in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 466, the City shall indemnify, defend
and hold a Grantee harmless from any damage resulting from any intentional
misconduct, willful neglect or negligence by the City, its officers, boards,
committees, commissions, elected officials, employees and agents, in utilizing
PEG Access Facilities or Channels, delivering EAS messages originated by the
City, or in connection with work performed on or adjacent to the System.
4-88
4. With respect to each claim for indemnification:
a. the City must promptly notify the Grantee in writing of any suit, claim or
proceeding which gives rise to such right;
b. the Grantee must afford the City an opportunity to participate in any
compromise, settlement or other resolution or disposition of any suit,
claim or proceeding; and
c. the City must cooperate with reasonable requests of the Grantee, at
Grantee’s expense, in its participation in a suit, claim or proceeding.
B. Insurance.
1. A Grantee must obtain and maintain in full force and effect, at its sole expense, a
comprehensive general liability insurance policy, in protection of the Grantee, and
the City, its officers, elected officials, boards, commissions, agents and employees
for damages which may arise as a result of operation of the System or delivery of
Cable Service.
2. The policies of insurance must be in the sum of not less than $1,000,000.00 for
personal injury or death of any one Person, and $2,000,000.00 for personal injury
or death of two or more Persons in any one occurrence, $500,000.00 for property
damage to any one person and $2,000,000.00 for property damage resulting from
any one act or occurrence.
3. The insurance policy must be maintained by Grantee in full force and effect
during the entire term of the Franchise. Each policy of insurance must contain a
statement on its face that the insurer will not cancel the policy or fail to renew the
policy, whether for nonpayment of premium, or otherwise, and whether at the
request of Grantee or for other reasons, except after 60 days advance written
notice have been provided to the City.
Subd. 11. Franchise Transfer or Abandonment.
A. Abandonment of Service. A Grantee may not discontinue the provision of Cable Service
without having first given three months written notice to the City.
B. System Removal After Abandonment, Termination or Forfeiture.
1. In the event of termination or forfeiture of the Franchise or abandonment of the
System, the City may require the Grantee to remove all or any portion of its
System from all Rights-of-Way and public property within the City; provided,
however, that the Grantee will not be required to remove its System to the extent
it lawfully provides Telecommunications Services over the System.
4-89
2. If the Grantee has failed to commence removal of its System, or such part thereof
as was designated by the City, within 120 days after written demand for removal
is given, or if the Grantee has failed to complete such removal within 12 months
after written demand for removal is given, the City may apply funds secured by
the Franchise toward removal.
C. Sale or Transfer of Franchise.
1. No sale or transfer of ownership of a Grantee or “fundamental corporate change”
in a Grantee as defined in Minn. Stat. 238.083, nor sale or transfer of a Franchise
is permitted without City approval. Any sale or transfer of stock in a Grantee
creating a new controlling interest constitutes a sale or transfer of ownership. A
“controlling interest” includes majority stock ownership or a lesser amount
sufficient to confer actual working control in whatever manner exercised. City
approval shall not be required where a Grantee grants a security interest in its
Franchise or System to secure an indebtedness.
2. A Grantee must file a written request with the City prior to any transaction
described above. The City will approve or deny a transfer request within 120
days of receipt of a written request. The City will not unreasonably withhold its
approval.
3. In no event will a transaction be approved unless any proposed new Grantee
becomes a signatory to, and assumes all rights and obligations under, the
Franchise.
4. In the event of any proposed transaction described above, the City will have the
right to purchase the System. In the event a Grantee has received a bona fide
offer for purchase of its System, the City shall have the right to purchase for the
price which the proposed assignee or transferee agreed to pay. The City will be
deemed to have waived its right purchase the System in the following
circumstances:
a. The City does not notify the Grantee in writing, within 60 days of notice,
that it intends to exercise its right of purchase; or
b. the City approves the transaction.
Subd. 12. Protection of Individual Rights.
A. Discriminatory Practices Prohibited. No Grantee may deny Cable service or otherwise
discriminate against citizens or businesses on the basis of race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, age, status as to public assistance, affectional preference, or disability.
B. Subscriber Privacy.
4-90
1. A Grantee must comply with the subscriber privacy-related requirements of 47
U.S.C. § 551.
2. No signals of a Class IV Channel may be transmitted from a Subscriber terminal
for purposes of monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices without the
express written authorization of the Subscriber.
Subd. 13. Unauthorized Connections and Modifications.
A. Unauthorized Connections or Modifications Prohibited.
1. It is unlawful for any Person, without the express consent of the Grantee, to make
or possess, or assist anybody in making or possessing, any connection, extension,
or division, whether physically, acoustically, inductively, electronically or
otherwise, with or to any segment of a Grantee’s System.
2. It is unlawful for any Person to willfully interfere, tamper, remove, obstruct, or
damage, or assist thereof, any part or segment of a System for any purpose.
3. Any Person found guilty of violating this Section may be fined not less than
Twenty Dollars ($20.00) and the costs of the action nor more than Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00) and the costs of the action for each and every subsequent
offense.
Subd. 14. Enforcement of the Cable Ordinance or Franchise.
A. Violations or Other Occurrences Giving Rise to Enforcement Action.
1. In order to take enforcement action pursuant to this Cable Ordinance or a
Franchise, the City must provide the Grantee with written notice of the violation
or other occurrence giving rise to the City’s action.
2. The Grantee shall have 30 days subsequent to receipt of the notice to cure the
violation or occurrence giving rise to the City’s action. Alternatively, the Grantee
may, within 14 days of receipt of notice from the City, notify City in writing that
there is a dispute as to whether a violation or failure has in fact occurred. Such
written notice by the Grantee to the City shall specify with particularity the
matters disputed by Grantee.
3. In the event the Grantee does not timely cure to the City’s satisfaction the
violation or other occurrence giving rise to the City’s action, or timely disputes
whether a violation has occurred, the City will schedule a public hearing affording
Grantee due process. The City will endeavor to schedule the hearing for a date
within 90 days of the initial violation notice. Notice of the hearing must be
provided to the Grantee.
4-91
4. At the completion of the hearing, the City will issue written finding of fact and its
final determination.
5. In the event City determines that no violation has taken place, the City will
rescind the notice of violation in writing.
B. Franchise Revocation.
1. In addition to all other rights and remedies that the City possesses pursuant to law,
equity and the terms of the Franchise Agreement, the City may revoke or
terminate the Franchise, and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto. If the City
determines that:
a. The Grantee has violated any material requirement or provision of the
Cable Ordinance or a Franchise and has failed to timely cure; or
b. The Grantee has attempted to evade any of the material provisions of the
Cable Ordinance or a Franchise; or
c. The Grantee has practiced fraud or deceit upon the City or a Subscriber; or
d. The Grantee has filed for bankruptcy.
2. During any revocation proceeding and any appeal period, the Franchise will
remain in full force and effect unless the term thereof sooner expires.
C. Compliance with Federal, State and Local Laws. The City and Grantee will conform to
federal and state laws and rules regarding Cable Service or the System as they become effective.
P:\Home\1500.309 -- Delano City Code\CHAPTER 4 PUBLIC PROTECTION AND GENERAL LICENSING\CHAPTER 4 (clean) 2009 02 09.doc
CHAPTER 5
LICENSING AND REGULATION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION 501.01. PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED.
The provisions of Minnesota Statute Chapter 340A are adopted and made part of the City Code as if set
out in full. Whenever there is an inconsistency between the provisions of Minnesota Statute Chapter 340A
and the provisions of the City Code, the more restrictive governs.
SECTION 502.01. DEFINITIONS.
In addition to the definitions set forth in Minnesota Statute Chapter 340A, and unless otherwise stated in
specific Sections, the following words and terms shall have the meanings stated:
Subd. 1. “Alcoholic beverage” means any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol
by volume.
Subd. 2. “Applicant” means any person making an application for a license under this Chapter.
Subd. 3. “Application” means a form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in and completed by the
Applicant as his or her request for a license, furnished by the City and required as a prerequisite to the
consideration of the issuance of a license pursuant to this Chapter.
Subd. 4. “Bed and Breakfast Facility” means a place of lodging that:
A. Provides not more than eight rooms for rent to no more than 20 guests at a time;
B. Is located on the same property as the owner’s personal residence;
C. Provides no meals, other than breakfast served to persons who rent rooms; and
D. Was originally built and occupied as, or was converted to, a single-family residence prior to being
used as a place of lodging.
Subd. 5. “Bowling Center” is an establishment which is under the control of the single proprietor or
manager where the primary business is bowling, but which, incidental to its primary bowling business,
may also include other family recreational activities, sales and services and equipment sales including, but
not limited to, arcade games, billiards, and food and beverages.
Subd. 6. “Brewer” is a person who manufacturers malt liquor for sale.
Subd. 7. “Brew pub” is a brewer who also holds one or more retail on-sale licenses and who manufactures
fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year, at any one licensed premises, the entire production of
which is solely for consumption on tap on any licensed premises owned by the brewer, or for off-sale from
those licensed premises as permitted by Minnesota 2015 Session Laws Chapter 9, Article 1, Section 3 to
be codified as Minnesota Statutes Section Chapter 340A.24, subdivision 2.
City of Delano General Code
Chapter 5 – Licensing and Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages
Page 2 of 18
Subd. 8. “Brewer Taproom” is a brewer licensed under section 340A.301, subdivision 6, clause (c), (i), or
(j) who also holds a retail license to sell on-sale malt liquor produced by the brewer for consumption on
the premises of or adjacent to a brewery location owned by the brewer.
Subd. 9. “Club” is an incorporated organization under the laws of the State for civic, fraternal, social or
business purposes, for intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports, or a congressionally
chartered veteran’s organization. In addition, the organization shall:
A. Have more than 30 members and have been in existence for at least three years;
B. Have owned or rented a building or space in a building for more than one year that is suitable and
adequate for the accommodation of its members;
C. Be governed by a board of directors, executive committee, or other similar body chosen by the
members at a meeting held for that purpose. No member, officer, agent, or employee shall receive
any profit from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club, or their guests,
beyond a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each year by the governing body.
Subd. 10. "Growler'' is malt-liquor sold off-sale by a small brewer or brew pub, which has been produced
and packaged by the brewer in 64-ounce containers commonly known as growlers or in 750 milliliter
bottles.
Subd. 11. “Guest” means a person not a member of the club licensee but present on the club licensed
premises in the company of a host member at all times while on the licensed premises.
Subd. 12. “Host Member” means a member of a club licensee who is entertaining a guest.
Subd. 13. “Hotel” is an establishment where food and lodging are regularly furnished to transients and
which has:
A. A dining room serving the general public at tables and facilities for seating at least 30
guests at one time; and
B. A minimum of 10 guest rooms.
Subd. 14. “License” means a documented approval issued by the City to an applicant permitting the
applicant to carry on and transact the business stated therein.
Subd. 15. “Intoxicating Liquor” means ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous, and malt
beverages containing more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight.
Subd. 16. “Licensee” means an applicant, including the applicant’s agents or employees who, pursuant to
an approved application, holds a valid, current, unexpired license, which has neither been revoked nor
suspended.
Subd. 17. “Manufacturer” means any person who, by any process of manufacturing, fermenting, brewing,
distilling, refining, rectifying, blending, or by the combination of different materials, prepares or produces
alcoholic beverages for sale.
City of Delano General Code
Chapter 5 – Licensing and Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages
Page 3 of 18
Subd. 18. “Malt Liquor” is any beer, ale, or other beverage made from malt by fermentation and
containing not less than one half of one percent alcohol by volume.
Subd. 19. “3.2% Malt Liquor” means malt liquor containing not less than one half of one percent alcohol
by volume nor more than 3.2% alcohol by weight.
Subd. 20. “Member” means any person in good standing according to rules and regulations of the licensed
club, wherever located, having evidence of current membership upon his person.
Subd. 21. “Off-sale” means the retail sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for consumption only
off the premises where sold.
Subd. 22. “On-sale” means the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where
sold only.
Subd. 23. “Package” means any sealed or corked container of alcoholic beverages.
Subd. 24. “Restaurant” is an establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of a single proprietor or
manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the premises and served at tables to the general public
and which meets the following standards:
A. It shall have a full commercial State licensed kitchen where meals are prepared on site.
B. It shall have a full service dinner menu with meals served at tables.
C. It shall have minimum interior seating capacity of not less than fifty (50) people.
D. It shall be compliant with all Building and Fire Codes and meet all health standards of the
Minnesota Food Code.
Subd. 25. “Restaurant Movie Theater” is an establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of a single
proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the premises and served at tables to the
general public, which has a minimum interior seating capacity of not less than fifty (50) people and which
contains a movie theater in which movies or motion pictures are shown.
Subd. 26. “Small Brewer” is a brewer licensed under section 340A.301, subdivision 6, clause (c), (i), or (j)
who also holds a retail license to sell off-sale malt liquor at its licensed premises which has been produced
and packaged by the brewer.
Subd. 27. “Theater” means a building containing an auditorium in which live, dramatic, musical, dance, or
literary performances are regularly presented to holders of tickets for those performances.
Subd. 28. “Wholesaler” means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to retail dealers.
Subd. 29. “Wine” means the product made from the normal alcoholic fermentation of grapes, including
still wine, sparkling and carbonated wine, wine made from condensed grape must, wine made from other
agricultural products than sound, ripe grapes, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider,
City of Delano General Code
Chapter 5 – Licensing and Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages
Page 4 of 18
perry and sake, in each instance containing not less than one half of one percent nor more than 24%
alcohol by volume for nonindustrial use.
SECTION 503.01. LICENSE REQUIRED.
Subd. 1. License Required. It is unlawful for any person to directly or indirectly, on any pretense or by any
device, sell, barter, keep for sale, charge for possession, or otherwise dispose of alcoholic beverages as
part of a commercial transaction without having obtained the license or permit required by this Chapter
and/or Minnesota Statutes Chapter 340A. The licenses permitted under this Chapter are as follows: 3.2%
Malt Liquor (Subd. 3); Temporary 3.2% Malt Liquor (Subd. 4); Intoxicating Liquor (Subd. 5), Temporary
Intoxicating Liquor (Subd. 6); On-Sale Wine (Subd. 7); Brew Pub On-Sale and Off-Sale (Subd. 8); Brewer
Taproom; (Subd. 9); Small Brewer Off-Sale (Subd. 10); Consumption and Display/Bottle Club (Subd. 11);
Sunday Sales (Subd. 12); Community Festival (Subd. 13); Caterers (Subd. 14).
This Section shall not apply to (1) to possession or handling for sale or otherwise of sacramental wine or
to any representative of any religious order or for use in connection with a legitimate religious ceremony;
(2) to such potable liquors as are prescribed by licensed physicians and dentists for therapeutic purposes;
(3) to industrial alcohol and its compounds not prepared or used for beverage purposes; (4) to sales by
manufacturers to wholesalers duly licensed as such by the State of Minnesota and to sales by wholesalers
to persons holding on-sale or off-sale licenses from the City.
Subd. 2. License Not Required. No license under this Chapter is required for a bed and breakfast facility to
provide at no additional charge to a person renting a room at the facility not more than two glasses per
day each containing not more than four fluid ounces of wine. Wine so furnished may be consumed only
on the premises of the bed and breakfast facility. A bed and breakfast facility may furnish wine under this
Subsection only if the facility is registered with the commissioner of public safety.
Subd. 3. 3.2% Malt Liquor License. An applicant may apply for an on-sale and/or off-sale 3.2% malt liquor
license.
On-sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses shall be issued only to clubs, bowling centers, restaurants, hotels and
theaters.
Off sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses shall be issued only to grocery stores and grocery convenience stores.
Subd. 4. Temporary 3.2% Malt Liquor License.
A. Applicant. A club or a charitable, religious, or non-profit organization, duly incorporated as a nonprofit
or a religious corporation under the laws of the State of Minnesota and having its registered
office and principal place of activity within the City (“organization”), may apply for a temporary
on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license.
B. Conditions.
1. An application for a temporary license shall state the exact dates and place of the
proposed temporary sale.
City of Delano General Code
Chapter 5 – Licensing and Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages
Page 5 of 18
2. Any such license may be conditioned, qualified or restricted as the Council determines
appropriate.
3. If the premises to be licensed is owned or under the control of the City, the applicant
shall file with the City, prior to issuance of the license, a certificate of liability insurance
coverage in at least the sum of $100,000.00 for injury to any one person and
$300,000.00 for injury to more than one person, naming the City as an additional
insured during the license period.
Subd. 5. On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License.
A. General. An applicant may apply for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license for a hotel, restaurant,
bowling center, club, congressionally chartered veteran’s organization or theater.
B. Restaurant Movie Theater. An applicant may apply for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license for a
restaurant movie theater if all of the following conditions are met:
1. The restaurant movie theater is under the control and ownership of a single person. No
part of the restaurant or movie theater, including but limited to the property, equipment
and operations, shall be owned or controlled separate persons.
2. The restaurant movie theater consists of one stand-along structure containing a
minimum of 24,000 square feet.
3. The restaurant movie theater has a minimum of 25 tables, each with a table top
containing a minimum of 433 square inches. The tables shall be permanently attached to
the floor and the seats shall be permanently attached to the floor or the table. The table
shall be divided proportionately between the movie screening rooms in which alcoholic
beverages are allowed.
4. The restaurant movie theater has a manager appointed pursuant to Section 506.01,
Subd. 2 of this Chapter, which manager operates both the restaurant and the movie
theater.
Subd. 6. Temporary On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License. A club, charitable, religious or other non-profit
organization in existence for at least three years, or a political committee registered under Minn. Stat. §
10A.14 (collectively “Organization”), may apply for a temporary license for the on-sale of intoxicating
liquor in connection with a social event held within the City and sponsored by the Organization. The license
may authorize the on-sale of intoxicating liquor for not more than four consecutive days, and may
authorize on-sales on premises other than premises the Organization owns or permanently occupies. No
more than three four-day, four three-day, six two-day, or 12 one-day temporary licenses, in any
combination not to exceed 12 days per year, temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued
to any one Organization for any one location within any 12 month period. In addition, no more than one
temporary intoxicating on-sale liquor license may be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages to any one
Organization, or for any one location, within any 30-day period unless the licenses are issued in connection
with an event officially designated a community festival by the City. The license may provide that the
Organization may contract for liquor catering services with the holder of a full year intoxicating liquor
license issued by any municipality. Temporary intoxicating on-sale liquor licenses are subject to all laws
City of Delano General Code
Chapter 5 – Licensing and Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages
Page 6 of 18
and ordinances governing the sale of intoxicating liquor except those relating to insurance required by
Minn. Stat. § 340A.409 or by city code and except for those which in their nature are not applicable. No
temporary license issued under this Section shall be valid unless first approved by the Minnesota
Commissioner of Public Safety.
Subd. 7. On-Sale Wine License. A theater or a restaurant with facilities for seating at least 25 guests at one
time may apply for an on-sale wine license.
Subd. 8. Brew pub On-Sale and Off-Sale (Growler) Malt Liquor License.
A. A brew pub may apply for an intoxicating liquor and/or 3.2 malt liquor on-sale brew pub
license for a restaurant operated in the place of manufacture. On-sale brew pub licenses are
subject to all conditions and restrictions contained in Minnesota 2015 Session Laws Chapter 9,
Article 1, Section 3 to be codified as Minnesota Statutes Section 340A.24.
B. A brew pub that holds an on-sale brew pub license may apply for a malt liquor off-sale brew
pub license. Off-sale brew pub licenses are subject to all conditions and restrictions contained
in Minnesota 2015 Session Laws Chapter 9, Article 1, Sections 3 and 6 to be codified as
Minnesota Statutes Sections 340A.24 and 340A.285.
Subd. 9. Brewer Taproom License. A brewer taproom may apply for a malt liquor on-sale brewer taproom
license. Brewer taproom licenses are subject to all conditions and restrictions contained in Minnesota 2015
Session Laws Chapter 9, Article 1, Section 4 to be codified as Minnesota Statutes § 340A.26.
Subd. 10. Small Brewer Off-Sale (Growler) License. A small brewer may apply for a malt liquor off-sale small
brewer license. Small brewer licenses are subject to all conditions and restrictions contained in Minnesota
2015 Session Laws Chapter 9, Article 1, Sections 5 and 6 to be codified as Minnesota Statutes §Sections
340A.28 and 340A.285.
Subd. 11. Consumption and Display/Bottle Club. Consumption and Display permits, otherwise known as
bottle club permits, shall be issued only after the applicant has obtained a permit from the Public Safety
Commissioner pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 340A.414 and shall be issued only to restaurants, hotels and
clubs.
Subd. 12. Sunday Sales License.
A. Sunday On-Sale. A restaurant, restaurant movie theater, club, bowling center, brew pub, or hotel,
which has a seating capacity for at least 30 persons and which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor
license may apply for a Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor license for the sale of intoxicating liquor for
consumption on the premises in conjunction with the sale of food between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on
Sundays and 1:00 a.m. on Mondays, all subject to Minnesota Statutes Section 340A.504, Subd. 3.
B. Brewer Taproom. A brewer taproom may apply for a Sunday on-sale malt liquor license subject to
Minnesota 2015 Session Laws Chapter 9, Article 1, Section 4 to be codified as Minnesota Statutes
Section 340A.26 for the sale of malt liquor for consumption on the premises between the hours of
8:00 a.m. on Sundays and 1:00 a.m. on Mondays.
City of Delano General Code
Chapter 5 – Licensing and Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages
Page 7 of 18
C. Sunday Off-Sale. Brew pubs and small brewers may apply for Sunday off-sale growler licenses subject
to Minnesota 2015 Session Laws Chapter 9, Article 2, Sections 2 and 3 to be codified as Minnesota
Statutes Sections 340A.24 and 340A.285 for the sale of malt liquor at off-sale between the hours of
8:00 a.m. on Sundays and 1:00 a.m. on Mondays.
Subd. 13. Community Festival. The holder of an on-sale intoxicating liquor license may dispense
intoxicating liquor off premises at a community festival held within the City, so long as the licensee obtains
a permit from the City, on terms and conditions acceptable to the City, and based upon acceptable
evidence that the licensee has liability insurance, as prescribed by this Chapter, to cover the event.
Subd. 14. Caterers.
A. Prior to the sale of intoxicating liquor within the City under a caterer's permit issued pursuant
to Minn. Stat. 340A.404, Subd. 12, the holder of the caterer's permit shall provide to the City
the following: (i) a copy of a valid State issued caterer's permit; (ii) a copy of a valid State issued
restaurant license; and (iii) proof of compliance with the financial responsibility and insurance
requirements set forth in City Code Section 505.01, Subd. 1 and Subd. 2.
B. A caterer’s permit is auxiliary to the primary on-sale license held by the licensee.
C. The restrictions and regulations which apply to the sale of intoxicating liquor on the licensed
premises also apply to the sale under the authority of a caterer’s permit, and any act that is
prohibited on the licensed premises is also prohibited when the licensee is operating other than
on the licensed premises under a caterer’s permit.
D. Any act, which if done on the licensed premises would be grounds for cancellation or suspension
of the on-sale licensee, is grounds for cancellation of both the on-sale license and the caterer’s
permit if done when the permittee is operating away from the licensed premises under the
authority of the caterer’s permit.
E. The permittee shall notify, prior to any catered event, the Wright County Sheriff.
F. If the primary license ceases to be valid for any reason, the caterer’s permit ceases to be valid.
G. All holders of caterer's permits shall comply with City Code Section 507.01, City Code Section
510.01, and all laws and ordinances governing the sale of intoxicating liquor except those laws
and ordinances which by their nature are not applicable.
SECTION 504.01. LICENSE APPLICATIONS.
Subd. 1. Application. All applications shall be made at the office of the City Clerk upon forms if prescribed
by the proper Department of State of Minnesota, together with such additional information as the Council
may desire. If State forms are not prescribed, then applications shall be made upon forms furnished by the
City. Information required may vary with the type of business organization making application. All questions
asked or information required by the application forms shall be answered fully and completely by the
applicant.
City of Delano General Code
Chapter 5 – Licensing and Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages
Page 8 of 18
Subd. 2. False Statements. No applicant shall make a false statement or omission upon any application
form. Any false statement in such application or any omission of any information called for on such
application form shall, upon discovery of such falsehood, result in an automatic refusal of license or, if
already issued, shall render any license issued pursuant thereto void.
Subd. 3. Renewal Application. Applications for the renewal of an existing license shall be made at least 60
days prior to the date of the expiration of the license and shall be made in such form as the Council may
approve. If, in the judgment of the Council, good and sufficient cause is shown by an applicant for failure
to file for renewal within the time provided, the Council may grant the application. At the earliest
practicable time after the application is made for a renewal and prior to the time that the application is
approved, the Council may require any applicant which is a restaurant or hotel to file with the Clerk a
statement made by a certified public accountant reflecting the total gross sales and the total food sales
for the twelve-month period immediately preceding the date for filing renewal applications.
Subd. 4. Corporate Applicants and Licensees. A corporation applicant, at the time of application, shall
furnish the City with a list of all persons that have an interest in such corporation and the extent of such
interest. The list shall name all shareholders holding more than five percent (5%) of all issued and
outstanding stock and shall show the number of shares held by each, either individually or beneficially,
for others. Each licensee shall notify the Clerk in writing of any change in the legal ownership or beneficial
interest, or in such shares. The notice of such change shall be given within ten (10) days of its occurrence.
Any change in the ownership or beneficial interest in the shares entitled to be voted at the meeting of the
shareholders of a corporation or partnership licensee which results in the change of voting control by the
persons owning the shares therein shall be deemed equivalent to a transfer of the license. The Council or
any officer of the City designated by the Council may, at any time, examine the stock transfer records and
minute books of any corporation licensee in order to verify and identify the shareholders, and the Council
or its designated officer may examine the business records of any other licensee to the extent necessary
to disclose the interest which persons other than the licensee have in the licensed business.
Subd. 5. Every application for the issuance or renewal of a license shall include a copy of each notice
received by the applicant under Minnesota Statutes § 340A.802 during the preceding year.
SECTION 505.01. FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY OF APPLICANTS AND LICENSEE.
Subd. 1. No license under this Chapter shall be issued, maintained, or renewed unless and until the
applicant has provided proof of financial responsibility by filing with the City:
A. Proof that there is in effect an insurance policy or pool providing a minimum coverage of (1)
$50,000.00 because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence, and $100,000.00
because of bodily injury to two or more persons in any one occurrence, and in the amount of
$10,000.00 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one occurrence; and
(2) $50,000.00 for loss of means of support of any one person in any one occurrence and
$100,000.00 for loss of means of support of two or more persons in any one occurrence. (An
annual aggregate policy limit for dram shop liability of not less than $300,000.00 per policy may
be included in the policy provision); or
B. A bond of a surety company with minimum coverage as provided in Subparagraph A of this
Section; or
City of Delano General Code
Chapter 5 – Licensing and Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages
Page 9 of 18
C. A certificate of the State Treasurer that the licensee has deposited $100,000.00 in cash or
securities which may legally be purchased by a savings banks or for trust funds having a market
value of $100,000.00.
Subd. 2. The liability insurance policy, bond or certificate of the State Treasurer required above shall
include coverage for dram shop liability and shall provide that the policy, bond or certificate may not be
canceled for any cause by the licensee, the insurance company, bond company or State Treasurer without
first giving 30 days’ notice to the municipality in writing of intention to cancel it or, if cancellation is due
to nonpayment, 10 days’ notice to the municipality in writing of the intent to cancel it. Such notice shall
be addressed to the Clerk. The policy shall also list the City of Delano, its agents, officials, and assigns as
additional insureds.
Subd. 3. Subdivisions 1 and 2 do not apply to licensees who by affidavit establish that they qualify under
Minn. Stat. Section 340A.409, Subd. 4. The exceptions to proof of financial responsibility and insurance do
not apply where the applicant seeks a license for the serving or consumption of alcoholic beverages on
property owned by the City of Delano or other public property.
SECTION 506.01. PROCESSING OF APPLICATION.
Subd. 1. Investigation and Approval. The City shall, on initial application for a license, or an application for
a transfer of an existing license, conduct a preliminary background and financial investigation of the
applicant. If the City determines that a comprehensive background investigation of the applicant is
necessary, the City may conduct the investigation itself or contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety
for the investigation. In addition, an investigation may be required prior to renewal of an existing license
when the Council deems it in the public interest
Subd. 2. Manager or Agent. Before a license is issued under this Chapter to any individual who is a
non-resident of the City, to more than one individual whether or not they are residents of the City, or to
a corporation, partnership, or association, the applicant or applicants shall appoint in writing a natural
person who is its manager or agent. Such manager or agent shall, by the terms of his written consent, (1)
take full responsibility for the conduct of the licensed premises and (2) serve as agent for service of notices
and other process relating to the license. Such manager or agent shall be a person who, by reason or age,
character, reputation, and other attributes, could qualify individually as a licensee. The licensee shall
provide written notice to the City if the appointed manager or agent ceases to act in such a capacity. If
such manager or agent ceases to act in such capacity for the licensee without appointment of a successor,
the license issued pursuant to such appointment shall be subject to revocation or suspension.
Subd. 3. Issue. If an application is approved, the Clerk shall issue a license in the form prescribed by the
City or the proper department of the State of Minnesota, as the case may be. All license terms shall begin
on July 1 and terminate on June 30 of the following year. Licenses shall be valid only at one location and
on the premises therein described.
Subd. 4. Conditional Licenses. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Council may, upon
a finding of the necessity therefore, place such special conditions and restrictions, in addition to those
stated in this Chapter, upon any license as it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and justified.
City of Delano General Code
Chapter 5 – Licensing and Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages
Page 10 of 18
Subd. 5. Unavailable Building. Where a license is granted for a premises where the building is under
construction or otherwise not available for occupancy, the Clerk shall not issue the license until notified
by the Building Official that a certificate of occupancy has been issued and the building is ready for
occupancy.
Subd. 6. Fees.
A. License Fee. Prior to consideration of any new application for a license or an application for
renewal of a license, the applicant shall pay the license fee, which is not refundable to applicant
except as provided in Minn. Stat. 340A.408, Subd. 5, to cover the costs of the City in administering
the license. Licenses issued on a date other than July 1, shall be subject to a pro rata share of the
annual license fee.
License fees for renewal applications may be paid in equal monthly installments upon request by
the applicant and at the Council’s sole discretion. If an applicant requests installments payments
the license fee shall be subject to a 15% surcharge. The first installment payment shall be due
upon filing of the renewal application and all subsequent installment payments shall be due on
the first of the month. If a licensee fails to make an installment payment or makes an installment
payment after the first of the month, the licensee shall be charged a late fee of 20% of the
installment payment. If a licensee makes an installment payment by check and the check is
dishonored, the City may refuse to accept any future payments by check and may require that all
future installment payments be made by cash or cashier's check. The City shall inform the licensee
of such a decision in writing. In addition, if a licensee fails to make an installment payment, makes
an installment payment after the first of the month, fails to pay the late fee, or pays with a check
that is dishonored, the license may be revoked pursuant to Section 511.01. In the event the
licensee goes out of business during the license term or the license is temporarily suspended or
revoked, the full license fee, including any delinquent payments, shall be due to City upon
demand, along with any other penalty or fines imposed. The Council, at its sole discretion, may
reinstate a license revoked due to late payment of an installment payment upon receipt of the
entire license fee, including all delinquent payments, for the current license term.
B. Investigation Fee. At the time of the initial application, or a renewal application if the Council
determines an investigation is in the public interest, applicants for a license under this Chapter
shall pay a fee to the City which shall be considered an investigation fee, not refundable to the
applicant, to cover the costs of the City in processing the application and the investigation thereof.
All license and investigation fees provided for in this Chapter shall not exceed, and shall otherwise comply
with, the provisions of Minn. Stat. §340A.408. Such fees shall be fixed and determined by the Council,
adopted by resolution and uniformly enforced. No increase in the fees shall be effective, except after
notice and hearing on the proposed increase. Notice of the proposed increase shall be mailed to all
affected licensees at least 30 days before the date set for the hearing.
Subd. 7. Standards.
A. The Council may in its sole discretion, for any reasonable cause, refuse to grant any application
for a license.
B. No license may be issued under this Chapter to:
City of Delano General Code
Chapter 5 – Licensing and Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages
Page 11 of 18
1. A person under 21 years of age.
2. A person who within the previous five years of the license application has been
convicted of a felony, or of a violation of a federal or state law or a local ordinance
governing the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession for sale or distribution of
alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs or controlled substances.
3. A person who has had a license for alcoholic beverages revoked within the previous five
years of the license application; or to any person who at the time of the revocation
owned any interest, whether as a holder of more than five percent of the capital stock
of a corporation licensee, as a partner or otherwise, in the premises or in the business
conducted thereon; or to a corporation, partnership, association, enterprise, business,
or firm in which any such person is in any manner interested.
4. A person not of good moral character and repute.
5. A person who has a direct or indirect interest in a manufacturer, brewer or wholesaler,
except to a brew pub, brewer taproom, or small brewer as permitted under this Chapter.
6. An applicant who has not complied with any provision of this Chapter.
7. An applicant where issuance of a license would not be in the public interest.
C. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, no license shall be granted for any building within
300 feet of any elementary or secondary school structure when school is in session or when
children are present or within 100 feet of any religious structure, unless approved by Council. This
Section shall not apply to a building that houses a licensee with a license for the building that predates
the arrival of an elementary or secondary school structure within 300 feet of the building
or any religious structure within 100 feet of the building.
D. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, no license shall be granted for operation on any
premises upon which taxes, assessments, or installments thereof or other financial claims of the
City are owed by the applicant and are delinquent and unpaid. A license may be issued if said
taxes, assessments, installments, or financial claims are the subject of a pending legal challenge
pursuant to Minnesota Statute § 278.01.
E. No person shall be granted a license under this Chapter at more than one location.
F. The Council may issue the number of licenses authorized by Minn. Statute § 340A.413 or restrict
such number from time-to-time as it may, in its discretion, deem proper.
SECTION 507.01. LICENSEE RESTRICTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
Subd. 1. No licensee shall:
City of Delano General Code
Chapter 5 – Licensing and Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages
Page 12 of 18
A. Sell, barter or furnish any alcoholic beverages to anyone under the age of 21 years or permit
anyone under the age of 21 years to consume alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises.
B. Fail, where doubt could exist, to require adequate proof of age of a person upon licensed premises
for the purpose of consuming, purchasing or procuring any alcoholic beverage. Such proof of age
may be established only as set forth in Minn. Stat. §340A.503, Subd. 6.
C. Hinder or prevent an officer of the law from making an inspection to determine whether or not
the provisions of this Chapter and all laws are being observed.
D. Permit consumption of any alcoholic beverages on licensed premises more than 20 minutes after
the hour when a sale thereof can legally be made.
E. Permit any glass, bottle or other container, containing an alcoholic beverage in any quantity, to
remain upon any table, bar stool or other place where customers are served, more than 20
minutes after the hour when a sale thereof can legally be made.
F. Permit any gambling or gambling device upon the licensed premises except such as are licensed
by the State of Minnesota or permitted by the City.
G. Sell any alcoholic beverage to any person who is obviously intoxicated.
H. Sell, offer for sale, or keep for sale, any alcoholic beverage in any original package which has been
refilled or partly refilled, except for the off-sale of malt liquor by a brew pub or small brewer as
permitted by this Chapter. No licensee shall directly or through any other person dilute or in any
manner tamper with the contents of any original package so as to change its composition or
alcoholic content while in the original package. Possession on the premises by the licensee of any
alcoholic beverage in the original package differing in composition or alcoholic content from the
composition or alcoholic content when received from the manufacturer or wholesaler from
whom it was purchased, shall be prima facie evidence that the contents of the original package
have been diluted, changed or tampered with.
I. Sell, offer for sale, or display any alcoholic beverage during the times when such sale is prohibited
by State law or by this Chapter.
J. Employ anyone under the age of 18 years to serve or sell alcoholic beverages or permit anyone
under the age of 18 to serve or sell alcoholic beverages as a volunteer.
K. Permit any club or any other business establishment to allow the consumption or display of liquor
or the serving of any liquid for the purposes of mixing liquor therewith, unless duly licensed under
the provisions of this Chapter.
Subd. 2. Nudity and obscenity prohibited.
A. Definition. For the purpose of this Section the following definitions apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
City of Delano General Code
Chapter 5 – Licensing and Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages
Page 13 of 18
1. “Nudity.” Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, human genitals, pubic areas, and
the post-pubertal human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola or the covered human male genitals in the discernably turgid state. For purposes
of this definition, any female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the
nipple and the areola only are covered.
2. “Sado-masochistic Abuse.” Flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad
in undergarments or in revealing or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered,
bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed.
3. “Sexual Conduct.” Human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or any touching of the
genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female, or the breasts of female,
whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans
and animals, and an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
B. Unlawful Act. It is unlawful for any person issued a license provided for in this Chapter to permit
upon licensed premises any nudity, sado-masochistic abuse, or sexual conduct.
Subd. 3. Posting. All licensees shall conspicuously post their licenses in their places of business.
Subd. 4. Premises Licensed. Unless expressly stated therein, a license issued under the provisions of this
Chapter shall be valid only in the compact and contiguous building or structure situated on the premises
described in the license, and all transactions relating to a sale under such license shall take place within
such building or structure.
Subd. 5. Principal Part of Business. A licensed restaurant, including a brew pub, shall be conducted in such
manner that the principal part of the business for a license year is the serving of foods. A hotel shall be
conducted in such manner that, of that part of the total business attributable to or derived from the
serving of foods and intoxicating liquors, the principal part of the business for a license year is the serving
of foods. For purposes of this subdivision “principal part” shall mean fifty percent or more of the gross
receipts. A restaurant movie theater shall be conducted in such manner that the principal part of the
business for a license year is the serving of food and the sale of movie tickets.
Subd. 6. Premises Subject to Inspection. All premises licensed under this Chapter shall at all times be open
to inspection by any officer of the law to determine whether or not this Chapter and all other laws are
being observed. All persons, as a condition to being issued such license, consent to such inspection by
such officers and consent to, without a warrant, searches and seizures.
Subd. 7. Conduct on Licensed Premises. Except as herein provided, every licensee under this Chapter shall
be responsible for the conduct of the licensed place of business and shall maintain conditions of sobriety
and order therein.
Subd. 8. Transfer. No license shall be transferable between persons or locations without the consent of
the Council.
Subd. 9. Termination. Licenses shall terminate only upon expiration, revocation or as otherwise provided
in this Chapter.
City of Delano General Code
Chapter 5 – Licensing and Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages
Page 14 of 18
Subd. 10. Hours and Days of Sale.
A. The sale of intoxicating liquor and 3.2 malt liquor is prohibited between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
Monday through Saturday.
B. The sale of intoxicating liquor is prohibited after 1:00 a.m. on Sundays, except as provided by
Section 503.01, Subd. 12.
C. The sale of 3.2 malt liquor is prohibited between 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sundays.
D. No establishment holding a valid consumption and display/bottle club permit may permit a
person to consume or display intoxicating liquor and no person may consume or display
intoxicating liquor between 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays, and between 1:00 a.m. and
8:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday.
SECTION 508.01. CLUB LICENSEE RESTRICTIONS.
Subd. 1. Any club holding a license under this Chapter shall comply with the following restrictions in
addition to all other restrictions contained in this Chapter:
A. No club licensee shall sell any alcoholic beverage to any non-member of the licensed club unless
such non-member is a guest of a member.
B. No person who is not a member of the licensed club shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from
the club, unless such non-member is a guest of a member.
C. No club licensee shall hinder or prevent an officer of the law from determining compliance with
this Section and Chapter and all other laws.
D. No person shall refuse, upon request of a licensee or officer of the law, to provide information as
to whether he or she is a member, guest, or host member or to give false, fraudulent, or
misleading information in response to such request.
SECTION 508.02. RESTAURANT MOVIE THEATER RESTRICTIONS
Subd. 1. The following are in addition to all other unlawful acts set forth in this Chapter. It is unlawful for
any restaurant movie theater licensee to:
A. Offer any discounts or happy hours.
B. Offer or sell wine or distilled spirits by the bottle.
C. Offer to sell wine in any amount exceeding 8 fluid ounces per serving.
D. Offer to sell distilled spirits in any amount exceeding 3 fluid ounces per serving.
E. Offer to sell malt liquor in any amount exceeding 24 fluid ounces per serving.
City of Delano General Code
Chapter 5 – Licensing and Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages
Page 15 of 18
F. Offer to sell any alcoholic beverages containing more than 50% alcohol by volume.
G. Offer to sell any alcoholic beverage not in the original packaging without using a measuring device.
H. Offer or sell any alcoholic beverage to any person without requiring adequate proof of age. Such
proof of age may be established only as set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 340A.503, Subd.
6.
I. Offer or sell any more than 1 alcoholic beverages to one person in the same sale or transaction.
SECTION 509.01. MUNICIPAL DISPENSARIES.
Subd. 1. Establishment. The City may establish a municipal on-sale facility, a municipal off-sale facility, and
any subsidiaries and affiliates thereof within the City for the sale of alcoholic beverages. The facilities shall
be at such places as the Council shall determine and may be either leased or owned by the City. The
Council shall employ a person known as the Liquor Manager and the Council may employ assistants to the
Manager, as it deems necessary.
Subd. 2. Liquor Fund. A Liquor Fund is hereby created into which all revenues received from the operation
of the liquor facilities shall be paid and from which all operating expenses shall be paid. Any surplus
accumulating in this Fund may, from time to time, be transferred to the general fund by resolution of the
Council and expended for any municipal purpose.
SECTION 510.01. GENERAL RESTRICTIONS.
Subd. 1. No person under the age of 21 years shall:
A. Consume any alcoholic beverage unless in the household of his or her parent or guardian and
with the consent of the parent or guardian.
B. Possess any alcoholic beverage at a place other than the household of his or her parents or
guardian.
C. Purchase or attempt to purchase any alcoholic beverage.
D. Enter an establishment licensed under this Chapter for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage. Persons who are 18, 19, and 20 years old may enter
establishments licensed under this Chapter and may remain upon the premises in order to
perform work as employees of the establishment, including the serving of alcoholic beverages.
Persons under the age of 18 shall not serve or sell alcoholic beverages as an employee or as a
volunteer. Persons under the age of 21 who are not employees of the establishment shall be
accompanied by their parent or guardian and, unless consuming meals in a restaurant or hotel,
or attending a social function in a portion of the establishment where alcoholic beverages are not
sold, may remain on the premises no later than 6:00 p.m.
City of Delano General Code
Chapter 5 – Licensing and Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages
Page 16 of 18
E. Represent themselves as 21 years old or older for the purpose of purchasing any alcoholic
beverage.
Subd. 2. No person shall:
A. Induce a person under the age of 21 years to purchase or procure any alcoholic beverage.
B. Consume any alcoholic beverage on a licensed premises more than 20 minutes after the hour
when a sale thereof can legally be made.
C. Purchase any alcoholic beverage on any day or during any hour when sales are not permitted by
State law or this Chapter.
D. Sell, barter, furnish, or give any alcoholic beverage to a person under 21 years of age except that
a parent or guardian of a person under 21 years of age may give or furnish an alcoholic beverage
to that person solely for consumption in the household of the parent or guardian.
E. Consume an alcoholic beverage in public parks or such other public place, except where a license
therefor has been granted by the Council. The Council may require, as a condition of such license
that the City be provided with adequate safety and liability protection, including but not limited
to adequate indemnification and insurance. In no event shall a person consume any alcoholic
beverage in public parks while under the influence of alcohol.
Subd. 3. Alcoholic beverages on school grounds restricted. It is unlawful for any person to introduce upon,
or have in his or her possession upon or in, any school ground, school house, or school building, any
alcoholic beverage, except for those organizations which have been issued temporary licenses to sell 3.2%
malt liquor, and/or any person as a result of a purchase from those organizations holding temporary
licenses.
SECTION 511.01. REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR FINE.
Subd. 1. Upon a finding that any licensee has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter
or with any applicable State Law, or other regulation or ordinance relating to an alcoholic beverage, or for
other good cause, the Council may either suspend the license for a period not to exceed 60 days, revoke
the license, or impose a civil fine on the licenses not to exceed $2000.00 for each violation, or some
combination thereof. The civil penalty and/or suspension and revocation imposed pursuant to this Section
shall be based on the licensee’s total number of violations at the specific location, at which the violation
occurred within the preceding 24-month period for participants in the Best Practices Program and 36-
month period for non-participants in the Best Practices Program as follows:
City of Delano General Code
Chapter 5 – Licensing and Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages
Page 17 of 18
Best Practices Participants Grid Best Practices Non-Participants Grid
1st Violation $250.00 $750.00
2nd Violation $500.00 $1,500.00, plus a three (3) day
suspension of license
3rd Violation $1,500.00, plus a two day
suspension
$2,000.00, plus a ten (10) day
suspension of license
4th Violation $2,000.00, plus a suspension of not
less than five (5) days but no more
than sixty (60) days or revocation as
determined by the City Council.
Revocation.
Penalty
Calculation
Period
…within the preceding 24-month
period…
…within the preceding 36-month
period…
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may impose a fine, suspension or revocation that varies from the
above schedule for any violation it determines, through the hearing specified below, was of a seriousness
that justifies a departure from the schedule. In addition, the Council may revoke a license for non-payment
of a license fee regardless of the licensee’s total number of violations or the licensee’s participation in the
Best Practices Program.
Subd. 2. Notification and Hearing. The following notification and hearing processes will apply to violations
of this Section.
A. Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation of this Section, the alleged violator shall be
issued, either personally or by mail, a notice that sets forth the alleged violations and which shall
inform the alleged violator of his or her right to be heard on the accusation. The person
responsible for the violation shall either pay the scheduled fine or request a hearing under Subd.
2B of this Section. Payment of the fine constitutes admission of the violation.
B. Hearings. No license suspensions or revocations shall take effect until the license holder has been
given an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to Minnesota Statutes § 14.57 through 14.69. If a
license holder has been issued a fine pursuant to this Section, the license holder may request a
hearing within 15 days after the issuance of the citation. A hearing requested or required in
accordance with this Section shall be scheduled for a date not to exceed 45 days from receipt of
the request, or in the case of suspension or revocation, within 45 days from the date of issuance
of the notice. Notice of the hearing shall be served in person or by mail on the license holder at
least 15 days in advance of the hearing, unless a shorter time is accepted by the parties. Such
notice shall contain the time, place and issues involved, but if by reason of the nature of the case,
the issues cannot be fully stated in advance of a hearing, or if subsequent amendment of the
issues is necessary, they shall be fully stated as soon as practicable, and opportunity shall be
afforded to the holder of the license to present evidence in argument with respect thereto.
The City Council may designate the entire Council, a committee of the Council, a member thereof,
or an employee of the Office of Administrative Hearings to preside over hearings pursuant to this
City of Delano General Code
Chapter 5 – Licensing and Regulation of Alcoholic Beverages
Page 18 of 18
Section.
C. Decision. If it is determined at a hearing that a violation of this Section occurred, the decision,
along with the reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under this Section
shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the accused violator and the City
Council if it did not preside over the hearing. In the case of a Fourth Violation, if the City Council
has designated someone other than the entire Council to preside over the hearing, the decision
and recommendation for the penalty to be imposed shall be referred to the City Council. The City
Council shall consider the recommendation and impose a penalty within 30 days of the Council’s
receipt of the decision. If it is determined at a hearing that no violation occurred or finds grounds
for not imposing any penalty, such findings shall be recorded and the copy provided to the
acquitted.
D. Appeal. Appeal of any decision shall be filed pursuant to Minn. Stat. 14.63, by filing a petition for a
writ of certiorari with the Court of Appeals.
Subd. 3. Continued Violation. Each violation, and each day in which a violation occurs or continues, shall
constitute a separate offense.
Subd. 4. Late Payment. A late payment fee of 10% of the penalty shall be assessed for each 30 day period
in which the penalty remains unpaid after the due date.
Subd. 5. Suspensions. Suspensions will commence on the same day of the week as the occurrence of the
violation. Unless specified, numbers indicate consecutive days’ suspension during regular business hours.
Subd. 6. Prosecution. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the City, County, or other authorized entity
from seeking prosecution as a petty misdemeanor, misdemeanor, or gross misdemeanor for any violation
of this Section.
Section 2. All prior ordinances and resolutions pertaining to subjects under Chapter 5 shall be deemed
repealed from and after the effective date of this Ordinance. All fees established in prior ordinances shall
remain in effect unless amended in this Ordinance, or until an ordinance adopting a fee schedule is adopted
or amended.
6-1
CHAPTER 6 SEWER AND WATER........................................................................... 6-2
SECTION 601.01. DEFINITIONS....................................................................................... 6-2
SECTION 602.01 CONTROL AND SUPERVISION ....................................................... 6-7
SECTION 603.01 UTILITY OWNERSHIP....................................................................... 6-7
SECTION 604.01 RIGHT OF ENTRY............................................................................... 6-7
SECTION 605.01 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS ................................................................. 6-7
SECTION 606.01 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES FROM SUMP PUMPS AND OTHER
SOURCES INTO THE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM ................. 6-14
SECTION 607.01 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS ................................. 6-16
SECTION 608.01 BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS ........ 6-18
SECTION 609.01 STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY........................................ 6-20
SECTION 610.01 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.......................................................... 6-22
SECTION 611.01 CONNECTION FEES AND SEWER AVAILABILITY CHARGES
AND CONNECTION DEPOSIT........................................................ 6-27
SECTION 612.01 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTIONS ........................ 6-32
SECTION 613.01 WATER CONNECTION.................................................................... 6-32
SECTION 614.01 ASSESSMENT OF CERTAIN SEWER, WATER AND
ELECTRICAL FEES.......................................................................... 6-34
SECTION 615.01 WATER DEFICIENCY AND SHUTOFF; DISCLAIMER............ 6-35
SECTION 616.01 REPAIR OF LEAKS AND EQUIPMENT........................................ 6-36
SECTION 617.01 ABANDONED SERVICE; DISCONNECTION FEES; IMPROPER
DISCONNECTION ............................................................................. 6-36
SECTION 618.01 PRIVATE WATER SUPPLIES; CONNECTION PROHIBITED. 6-36
SECTION 619.01 SHORTGAGES; RESTRICTIONS USES AND HOURS............... 6-37
SECTION 620.01 PRIVATE FIRE CONNECTIONS .................................................... 6-37
SECTION 621.01 OPENING HYDRANTS RESTRICTED .......................................... 6-37
SECTION 622.01 WATER METERS............................................................................... 6-37
SECTION 623.01 STATE PLUMBING CODE; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED .......... 6-38
SECTION 624.01 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE ................................................. 6-38
SECTION 625.01 COLD WEATHER RULE.................................................................. 6-38
SECTION 626.01 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY HAZARD.................................. 6-40
6-2
CHAPTER 6
SEWER AND WATER
SECTION 601.01. DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Chapter, unless otherwise stated in specific Sections, the following words and
terms shall have the meanings stated:
Subd. 1. “BOD (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand)” means the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biological oxidation of organic matter expressed in milligrams per liter, as
determined in accordance with standard laboratory procedure as set out in the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
Subd. 2. “Building Drain” means that part of the lower horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls
of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of
the building wall.
Subd. 3. “Building Sewer” or “Service Connection” means the extension from the
building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
Subd. 4. “Capital Costs” means all reasonable and necessary costs and expenses incurred
by the City in planning, designing, financing, and constructing disposal system facilities,
including, but not limited to, costs and expenses for obtaining necessary permits, licenses,
approvals and grants for design and construction costs; fees or legal and consulting services; or
the acquisition of such facilities.
Subd. 5. “COD (denoting Chemical Oxygen Demand)” means the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the chemical oxidation of organic matter, expressed in milligrams per liter, as
determined in accordance with standard laboratory procedure as set out in the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
Subd. 6 “Combined Sewer” means a sewer originally designed and currently designated
to receive both surface water runoff and sewage.
Subd. 7. “Commercial Users” means all users of the system classified as industrial users
in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, U.S. Office of Management and Budget,
as amended and supplemented under Division A, B, C, E, and I, but who are excluded from such
definition for the purposes of this Chapter, because they discharge primarily segregated domestic
wastes, or wastes from sanitary conveniences, except that the classification shall not include such
exempted users who are otherwise classified in this Chapter as domestic users, governmental
users, or institutional users.
6-3
Subd. 8. “Commission” means the Delano Water, Light and Power Commission.
Subd. 9. “Contract Users” means all users who have a written contract with the City to
use the City sewer system or City wastewater treatment plant.
Subd. 10. “Debt Service” means the principal and interest necessary to pay bonded
indebtedness.
Subd. 11. “Debt Service Charge” means the charge related to the principal and interest
necessary to pay bonded indebtedness of facilities owned or operated by the City. The debt
service charge includes a “debt service connection charge” and a “debt service user charge.”
Subd. 12. “Domestic User” means a user of the treatment facilities whose premises or
building is used primarily as a residence for one or more persons, including dwelling detached
housing, apartments and mobile homes, and which discharges primarily normal domestic
strength sanitary wastes.
Subd. 13. “Flow” means the quantity of sewage expressed in gallons or cubic feet per 24
hours.
Subd. 14. “Garbage” means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of food.
Subd. 15. “General Municipal Flow” means the total sewage flow discharged to the
treatment facilities, minus the flows from industrial users, other municipalities, and contract
users and therefore includes sanitary wastes and infiltration. General municipal flow, based on
the design of the wastewater treatment facilities, is further defined as flows containing five day
BOD concentrations not greater than 250 mg/1 and suspended solids concentrations not greater
than 250 mg/1.
Subd. 16. “General Municipal User” means any user discharging sewage to the general
municipal flow other than industrial users, municipalities and other contract users. This category
of user includes as sub-categories:
Domestic Users;
Commercial Users;
Institutional Users;
Governmental Users, which are not contract users.
Subd. 17. “Governmental User” includes those establishments whose function is the
administration and/or execution of governmental programs as well as the offices of executives
and legislative bodies and agencies which provide general support services for government.
6-4
Subd. 18. “Industrial User” means any non-governmental user of the wastewater treatment
facilities identified in the Federal Standard Industrial Classifications Manual, 1972, Office of
Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under the following divisions:
A. Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing;
B. Mining;
C. Manufacturing;
D. Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services;
E. Services.
A user in the divisions listed may be excluded and treated as a commercial user if the City
determines it will primarily introduce domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
The BOD and suspended solids loads from industrial users will be based on the actual
concentrations of those constituents, except that for industrial users with sewage containing BOD
and suspended solids concentrations less than the concentrations as defined for general municipal
flow, the charges shall be based on concentrations as defined for general municipal flow.
Subd. 19. “Industrial Wastes” means the solid, liquid or gaseous wastes resulting from any
industrial or manufacturing processes, trade or business, or from the development, recovery or
processing of natural resources.
Subd. 20. “Institutional User” means those establishments engaged in activities of a noneconomic
nature, frequently being the performance of services classified as a governmental or
commercial user in this Chapter.
Subd. 21. “Load” means quantities of sewage characteristics such as BOD, SS and other
constituents as expressed in milligrams per liter(mg/1) or pounds per 24 hours (Ibs/24 hours).
Subd. 22. “National Pollution Discharge Elimination System Permit (NPDES Permit)”
means the system for issuing, conditioning and denying permits for the discharge of pollutants
from point sources into the navigable waters, the contiguous zone, and the oceans by the
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to Section 402 and 405 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment 1972.
Subd. 23. “Normal Domestic Strength” means wastes with Biochemical Oxygen Demand
Concentration not to exceed 250 milligrams per liter and a total Suspended Solids Concentration
not to exceed 250 milligrams per liter and a phosphorous concentration not to exceed 10
milligrams per liter.
Subd. 24. “Natural Outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
6-5
Subd. 25. “Operation and Maintenance Costs (O & M Costs)” means the expenses
related to the costs of the operation, maintenance, replacement and administration of the City
facilities.
Subd. 26. “Other Wastes” shall mean garbage, municipal refuse, decayed wood, sawdust,
shavings, bark, lime, sand, ashes, oil, tar, chemicals, offal and other substances except sewage
and industrial wastes.
Subd. 27. “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ions concentration in
gram molecules per liter of solution.
Subd. 28. “Process Water” means any water used in the manufacturing, preparation of, or
production of goods, materials or food. Process water is an industrial waste.
Subd. 29. “Public Sewer” means any sewer owned or operated by a unit or agency of
government and located within the boundaries of the City.
Subd. 30. “Replacement Costs” means costs related to the expenditures for obtaining and
installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary to maintain the capacity
and performance during the service life of the City facilities for which such facilities were
designed and constructed. The term “operation and maintenance” includes replacement.
Subd. 31. “Sanitary Sewer” means a sewer intended to carry only sanitary or sanitary and
industrial wastewater from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions
together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are not admitted
intentionally.
Subd. 32. “Sanitary Wastes” means the liquid and water carried wastes discharged from
sanitary plumbing facilities.
Subd. 33. “Sewage” or “Wastewater” means the water carried waste products from
residences, public buildings, institutions, industrial establishments or other buildings including
the excrementitious or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals, together
with such ground water infiltration and storm and surface water as may be present, that are not
admitted intentionally.
Subd. 34. “Sewer” means a pipe, swale, ditch or other conduit for carrying sewage,
industrial waste or other waste liquids.
Subd. 35. “Sewer Service Charge” means the aggregate of all the charges including the
user charge, debt service charges, industrial cost recovery charges and other sewer related
charges that are billed periodically to users of the City facilities.
6-6
Subd. 36. “Sewer System” means pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, forcemains, and
all other devices and appliances appurtenant thereto, used for collecting or conducting sewage,
industrial wastes or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal.
Subd. 37. “Significant Industrial User” means any industrial user who discharges sewage
which constitutes greater than 10% of the design flow or design pollutant loading of the
wastewater treatment plant.
Subd. 38. “Slug” means any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24 hour concentration of flows during
the normal operation and which adversely affects the collection system and/or performance of
the water reclamation plant.
Subd. 39. “Storm Sewer (sometimes termed “Storm Drain)” means a sewer intended to
carry storm waters, surface runoff, groundwater, sub-surface water, street wash water, drainage
and unpolluted water from any source.
Subd. 40. “Suspended Solids” or “SS (denoting Total Suspended Solids)” means solids
that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids and
which are removable by laboratory filtering, in accordance with the latest edition of “Standard
Methods of the Examination of Water and Wastewater.”
Subd. 41. “Unpolluted Water” means clean water uncontaminated by industrial wastes,
other wastes, or any substance which renders such water unclean or noxious, or impure so as to
be actually or potentially harmful or detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare,
to domestic, commercial, industrial or recreational use, or to livestock, wild animals, bird, fish,
or other aquatic life.
Subd. 42. “User” means any person, or corporation, or other entity, whether municipal or
otherwise, discharging sewage into the City disposal system facilities.
Subd. 43. “User Charge” means a charge levied on users of City facilities for the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement of such facilities.
Subd. 44. “Wastewater Treatment Works or Treatment Works” means an arrangement
of devices and structures for treatment of wastewater, industrial waste, and sludge. Sometimes
used as synonymous for “waste treatment plant” or “wastewater treatment plant” or “water
pollution control plant” or “sewage treatment plant.”
6-7
SECTION 602.01. CONTROL AND SUPERVISION.
The Council shall have control and general supervision of all public sewers and service
connections in the City, except for those matters that are subject to the jurisdiction of the
Commission, and shall be responsible for administering the provisions of this Chapter to the end
that a proper and efficient City sewer system is maintained. The Council, at its discretion, may
rely on the Superintendent to aid in the performance of its duties herein.
SECTION 603.01. UTILITY OWNERSHIP.
Ownership of all municipal utilities, plans, lines, mains, extensions and appurtenances thereto,
shall be and remain in the City and no persons shall own any part or portion thereof. Provided,
however, that private facilities and appurtenances constructed on private property are not
intended to be included in municipal ownership.
SECTION 604.01. RIGHT OF ENTRY.
By applying for or receiving a municipal utility service, a property owner irrevocably consents
and agrees that any City and Commission employee acting within the course and scope of
employment may enter into and upon the private property of the property owner, including any
dwelling and other buildings, at all reasonable times under the circumstances, in or upon which
private property a municipal utility or connection therewith is installed, for the purpose of
inspecting, repairing, reading meters, connecting or disconnecting the municipal utility service.
Provided however, that, except in the case of emergency, before entering the property, the
property owner shall be notified of the proposed entrance and, if the property owner refuses to
permit the entrance into the interior of a building, the City employee must obtain an
administrative search warrant.
SECTION 605.01. USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
Subd. 1. Treatment Required. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet
within the City or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City any sewage or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this Chapter.
Subd. 2. Connection Required. Where the City sewer system is available to a property or
building from which sewage is discharged, the owner of said property or building shall connect
to the available City sewer system. If connection is not made pursuant to this Subdivision, the
City may issue written notice to connect within 90 days. Said notice shall be served on the
owner or an authorized agent of the owner or may be sent by mail to the owner’s last known
address. If the owner cannot be reached by mail so addressed, the City may serve the written
notice upon the occupant. Pursuant to the authority conferred by Minnesota Statutes § 444.075,
in addition to all other charges for tapping into or connection with the municipal sanitary sewer
system, including fees for inspection of the connection, right-of-way permit, and other fees
established by City Code or resolutions, no tap or other connection shall be installed, or made,
6-8
with or into any municipal sanitary sewer of the City, either directly or indirectly, from any lot or
tract of land unless the Clerk shall have certified as follows:
A. That the lot or tract of land to be served has been assessed for its proportionate cost of
construction of the main with which the connection is made.
B. If no assessment has been levied for such construction cost, that proceedings for the
levying of such assessment have been or will be commenced within a specified time
determined by the Clerk, or,
C. That the proportionate cost of construction for the main has been paid by the developer or
builder platting the lot or tract of land.
Subd. 3. Additional Connection Charge. If none of the above conditions can be certified
by the Clerk, no connection to any sanitary sewer main shall be made unless the applicant shall
pay an Additional Connection Charge. The Additional Connection Charge shall be equal to the
average assessment levied against like kind property for a similar public improvement
constructed and installed by the City provided, however, for a connection to a residential
property, the Additional Connection Charge shall be equal to the average assessment levied
against residential parcels of one-half acre or less. The average assessment shall be determined
by taking the total assessment for a similar public improvement and dividing that total by the
total number of properties assessed, such determination having regard for construction costs
current on the date of such determination. Whenever more than one tap or other connection is
requested for service to any lot or tract or whenever any tap or connection is requested for a lot
or tract which has previously been part of a lot or tract for which a connection charge has already
been imposed pursuant to this Subdivision, an Additional Connection Charge shall be imposed
for each tap or connection requested.
A. Notice and Hearing. Before the Clerk or the Clerk’s designee makes a final
determination of the Additional Connection Charge under this Section, the Clerk shall
cause a written notice to be sent to the property owner affected stating the amount of the
proposed Additional Connection Charge and the basis of its calculation. The notice shall
also state that the owner may, within 10 days of receipt of the notice, demand a hearing
on the matter. If the owner requests a hearing within that time, a hearing shall be held on
the matter by the Council within a reasonable time after the date on which the request is
made. The notice shall further state that the owner may request that the charges be levied
as an assessment against the lot or tract to be served and an application for such request
shall be provided with the notice. The application shall be made within 10 days of
receipt of the notice referred to above if no hearing is requested, or if a hearing is
requested, within 10 days following the hearing. If as a result of the hearing, the Council
finds that the proposed Additional Connection Charge complies with the requirements of
this Subdivision, it shall so determine. If it determines that the proposed charge is in
excess of an amount that would have been assessed had the property been assessed, it
shall make a determination of the proper amount of the charge with the limits specified in
this Subdivision. No connection shall be made without payment of the connection charge
6-9
unless the charge is to be levied as an assessment against the benefitted property. Upon
application, the owner may waive his right to notice, hearing and appeal.
B. Assessments. The Council may cause the Additional Connection Charge to be levied as
an assessment against the lot or tract to be served. The assessment, when levied, shall
bear interest at the rate for local improvements and shall be certified to the auditor of the
county in which the property is located and shall be collected and remitted to the City in
the same manner as assessments for local improvements. The Council may, by
resolution, provide that the assessment be spread over a term of up to 10 years upon
request of the property owner or agent.
C. Liability for Charge and Certification to County Auditor. All Additional Connection
Charges imposed pursuant to this Section, including those assessed against the property,
shall be a charge against the owner of the lot or tract of land to be served. The Clerk
shall certify all unpaid charges to the County Auditor with taxes against the lot or tract to
be served for collection as other taxes are collected.
Subd. 4 Separate Fund. The funds received from the collection of the charges authorized
by this Section shall be deposited as collected in the City sewer system operating fund and shall
be used for the operation, maintenance, debt service, replacement, and improvements of the City
sewer system, except that the portion of any such funds which is limited to a particular use by
applicable state or Federal rules or regulations shall be used in compliance with such restrictions.
Subd. 5. Connection by the City. In the event an owner shall fail to connect to the City
sewer system in compliance with written notice from the City, the City may, by resolution,
undertake to have said connection made and may assess the cost thereof against the benefitted
property.
Subd. 6. Other Facilities. It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
Subd. 7. Certain Connections Prohibited.
A. No building located on property lines outside the limits of the City shall be connected to
the City sewer system absent a contract between the City and the local governmental unit
containing the building served.
B. No sewer connection shall be made to any building or house which does not contain a
minimum of one vented sewer main.
Subd. 8. Storm and Other Water. Except as permitted by the City, no person shall
discharge or cause to be discharged directly or indirectly, into any sanitary sewer, any storm
water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, waste from on-site disposal
systems, or unpolluted cooling or process water. Storm water and all other unpolluted water
shall be discharged to a storm sewer, except the unpolluted cooling or process water shall only
be so discharged upon approval by the City or other local unit of government.
6-10
Subd. 9. Prohibited Discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged,
directly or indirectly, into any sanitary sewer, any of the following described substances:
A. Any gasoline, benzene, napatha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or
gas.
B. Any water or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the wastewater treatment works.
C. Any water or wastes having pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the
wastewater treatment works.
D. Solid or viscous substances, whether whole or ground, in quantities or of such size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper
continuation of the wastewater facilities, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, disposable
diapers, glass, grinding or polishing wastes, stone cuttings or polishing wastes, sand,
mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage,
whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and sanitary napkins, paper
dishes, cups, milk containers, and other paper products.
E. Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or substances which either singly or by interaction
with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are
sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair.
F. Any liquid or vapor having temperature higher than 150° F (65° C).
G. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in
excess of one hundred mg/1 or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between 32° and 150° F (0° and 65° C).
H. Any garbage that has not been ground or shredded to such a degree that all particles will
be carried freely in suspension under flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
I. Any water or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating
solutions, whether neutralized or not.
J. Any water or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances
which constitute a nuisance or hazard to the structures, equipment or personnel of the
sewage works, or which interfere with the treatment required to meet the requirements of
the state and federal government and any other public agency with proper authority to
regulate the discharge from the sewage treatment plant.
6-11
K. Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration that they are in noncompliance
with regulations issued by the appropriate authority having control over their
use or which have caused or may cause damage or hazards to the treatment works or
personnel operating it.
L. Prohibited wastes shall be regulated in accordance with the City’s NPDES permit,
Sections 307(a) and 307(b) of the Clean Water Act and all other applicable state and
federal regulations.
Subd. 10. Discharges Allowed by Permit Only. Unless a permit has been obtained from
the City, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged directly or indirectly, into any
public sewer, the following described substances. Application may be made upon forms
provided by the City. Such a permit may be granted by the Council only if, in the opinion of the
Council, such discharge will not harm the wastewater facilities, nor cause obstruction to the flow
in sewers, nor otherwise endanger life, limb or public property, nor constitute a nuisance. In
forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Council may give consideration to
such factors as the quantities of the subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the
sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity
of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, the
City’s NPDES permit, and other pertinent factors. The Council may make such determinations
either on a general basis or as to discharges from individual users or specific discharges, and may
prohibit certain discharges from individual users because of unusual concentrations or
combinations which may occur. Discharges prohibited except by permit include, but are not
limited to materials which exert or cause:
A. Unusual concentrations of suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth,
lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate).
B. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions).
C. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as
to constitute a significant load on the wastewater treatment works.
D. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting a slug.
E. Water or water containing substances which are not amendable to treatment or reduction
by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such
degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet NPDES permit requirements
or requirements of other governmental agencies having jurisdiction over discharge from
the sewage treatment plant.
6-12
F. Daily volumes greater than those given in the City’s Sanitary Sewer Master Plan (1997)
on a per acre basis.
Subd. 11. City Authority. If any water or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged, directly or indirectly to the public sewers, which water or wastes do not meet the
standards set forth in this Chapter or which, in the judgment of the Council, may have a
deleterious effect upon the treatment works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the City may take any or all of
the following steps:
A. Refuse to accept the discharges, or
B. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, or
C. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for the discharge to the public sewers, or
D. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treatment wastes.
The design and installation of the plant and equipment for pre-treatment or equalization of waste
flows shall be subject to the review and approval of the City and subject to the requirements of
40 CFR 403, entitled, “Pretreatment Standards” and all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent or prohibit a contract or agreement between
the City and any user whereby waste and material of unusual strength, character or composition
may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to additional payment therefor by such users
provided, however, that such contract or agreement shall have the prior approval of the
Superintendent, and the payments for such services meet the requirements of this Chapter and
provided that the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and the City’s NPDES permit
limitations are not violated.
Subd. 12. Interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Council, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing
grease, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors required
under this Subdivision shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City and shall be located
so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall not
be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. Where preliminary treatment, flow
equalizing facilities, or interceptors are provided for any water or wastes, they shall be
effectively operated and maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective condition by the
owner at his expense, and shall be available for inspection by the City and all reasonable times.
Subd. 13. Industrial Meters. When required by the City, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control structure,
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such structures and equipment, when
required, shall be constructed at the owner’s expense in accordance with plans approved by the
Council and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
6-13
Subd. 14. Measurement Standards. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the
characteristics of water and wastes to which reference is made in this Chapter shall be
determined in accordance with 40 CFR 136 (“Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for
Analysis of Pollutants”) and the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater. Sampling methods, locations, times, duration and frequencies shall be
determined on a case-by-case basis subject to approval by the Council.
Subd. 15. City Testing. The City may conduct such tests as are necessary to enforce this
Chapter and employees of the City may enter upon any property to take samples, obtain
information and conduct surveys or investigations relating to such enforcement. Entry shall be
made during operating hours unless circumstances require otherwise. In all cases where tests are
conducted by the City to determine if a previous violation of this Chapter has been corrected, the
cost of such tests shall be charged to the user and added to the user’s sewer charge. In those
cases where the City determines that the nature or volume of a particular user’s sewage requires
more frequent than normal testing, the City may charge such user for the test, after giving the
user 10 days written notice of its intention to do so, and the cost thereof shall be added to the
user’s sewer charge. In any case where industrial wastes are discharged to a public sewer, the
City may require the user to test the discharge on a regular basis and to report the test results to
the City within a reasonable time.
Subd. 16. Responsibility for Maintenance of Line. It shall be the duty and responsibility
of every owner and occupant of property upon or under which a building sewer is placed to
maintain the sewer line on and under said property and from the property line to the sewer line
connection to the sewer main. Said maintenance shall include responsibility for repairing any
broken tile or other break in said line, no matter what the cause, and the responsibility for any
clean out or maintenance caused by obstructions in said line, no matter what the cause of said
obstruction. Said owner and occupant also shall repair or cause such work to be done as the
Council may direct. Each day after three days that the owner or occupant neglect or fail to so act
shall constitute a separate violation of this Subdivision. Where the owner and occupant neglect
or fail to so act, the Council may cause the work to be done and recover from said owner and
occupant the expense thereof, and assess the amount of that expense against the property.
Subd. 17. Prohibited Waste. No person, having ownership, occupancy or charge of any
building, or other premises, which drains into a public sewer, shall permit any substance or
matter which may form a deposit or obstruction to flow or pass into the public sewer. Within 10
days after notice in writing from the City, a person shall install a suitable and sufficient catch
basin or waste trap, or if one already exists, clean out, repair or alter the same, and perform such
other work as the Council may deem necessary to prevent any substance or matter from passing
into the public sewer which may cause a deposit or obstruction therein. In addition to any
penalties that may be imposed for violating this subdivison, if a person refuses or neglects to
install a catch basin or waste trap, or to clean out, repair, or alter the same, if one exists, for a
period of five days after notice, the Council may cause such work to be done as deemed
necessary at the expense of the owner or person having charge of the premises, and assess the
amount of that expense against the property.
6-14
Subd. 18. Prohibited Waste Discharge Repair. In addition to any penalties that may be
imposed for violation of any provision of this Chapter, the City may assess against any person
the cost of repairing or restoring sewer or associated facilities damaged as a result of the
discharge or prohibited wastes by such person and may collect such assessment as an additional
charge for the use of the City sewer system or may collect in any other manner deemed
appropriate by the City.
Subd. 19. Motor Vehicle Service. The owner or operator of any motor vehicle washing or
servicing facility shall provide and maintain, in serviceable condition at all times, a catch basin
or waste trap in the building drain system to prevent grease, oil, dirt, or any mineral deposit from
entering the public sewer system.
Subd. 20. Dilution Prohibited. Under no circumstances shall the owner of any property
served by the City sanitary sewer system use increased amounts of process water in an attempt to
dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
Subd. 21. Accidental Discharges. Accidental discharges of prohibited waste into the City
sewer system, directly or through another disposal system, or to any place from which such
waste may enter the City sewer system, shall be reported to the City by the persons responsible
for the discharge, or by the owner or occupant of the premises where the discharge occurred,
immediately upon obtaining knowledge of the fact of such discharge.
History: Subd. 2 and 3 amended by Ordinance O-95-02 §2 and 3, January 17, 1995.
SECTION 606.01. PROHIBITED DISCHARGES FROM SUMP PUMPS AND OTHER
SOURCES INTO THE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
Subd. 1. Purpose. The Council finds that the discharge of water from roofs, downspouts,
surfaces, groundwater sump pumps, footing tiles or swimming pools, air conditioning systems,
areaway drains, or other means of transmitting natural precipitation into the City sanitary sewage
system will, and has on numerous occasions in the past, flooded and overloaded the sanitary
sewage system to such an extent as to cause significant and grave damage to the waste treatment
plant and sanitary sewer trunk systems. Such damage is caused by the backup of sewage into the
plant, private properties, and pressure damage to trunk lines. The Council, therefore, finds it
essential to the minimization of damage to property and to meet Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency and Delano City Code requirements that the provisions of this Ordinance be strictly
enforced to avoid emergencies in the future.
Subd. 2. Prohibition against discharges into sanitary sewer system. No water from any
roof, surface, groundwater, sump pump, footing tile, swimming pool, or other natural
precipitation shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer system. Dwellings and other buildings
and structures which require, because of infiltration of water into basements, crawl spaces and
the like, a sump pump discharge system shall have a permanently installed discharge line which
shall not at any time discharge water into the sanitary sewer system, except as provided herein.
A “permanently installed discharge line” shall be one which provides for year-around discharge
6-15
capacity to either an appropriate drainage area on the outside of the dwelling, building or
structure (in no event shall such a drainage area include property owned by others or any public
right-of-way), or is connected to the City storm sewer. It shall consist of a rigid discharge line,
without valving or quick connections for altering the path of discharge. It shall not be capable of
connection or reconnection to the sanitary sewer system.
Subd. 3. Disconnection. Any person, firm, or corporation having a roof surface,
groundwater, sump pump, footing tile or swimming pool now connected and/or discharging into
the sanitary sewer system shall immediately disconnect and/or remove same. Any disconnects or
openings in the sanitary sewer shall be closed in an effective, workmanlike manner, as approved
by the Delano Public Works Director or the Director’s designated agent.
Subd. 4. Inspection. Every person owning improved real estate that discharges into the
City’s sanitary sewer system shall, within 45 days after notice from the City, obtain an inspection
of each building located on such property by an inspector designated by the City. The purpose of
this inspection shall be to confirm that there is no sump pump or other prohibited discharge into
the sanitary sewer system. In lieu of having the City inspect such property, the owner may
furnish a certificate from a licensed plumber, in a form acceptable to the City, certifying that the
property is in compliance with this Section 606.01.
Subd. 5. Additional Inspections. Any building may be reinspected on a yearly basis in
conjunction with yearly water meter or other inspections.
Subd. 6. New home inspections. All new homes will be required to have their sump
pump system inspected and be in compliance with this Section 606.01 prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
Subd. 7. Waivers. The Council shall have the power and duty of hearing and deciding
requests for waivers from the applicability of the provisions of this Section 606.01 where strict
enforcement would cause undue hardship because of circumstances unique to the individual
property under consideration or cause a safety problem. This may also include cases where it
would not be practical or feasible to correct a clear water discharge problem.
Application for waivers pursuant to this Section 606.01 shall be addressed in writing to the City
Administrator. The applications shall at a minimum identify the subject property, the name of
the property owner/applicant, and describe in detail what characteristics of the subject property
create an undue hardship. Within a reasonable time the Council shall make its decision on the
matter and send a copy of such decision to the applicant by regular mail. Upon approval of an
application for a waiver, a property owner shall be allowed to discharge directly into the sanitary
sewer system for a limited time specified in the Council’s written decision and in accordance
with other terms and conditions specified by the Council. The applicant will be required to agree
to pay an additional fee for the additional sewer service, along with the regular monthly charge.
Fees for this service will be based on estimated yearly average amounts discharged to the
sanitary sewer.
6-16
Subd. 8. Surcharge and Penalties. A surcharge of $100.00 per month is added to every
sewer bill mailed to property owners who have not obtained a required property inspection or
who are not in compliance with this Section 606.01. The surcharge shall be added every month
thereafter for properties not complying with this Section 606.01. All properties found during any
inspection to have violated this Section 606.01 will be subject to the $100.00 per month charge
for all months between the two most recent inspections, and for each month thereafter until the
property owner submits proof to the City that the property is brought into full compliance. If the
surcharge is not paid, the City reserves the right to assess the property owner the unpaid balance
pursuant to Minnesota Statute § 429.101. In addition to the $100.00 per month charge, a
property owner or other person who is not in compliance this Section 606.01 may be mailed, by
regular mail, a notice that such violation must cease and desist within a time limit provided by
the Council. If such violation does not cease and desist by the established time limit, the owner
of the property or other person violating Section 606.01 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
History: Chapter 6, 603.02, amended by Ordinance O-03-03, February 4, 2003.
SECTION 607.01. BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
Subd. 1. Licensed Required. No person shall engage in the work or business of installing
or servicing building sewers and connections without a license therefor from the City.
Subd. 2. License Application. Any person desiring to engage in the work of installing or
servicing sewers and connections shall make application to the City on forms supplied by the
Clerk, shall pay the application fee, and shall file, with the Clerk, the following:
A. Proof that the applicant is a Master Plumber currently licensed with the State of
Minnesota or proof of a pipelayers certificate issued by the State of Minnesota.
B. Proof that the applicant has obtained a surety bond in the face amount set by resolution of
the Council, running to the City, conditioned that the City will be saved harmless from
any loss, damage, cost, or expense, by reason of improper or inadequate performance or
compliance with the terms of this Chapter by the licensee or the licensee’s agents or
employees.
C. A certificate of insurance showing that the applicant has obtained public liability
insurance coverage with limits of at least $250,000.00 per person; $500,000.00 per
occurrence and $250,000.00 for property damage. The certificate of insurance shall state
that such insurance covers underground operations and shall contain a provision that the
coverage afforded under the policies will not be canceled or materially altered until at
least 10 days prior written notice has been served upon the City. Failure to maintain such
insurance is grounds for denial or revocation of the license.
D. An agreement, on a form supplied by the Clerk, whereby the applicant agrees to pay the
City the actual cost of repair for any damage caused to the City sewer system by the
applicant or the applicant’s employees or agents.
6-17
Subd. 3. Licensee Requirements.
A. The licensee shall replace and restore the street or alley over any service connection
opening to as good a state or condition as the licensee found it, keep guard by day and
adequate lights by night and keep and maintain the same in good order, to the satisfaction
of the Council. No licensee shall allow the licensee’s name to be used by any other
person, for any purpose. Each licensee shall record in the Clerk’s office the licensee’s
place of business, the name under which the business is transacted, and shall immediately
notify the Clerk of any change in said information. The licensee shall, in addition,
comply with all provisions of City’s right-of-way ordinance.
B. The Council may suspend or revoke any license issued under this Chapter for any of the
following causes:
1. Providing false information in connection with the application for a license;
2. Incompetence of the licensee;
3. Violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, any rule or regulation
pertaining to the making of service connections, and any terms or conditions of
the license.
Subd. 4. Permit Required. No person shall uncover, make any connection with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the City. The provisions of this Section shall also apply to
connections made indirectly through privately owned or privately constructed sewers. A
connection fee, connection deposit and sewer availability charge shall be paid to the City at the
time the application is filed. Connection fees will be set periodically by resolution of the
Council as it deems necessary.
Subd. 5. Permittee Requirements.
A. Plan. Any person who desires to construct, reconstruct, extend, or alter a service
connection shall, before beginning work, file with the City a plan showing a whole course
of the service connection and all branches, traps and fixtures connected therewith. If the
City finds that the plan does not conform to the requirements of this Chapter, the City may
not issue a permit for such work. All plans shall be filed as a permanent record within the
office of the Clerk.
B. Owner Indemnity. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be the responsibility of the owner. The owner shall indemnify and
hold harmless the City from any loss or damage to any public sewer that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
6-18
C. Existing Sewer Conditions. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found, upon examination by the Building Official, to meet all
requirements of this Chapter.
D. Separate Sewers. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building. Where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no
building sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining
alley, court, yard, or driveway, the front building sewer may, if approval is received from
the Building Official in advance, be extended to the rear building sewer and the whole
considered as one building sewer. The City does not assume any obligation or
responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection. A
separate clean out shall be required for each building.
E. City Inspection. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the City when the
building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection
of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State
of Minnesota Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
City. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the Building
Inspection Department. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must
be approved by the Building Official prior to installation
F. Excavation. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks,
parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in
a manner satisfactory to the Council. The applicant shall comply with all provisions of the
City’s right-of-way ordinance.
G. Variances. Variances from the strict application of any of the provisions of this Section
may be permitted by the Council, if it is satisfied that special circumstances or conditions
exist affecting the premises for which the variance is requested and that the granting of
such variance will not adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens and
property of the City.
SECTION 608.01. BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
All building sewer construction requirements shall conform to the requirements of the State of
Minnesota Building Code except as amended in this Section. In the absence of code provisions
or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of
the American Society for Testing Materials (“ASTM”) and Water Pollution Control Federation
(“WPCF”) Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
Subd. 1. Materials. All pipes shall comply with the State Building Code.
Subd. 2. Joint and Connections. Type of joints shall comply with the State Building
Code .
6-19
Subd. 3. Alignment. No building sewer shall contain bends or a combination of bends
which at any point shall be greater than 45 degrees, and no more than four bends, regardless of
angle, shall be permitted in any single building sewer; except where manholes are constructed at
such points and in manner as directed by the Building Official. No building sewer shall be laid
parallel to any bearing wall or footing unless further distant than three feet from any such bearing
wall or footing. No connection sewer shall be laid within 20 feet of any well. If no cleanout is
provided then one with a minimum 4 inches opening must be provided outside of the house
within three feet of the foundation or before the first bend. On long runs a cleanout must be
provided each 75 feet.
Subd. 4. Excavation. All excavations shall be open-trench work unless otherwise
authorized by the Building Official. The foundation in the trench shall be formed to prevent any
subsequent settlement of the pipes. If the foundation the pipe is to be laid on is good and firm,
the earth shall be pared and molded to give a full support to the lower third of each pipe. Bell
holes shall be dug to provide ample space for pouring of joints. Care must be exercised in
backfilling below the center line of the pipe in order to give it proper support. Backfilling shall
not be done until the Section to backfill has been inspected and approved by the City inspector.
Subd. 5. Use of Old House Sewers. All sewer connections shall be made directly to the
pipe outlet from the building served provided the pipe outlet is an approved material under the
Minnesota State Building Code. No cesspool or septic tank shall be connected to any portion of
a building sewer that is also laid across or over any existing cesspool or septic tank. The existing
cesspool or septic tank shall first be pumped clean and filled with granular material to the
surrounding ground level, except that if the septic tank is needed for subsurface drainage, the
Building Official may allow continued use for this purpose. Where a building sewer is laid
across or over any existing cesspool or septic tank materials approved pursuant to the Minnesota
State Building Code and those conforming to the ASTM Standard Specification A-74-42 shall be
used for that portion of the connecting sewer which is laid across or over the existing cesspool or
septic tank, and if interposed in a polyvinyl chloride sewer pipe, the cast iron soil pipe shall be of
the same diameter as the plastic pipe.
Subd. 6. Connections at Stub Only. Every building sewer shall be connected to the City
system only at the stub provided for the property served by the connection except where
otherwise expressly authorized by the Building Official. Stubs have been provided for each
separate structure and all connections to the public sanitary sewer shall be made to such stubs. In
the event that the stub which has been installed cannot be used, then the property owner shall pay
the full cost of making the connection elsewhere. In the event it becomes necessary to install a
wye branch, this shall be done by installing a polyvinyl chloride wye on the existing pipe and
carefully cutting an opening in the pipe with an approved saw. The wye shall be installed by the
use of solvent and held in place with two stainless steel clamps. Any other methods of making
connection to the main sewer shall be subject to approval of the Building Official.
Subd. 7. Tunneling. Tunneling for distances of not more than 6 feet, or to such a length
that it may be serviced with a single length of cast iron pipe but not more than 20 feet in length,
6-20
is permissible in yards, courts or driveways of any building site. When pipes are driven, the
drive pipe shall be at least one size larger than the pipe to be laid.
Subd. 8. Cover. The minimum cover over building sewer connections shall be 6 feet in
order to prevent freezing. Where 6 feet is not practical at the building then 6 feet shall be
attained as soon as possible. All such connections must be approved by the Building Official
before work commences. Wherever possible the cover shall be maintained by 7 feet.
Subd. 9. Size, Slope, Materials and Placement. The size, slope, alignment, materials of
construction of a building sewer, and the method to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the State
Building Code and other applicable rules and regulations. Whenever possible, the building
sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings
in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, such building
drain shall be provided with a lifting device by an approved means and discharged to the
building sewer.
Subd. 10. City Inspection. Employees of the City shall be allowed to inspect the work at
any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the City
when the work is ready for final inspection and no underground portions shall be covered before
the final inspection is completed. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Building Official or his or her designee.
Subd. 11. Barriers and Restoration. All excavations for building sewer installations shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of work shall be restored
at the property owner’s expense in a manner satisfactory to the Building Official.
SECTION 609.01. STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY.
Subd. 1. Establishment. The City hereby establishes a storm water drainage utility,
pursuant to Minnesota Statute § 444.075, from which revenues will be derived subject to the
provisions of this Section and Minnesota Statutes. The storm water drainage utility shall be
operated as a public utility and will be part of the street, sewer and park department and shall be
supervised by the Council.
Subd. 2. Finance. For the purpose of paying the cost of building, constructing,
reconstructing, repairing, enlarging, improving, or in any other manner obtaining the facilities or
any portion of them, or administering the City’s storm drainage system, the City may issue and
sell general or special obligations in accordance with Chapter 475 of the Minnesota Statutes.
These obligations may be payable from any of the sources as set forth in Minnesota Statute §
444.075, Subd. 2 which include, but are not limited to, those revenues derived by the utility as
set forth below.
6-21
Subd. 3. Storm Drainage Utility Fund. There shall be maintained within the City’s
accounting system a separate fund to be known as “Storm Drainage Utility Fund.” All revenues
derived by the utility shall be deposited in such fund. Such fund shall be used for the purpose of
paying the cost of building, constructing, reconstructing, repairing, enlarging, improving, or in
any other manner obtaining the facilities or any portion of them, or administering the City’s
storm drainage system.
Subd. 4. Rates and Charges.
A. Residential Equivalent Factor. Rates and charges for the use and availability of the
system shall be determined through the use of a “residential equivalent factor” (“REF”).
One REF is defined as a factor assigned to the amount of runoff generated by a typical
single family residential parcel (41% Impervious, .4 acre parcel) during a 5 year rainfall
event. For the purpose of this Section the number of REF’s of a given parcel is defined
as the ratio of the average volume of surface water runoff generated by the parcel to the
average volume of runoff generated by a typical single family residential parcel.
Appendix 1 presents the REF values per acre for any given percentage of impervious area
in a parcel. After determining the percentage of impervious area of a parcel, the parcel
shall be assigned a corresponding REF using the chart set forth on Appendix 1.
B. Storm Drain Rates: The Council, from time to time, by resolution, shall determine a
“Base Storm Drainage Rate” which shall be based upon the financial needs of the Storm
Water Drainage Utility System.
C. Calculation of Charges. Storm water drainage charges for parcels of land shall be
determined using the following formula:
Parcel’s REF per Acre x Parcel’s Acreage x
Base Storm Drainage Rate = Parcel’s Charges/Month
For the purpose of calculating storm water drainage charges on residential parcels, all
developed single family parcels shall be considered to have an acreage of .4 acre with a
41% impervious surface. For the purpose of calculating storm water drainage charges for
apartments, duplexes and any other residential parcels containing greater than one living
unit, the total REF shall be calculated for the entire unit and divided between the number
of units to equal a per unit REF. It is further assumed that the land in Delano is Type B
soil based upon the United States Geological Survey and that a five year rainfall event
generates 3.6” of rainfall in 24 hours based upon the United States Department of
Commerce Weather Bureau T.P. #40.
D. Adjustments. The Council may, by resolution, adopt policies providing for adjustment of
the storm water drainage charges for parcels based upon hydrologic data to be supplied
by the property owners, which data demonstrates a hydrologic response substantially
different from the standards used by the City to establish the REF. Such adjustments of
storm water drainage charges shall not be made retroactively.
6-22
E. Exemptions. The following land uses are exempt from storm water drainage fees:
1. Public right-of-way;
2. Vacant, unimproved land with sufficient ground cover so as not to create any
significant runoff as determined by the City Engineer; and
3. Land owned by the City.
Subd. 5. Payment of Charges.
A. Statements. Statements for storm water drainage charges shall be computed every month
and invoiced as part of the sewer and water utility billing system. Such statements shall
be due on or before the 15th day of each month stated on the bill. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner, lessee, occupant, or all of them, jointly and severally, to pay
the charges as set forth within the statement when due.
B. Recalculation of Charges. If the owner, lessee, occupant or the person responsible for
paying the storm water drainage charges questions the correctness of an invoice for such
charges, said person may have the determination of the charge recomputed by the City by
written request to the Clerk made within 60 days of mailing of the invoice in question.
C. Penalty for Late Payment. Each monthly billing for storm water drainage charges not
paid on or before the 15th day of the month stated on the billing statement shall incur a
penalty charge of 10% of the amount past due.
D. Establishment of Tax Lien. Any past due storm water drainage charge levied pursuant to
this Section shall be a lien against the subject property. Charges more than 30 days past
due, having been properly mailed to the occupant or owner of the premises, shall be
certified by the Council to the county auditor, shall specify the amount thereof, the
description of the premises, the name of the owner thereof, and the amount so certified
shall be extended upon the tax rolls against such premises in the same manner as other
taxes, and collected by the county treasurer and paid to the City along with other taxes.
SECTION 610.01. SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.
It is the purpose of this Section to recover from users of the City facilities, on an equitable basis,
the share of the City facilities’ costs attributable to such users, and to provide funds for the
operation and maintenance, debt service, replacement and improvements of the City.
Subd. 1. Charges Levied. The user charges provided for in this Section are hereby levied
and assessed upon each lot, parcel of land, building or premises having any connection with, or
discharging either directly or indirectly into the sewer system.
6-23
Subd. 2. Computation and Notice. The Council shall annually determine and fix the unit
cost for flow, BOD, TSS and any other pollutants, based upon the allocation of total Annual
Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Costs respectively, for the treatment of such sewage at
the City treatment facilities (see Appendix 2). The Council may increase or decrease such unit
costs as often and in such amounts as may reasonably be required to accomplish the purposes of
this Section. The City shall compute the amount due the City for sewer service charges and
render a statement thereof, at monthly intervals, to the owner or occupant of any premises using
the City facilities. Notwithstanding any provision of the City Code to the contrary, if any such
owner or occupant is vacating any such premises and notifies, in writing, the offices of the Clerk,
at least ten days prior to vacating the premises, as to (a) the date that the owner or occupant will
vacate the premises and the new address of the person vacating, and (b) the name and move-in
date of the new owner or occupant (if any); then the amount due for such charges shall be prorated
between the owners or occupants vacating the premises and any owners or occupants moving into
the premises. Statements for sewer service charges shall be computed every month and invoiced
as part of the sewer and water utility billing system. Such statements shall be due on or before the
15th day of each month stated on the billing statement. Failure to pay on or before the 15th day of
the month stated on the billing statement shall result in a penalty charge at 10% of the amount past
due. Each user will be notified annually by the City, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate
and that portion of the sewer service charges which are attributable to the operation, maintenance
and replacement costs. The Clerk shall, in August of each year, provide to the Council an internal
report which shall address specific areas of concern including: the need to generate sufficient
revenue through “user” charges to cover total O & M costs; the necessity of maintaining a
proportionate system of “user” charges; and the need to review the replacement account to
determine its proper funding level. Appropriate revisions will be made to the rates to maintain
proportionality and to cover total O & M cost, as reflected by the annual audit.
Subd. 3. Charges a Lien. Each charge levied pursuant to this Section shall be a lien
against the subject property. Charges more than 30 days past due, having been properly mailed to
the occupant or owner of the premises, shall be certified by the Council to the county auditor,
shall specify the amount thereof, the description of the premises, the name of the owner thereof,
and the amount so certified shall be extended upon the tax rolls against such premises in the same
manner as other taxes, and collected by the county treasurer and paid to the City along with other
taxes.
Subd. 4. Civil Action. Any charges levied pursuant to this Section which have been
properly sent to the occupant or owner and not paid, may, in addition to all other remedies
available to the City, be recovered in a civil action by the City in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
Subd. 5. Funds from Sewer Service Charges. The funds received from the collection of
the charges authorized by this Section shall be deposited as collected in the City sewer system
operating fund and shall be used for the operation, maintenance, debt service, replacement, and
improvements of the City sewer system, except that the portion of any such funds which is limited
to a particular use by applicable state or Federal rules or regulations shall be used in compliance
with such restrictions.
6-24
Subd. 6. Unit Cost Categories. The cost to be recovered pursuant to this Section and the
unit cost to be fixed by the Council shall be determined and allocated in each of the following
categories:
A. Category “A” – Debt Service for Wastewater Treatment Facilities:
This shall be the amount of the annual interest and principal cost necessary to retire the
bonds issued, debt incurred and other obligations entered into for the purpose of paying
the City’s share of all project costs. The City shall retire the debt in the sewer service
charge or through the levying of ad-valorem taxes. The Council, will establish a separate
account by which that portion of the sewer services charge is attributed to the debt
service cost.
B. Category “B” – Operation and Maintenance – City Wastewater Treatment Plant and
Sewer System:
This shall be the annual cost of operating and maintaining the City wastewater treatment
plant and sewer system facilities, including an amount for replacement costs of facility
equipment. The sewer service charge will be segregated into an account for operating
and maintenance costs and a separate account for replacement costs.
C. Category “C” – Capital Improvements
The Council shall annually establish a “Unit” Capital Improvement Charge for
improvements to the existing wastewater collection system. The Capital Improvement
Charge for a given user shall be calculated by multiplying the “Unit” Capital
Improvement Charge by the average monthly water usage.
Subd. 7. Industrial Charges.
A. The industrial user charges for operation, maintenance and replacement of the City
facilities (Category B of Subd. 6 herein) shall be determined as follows:
Unit costs for flow, BOD, TSS shall be calculated by apportioning the annual Category B
cost as determined by Council Resolution, to flow, BOD and TSS, then dividing each
cost so apportioned by the total Annual Wastewater Flow, BOD and TSS, to be received
at the Wastewater Treatment Plant in that year.
Unit Cost for Flow/ = Annual OM & R Cost for Flow Treatment x 1000
1000 Gallons Annual Wastewater Flow
Unit Cost for BOD/ = Annual OM & R Cost for BOD Treatment
1b. BOD Annual BOD to Facility
6-25
Unit Cost for TSS/ = Annual OM & R Cost for TSS Treatment
1b. TSS Annual TSS to Facility
Industrial Sewer Service Charge shall be the sum of the products obtained by multiplying
the unit costs as determined above by the user’s actual flow, BOD, TSS during the billing
period with general municipal flow strength sewage as a minimum.
B. In addition to the charges provided for herein, the City may impose a surcharge on any
industrial user based on some other pollutant loading factors which require special
treatment at the Wastewater Treatment Plant. A surcharge also may be imposed on any
industrial user which discharges any substance or pollutants, which may result in an
increase in the cost of managing the effluent of the City’s treatment works. Surcharges
shall be levied on the basis of any additional costs incurred by the City in treatment of
these pollutants.
C. Industrial users shall be billed on a monthly basis. Industrial user charges shall be
reviewed and revised quarterly based upon the measurements taken under Subdivision 9
of this Section
D. The Category B cost factor for the operation and maintenance user charge and the
surcharge cost factor shall be itemized in resolution form to accompany this Code. The
Category A cost factor, shall be determined in the same manner as for general users. The
Category C cost factor shall be determined by the Council and itemized in resolution
form to accompany this Code.
E. When required by the City, each industrial user shall install suitable measuring, sampling
and analyzing devices. The City shall not require installation of such devices where the
City determines that such industrial user has average concentrations of BOD and TSS no
greater than the concentration of such constituents in the general municipal flow and a
satisfactory method and access exist for sampling and determining the total daily sewage
flow. In such cases, the charges to those industrial users shall be based on the flow rate
as determined and on BOD and TSS loads equal to the average load of the general
municipal flow.
F. Each industrial user required by the City to install and maintain sewage monitoring
facilities shall submit to the City a monthly report of daily flow, BOD and TSS on a form
approved by the City. This report shall be used for billing purposes and shall be
submitted prior to the 15th day of the subsequent month.
G. The City shall have the right to periodically or continuously inspect the monitoring
facilities, to measure, sample and analyze the user’s flow and to analyze the samples
obtained by the industrial user. In the event of any discrepancy between the flows or
loads determined by the City and the industrial user, the values determined by the City
shall be used for billing purposes. A high strength user may appeal this procedure by
6-26
presenting information and documentation which provides a more equitable means of
determining their cost based upon flow, BOD, TSS, to the satisfaction of the City.
Subd. 8. Charges for General Users – Domestic, Commercial, Institutional and
Governmental Users.
A. The Category B (User) for general users shall be based on water meter records. The
amount of Category B revenues that the City determines is necessary for the annual
operation and maintenance of the treatment facilities, less the user fees collected from the
other contract users and industrial users, this difference divided by the total annual
volume of metered water utilized by the general users and multiplied by 1,000, shall be
the cost factor for the general user charge per 1,000 gallons of water used. The cost
factor shall take effect at the conclusion of the first quarter and shall remain in effect for
one year unless adjusted by Council action on the interim basis. The total annual volume
of metered water, utilized by the general users shall be the sum of the first and fourth
quarter water meter readings for the previous year, multiplied by two for each residential
water user plus the water meter reading during the quarter for commercial, institutional
and governmental users for the previous year. The cost factor times the volume as
determined by water meter readings in the fourth quarter of the previous year plus the
first quarter of the current year and divided by six, shall be the monthly user charge for
domestic users for the calendar months of May, June, July, August, September and
October. The cost factor times the volume as determined by the water meter readings in
the current month shall be the monthly user charge for domestic users for the calendar
months of November, December, January, February, March, and April. The cost factor
times the volume determined by water meter readings during each quarter and divided by
three shall be the monthly user charge for all commercial, industrial, and governmental
users for the following quarter. Contract users shall be charged monthly at the rate of
1/12 of the annual rate define in the contract with the City.
B. If a general user does not have a water meter, the user charge for operation and
maintenance shall be determined by the Council. The Council’s determination shall be
based on the average of the user charges for similar general users. At the Council’s
discretion, the City may require the general user to install a water meter or wastewater
flow meter for the purpose of determining wastewater volume. When so required, such
meters shall be of a type approved by the City, equipped with remote registering
recorders and located at an accessible site on the owner’s property.
C. The Category B cost factor for the operation and maintenance user charge and the
surcharge cost factor shall be itemized in resolution form to accompany this Code. The
Category A cost factor is made part of the Sewer Service Charge in accordance with
Subd. 6 of this Section and shall be itemized in resolution form to accompany this Code.
The methodology for determining the sewer service charges is outlined in the report
entitled “Delano, Minnesota, Sewer Service Charge System, Wastewater Treatment
Facilities.”
6-27
D. The rate for new users shall be established by the Council each year by resolution.
SECTION 611.01. CONNECTION FEES AND SEWER AVAILABILITY CHARGES
AND CONNECTION DEPOSIT.
Subd. 1. Connection fees shall be determined by the Council each year by resolution. The
connection fee shall be assessed to each property owner at the time of application for a
connection permit to the sewer system. This fee is also to cover all administrative costs incurred
by the City including but not limited to clerical and inspection.
Subd. 2. The applicant shall be required to make a connection deposit along with the
permit application. The connection deposit shall be refunded to the applicant after the City
completes a final on-site inspection of the sewer connection and restoration. The connection
deposit shall be established by the Council each year by resolution.
Subd. 3. The Sewer Availability Charge (SAC) shall be assessed to the applicant at the
time of application for a connection permit to the sewer system. A SAC unit is based upon 274
gallons of flow per day. Single family houses, townhouses, and duplex units each comprise one
SAC unit. Apartment buildings shall have a base charge of 0.5 SAC units for each apartment
unit, plus 0.25 units for (a) each additional sleeping room beyond the first sleeping room; and (b)
any den or study, not to exceed one total SAC unit per apartment unit. The SAC charge for
commercial and industrial facilities has been developed. This criteria is based upon the
recommendations/standards of the Minnesota Department of Health, the State Building code and
the U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare. The SAC charge for a multi-purpose
room or area in a building, should be determined based upon the use which will generate the
greatest discharge. There is a minimum charge of one SAC unit for each new building. The
sewer availability charge shall be established by the City Council by resolution In the event that
a current user is approved for a land use change, pursuant to Chapter 51, The Delano Zoning
Ordinance, the SAC corresponding to the appropriate facility designation shall be assessed.
Standard Sewer Availability Charge (SAC) Units for Various Commercial, Public and
Institutional Facilities.
Type of Facility Parameter SAC Unit
ARENAS 110 seats 1
AUDITORIUMS 110 seats 1
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE
(Fast service less than 4 hrs. per car)
(Major service more than 4 hrs. per car)
2 service bays
14 employees
1
1
BALLROOM
Facility without liquor service 825 sq. ft. 1
6-28
Facility with liquor service 590 sq. ft. 1
BANK 2400 sq. ft. 1
BANQUET ROOM
Food Catered
Food Catering with dishwashing
Food preparation and dishwashing
Food preparation, dishwashing w/liquor
2060 sq. ft.
1180 sq. ft.
825 sq. ft.
590 sq. ft.
1
1
1
1
BARBER SHOP 4 chairs 1
BEAUTY SALON 4 stations 1
BOARDING HOUSE 5 beds 1
BODY SHOP (No vehicle washing) 14 employees 1
BOWLING ALLEY
(Does not include bar or dining area) 3 alleys 1
CAMPS
Children’s camps (central toilet & Bath)
Day Camps (no meals)
Labor/Construction Camps
Resorts (housekeeping cabins)
Travel Trailer Parks
w/individual water & sewer hookup
w/central toilet & showers
sanitary dump (sites w/o hookup)
50 gal/occupant
÷ 274 gal.
10 gal/occupant
÷ 274 gal.
50 gal/occupant
÷ 274 gal.
60 gal/occupant
÷ 274 gal.
100 gal/site
÷ 274 gal.
75 gal/site
÷ 274 gal.
10 gal/site
÷ 274 gal.
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
CAR WASH (SELF-SERVICE) 1 stall 3
CAR WASH (SERVICE STATION) 6
CAR WASH (Requires specification on equipment
flow rate and cycle time) Contact MWCC for
determination
6-29
CHURCHES (for sanctuary only) Remainder use
other criteria
275 seats 1
COCKTAIL LOUNGE (No food service) 23 seats 1
DAYCARE (Number of children licensed for) 14 children 1
EXERCISE AREA/GYM 700 sq. ft. 1
GAME ROOM 590 sq. ft. 1
GENERAL OFFICE BUILDING 2400 sq. ft. Net*
floor space 1
GROUP HOME 5 beds 1
HANDBALL AND RACQUET COURTS 1 court 2
HOSPITALS (Does not include out-patient clinic) 1 bed 1
LAUNDROMATS (requires water volume for
cycle time, 8 cycles per day) 274 gals. 1
MOTELS AND HOTELS (Assume 2
persons/room) 2 rooms 1
NURSING HOME 3 beds 1
RESTAURANT (drive-in) 9 parking spaces 1
RESTAURANT (fast food) 22 seats 1
RESTAURANT 8 seats 1
RETAIL STORES 3000 sq. ft. net**
floor space 1
ROOMING HOUSES 7 beds 1
SCHOOLS (Sunday) 55 students 1
SCHOOLS (Elementary) 18 students 1
SCHOOLS (Nursery) – Number of students
6-30
licensed for 14 students 1
SCHOOLS (Secondary) 14 students 1
SERVICE STATION (Gas pumping only) 1
* Net – square footage – deduct mechanical rooms; elevator shafts, stairwells, rest rooms and
storage areas.
** Net – Deduct mechanical rooms, elevator shafts, stairwells, restrooms and unfurnished
storage areas.
SERVICE STATION (With service center) 2
SERVICE STATION (With service center and car
wash) 8
SWIMMING POOLS (Public) 900 sq. ft. pool area 1
TENNIS COURTS (Public) 1 court 2
THEATER 64 Seats 1
THEATER (Drive-In) 55 parking spaces 1
WAREHOUSES 7000 sq. ft. 1
Subd. 4. Minimum Charge. A minimum charge shall be paid by all general and industrial
users. The minimum charge shall be established by the Council each year by resolution. The
minimum charge per month shall equal all administrative and supply costs associated with the
preparation of the bills, for the year, divided by the total number of users, divided by twelve.
Subd. 5. Customer Charge. A customer charge shall be paid by all general and industrial
users of the sewer system each month. This charge shall equal the minimum charge plus the
capital improvement charge.
Subd. 6. Sanitary Sewer Trunk Charge. Trunk improvements for sanitary sewer consist
of trunk facilities and mains constructed of larger diameter pipe than is necessary to provide
minimum standard service to meet the needs of the adjacent properties. This oversizing is
provided to accommodate the cumulative sanitary sewer needs of the community at large. The
difference in the cost of the minimum standard lateral requirements for the adjacent property and
the oversizing requirements and related appurtenances for the community at large is called the
Sanitary Sewer Trunk Cost.
To cover the Sanitary Sewer Trunk Cost, all properties shall, at the time of entering into a
development agreement for the property or the time of building permit application, whichever
occurs first, pay a sanitary sewer trunk charge on a per unit basis as specified by Council
resolution. There is a minimum sanitary sewer trunk charge of one (1) unit for each new
building. The total units to be charged to each parcel of property shall be the same as the number
of SAC units for such parcel as specified in Delano City Code Section 611.01, Subd. 3.
Subd. 7. Commercial and Industrial Infrastructure Fee Policy. The City hereby adopts
the following policy regarding collection of infrastructure fees for new and existing commercial
and industrial properties pursuant to the authority in Minnesota Statute § 444.075:
A. All infrastructures fees shall continue to be calculated at the time of issuance of a
building permit for any construction project, unless otherwise specified in a Cityapproved
development agreement.
B. Applicants for a building permit in any commercial or industrial zoning district may
select a modified payment method for SAC, WAC, and Sewer Trunk charges. The
modified payment method shall be as follows:
1. The minimum SAC, WAC, and Sewer Trunk fees shall be paid at time of building
permit issuance equal to thirty percent of the total SAC, WAC, and Trunk fees or
current charge for one unit of SAC, WAC, and Trunk fees, which ever is greater.
2. The remaining amount of SAC, WAC and Trunk fees shall be payable to the city
in equal annual installments due on July 1 of each year for no more than five
successive years, plus interest at an annual amount specified by the Council.
C. Applicants for a building permit in the Central Business District redevelopment area (as
established by the Delano Comprehensive Plan) may select a modified payment method
for SAC, WAC, and Sewer Trunk charges. The modified payment method shall be as
follows:
3. The minimum SAC, WAC, and Trunk fees shall be paid at time of building
permit issuance equal to one unit of SAC, WAC, and Trunk fees.
4. The remaining amount of SAC, WAC and Trunk fees shall be payable to the City
in equal annual installments due on July 1 of each year for no more than 10
successive years, plus interest at an annual amount specified by the Council.
D. SAC, WAC, and Trunk fees, plus accrued interested, not paid when due and delinquent
as of August 1 of any calendar year may be certified to the County Auditor for collection
with taxes.
SECTION 612.01. POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTIONS.
Subd. 1. The Building Official or other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of
inspection observations, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the
community system in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
Subd. 2. The Building Official or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain
information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source
of discharge to the sewer collection system.
Subd. 3. The Building Official or other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the
wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said
easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the
private property involved.
SECTION 613.01. WATER CONNECTION.
Subd. 1. Where the City water system is available to any parcel of property or building
within the boundaries of the City, the owner of such parcel of property or building shall make
connection to the City water system. If connection is not made pursuant to this Subdivision, the
City may issue written notice to connect within 90 days. Said notice shall be served on the
owner or an authorized agent of the owner or may be sent by mail to the owner’s last known
address. If the owner cannot be reached by mail so addressed, the City may serve the written
notice upon the occupant. Pursuant to the authority conferred by Minnesota Statute § 444.075
and subject to the limitations under Minnesota Statute § 444.25, in addition to all other charges
for tapping into or connecting with the municipal water system, including fees for inspection of
the connection, right-of-way permit and other fees established by City Code provisions or
resolutions, no connection shall be installed, or made, with or into any municipal water system of
the City, either directly or indirectly, from any lot or tract of land unless the Clerk shall have
certified as follows:
A. That the lot or tract of land to be served has been assessed for its proportionate cost of
construction of the main with which the connection is made;
B. If no assessment has been levied for such construction cost, that proceedings for the
levying of such assessment have been or will be commenced within a specified time
determined by the Clerk; or
C. That the cost of construction for the main has been paid by the developer or builder
platting the lot or tract of land.
Subd. 2. Additional Connection Charges. If none of the above conditions can be
certified by the Clerk, no connection to any water main shall be made unless the applicant shall
pay an additional connection fee (hereinafter “Additional Connection Charge”). The Additional
Connection Charge shall be equal to the average assessment levied against like kind property for
a similar public improvement constructed and installed by the City provided, however, for a
connection to a residential property, the Additional Connection Charge shall be equal to the
average assessment levied against residential parcels of one-half acre or less. The average
assessment shall be determined by taking the total assessment for a similar public improvement
and dividing that total by the total number of properties assessed, such determination having
regard for construction costs current on the date of such determination. Whenever more than one
tap or other connection is requested for service to any lot or tract or whenever any tap or
connection is requested for a lot or tract which has previously been part of a lot or tract for which
a connection charge has already been imposed pursuant to this Subdivision, an Additional
Connection Charge shall be imposed for each tap or connection requests.
A. Notice and Hearing. Before the City makes a final determination of the Additional
Connection Charge under this Section, the Clerk shall cause a written notice to be sent to
the property owner affected stating the amount of the proposed Additional Connection
Charge and the basis of its calculation. The notice shall also state that the owner may,
within 10 days of receipt of the notice, demand a hearing on the matter. If the owner
requests a hearing within that time, a hearing shall be held on the matter by the Council
within a reasonable time after the date on which the request is made. The notice shall
further state that the owner may request that the charges be levied as an assessment
against the lot or tract to be served and an application for such request shall be provided
with the notice. The application shall be made within 10 days of receipt of the notice
referred to above if no hearing is requested, or if a hearing is requested, within 10 days
following the hearing. If as a result of the hearing, the Council finds that the proposed
Additional Connection Charge complies with the requirements of this Subdivision, it
shall so determine. If it determines that the Charge is in excess of an amount that would
have been assessed had the property been assessed, it shall make a determination of the
proper amount of the fee with the limits specified in this Subdivision. No connection
shall be made without payment of the Additional Connection Charge unless the City is to
be assessed pursuant to Subdivision 5. Upon application, the owner may waiver his right
to notice, hearing and appeal.
B. Assessments. The Council may cause the Additional Connection Charge to be levied as
an assessment against the lot or tract to be served. The assessment, when levied, shall
bear interest at the rate for local improvements and shall be certified to the auditor of the
county in which the property is located and shall be collected and remitted to the City in
the same manner as assessments for local improvements. The Council may, by
resolution, provide that the assessment be spread over a term of up to 10 years upon
request of the property owner or agent.
C. Liability for Charge and Certification to County Auditor. All Additional Connection
Charges imposed pursuant to this Section, including those assessed pursuant to
Subdivision 5, shall be a charge against the owner of the lot or tract of land to be served.
The Clerk shall certify all unpaid charges to the County Auditor with taxes against the lot
or tract to be served for collection as other taxes are collected.
Subd. 4. Separate Fund. Any sum collected and received by the City under this
Subdivision shall be placed in a separate fund and shall be used first to pay the normal,
reasonable and current costs of operating and maintaining the municipal water system. Net
revenues from time to time received in excess of such costs may be used as otherwise provided
for by law.
Subd. 5 Where a property or building in the City has connected to the City water system
or where the City water system is available to a property or building, no owner or occupant of
said property or building or any other person shall construct or make use of any private water
supply or well on said property or building, except for such purposes as may be allowed by the
Council. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an existing well may be used only for lawn irrigation
with proper backflow prevention per the Minnesota State Building Code
Subd. 6. All connections to the municipal water system shall be in accordance with the
Minnesota State Building Code and inspected by the Building Official or his or her designee.
Subd. 7. The Commission shall prepare, administer, and enforce rules and regulations
governing fees and rates of the City water system.
SECTION 614.01. ASSESSMENT OF CERTAIN SEWER, WATER AND
ELECTRICAL FEES.
Subd. 1 Authority to Assess. Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes § 444.075 and Minnesota
Statute Chapter 429, the City may assess the following fees against a benefited property:
A. Sanitary Sewer: connection fee, sewer availability charge, trunk fee, and sewer
connection inspection fee.
B. Water fees: water availability charge, water main connection fee, water trunk fee, water
connection inspection fee and water meter fee.
C. Electric service fees: electric service line fee, electric service territorial fee and electric
capital recovery fee.
(All such sewer, water and electrical fees are hereafter referred to as the “Utility Fees.”)
Subd. 2. Assessment Procedure. The City will consider assessing the Utility Fees for
payment over a period of time not to exceed 10 years, but only where the City receives, prior to
Council consideration of an assessment resolution, a petition and assessment agreement, signed
by all owners of the property to be assessed, which contains the following:
A. A request by all such property owners for the City to assess the Utility Fees.
B. Identification of the amount of all Utility Fees to be assessed.
C. A waiver by all such property owners of all procedural and substantive rights afforded
them by Minnesota Statute chapter 429 or otherwise, including but not limited to a
waiver of any rights (i) to require the City to conduct a feasibility study, (ii) to receive
notice of any kind, (iii) to require the City to conduct a public hearing, and (iv) to object
to the assessment amount.
D. A waiver of any rights to appeal or contest the assessment.
E. Approval from the Commission.
Upon receipt of the appropriate petition and assessment agreement, the City of Delano may
assess such property for the Utility Fees by Council resolution and certify such amount to the
Wright County Auditor.
Subd. 3. Authority to Assess by Other Means. Nothing in this Section 614.01 shall
prevent the City from collecting or assessing the Utility Fees in any other manner authorized by
law.
SECTION 615.01 WATER DEFICIENCY AND SHUTOFF; DISCLAIMER.
The City and Commission are not liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of water to
customers whether occasioned by shutting the water off for the purpose of making repairs or
connections or by any other cause whatsoever. In case of fire, or alarm of fire, water may be
shutoff to ensure a supply for firefighting. In making repairs or construction of new work, water
may be shutoff at any time and kept off so long as may be necessary.
SECTION 616.01 REPAIR OF LEAKS AND EQUIPMENT.
It is the responsibility of the consumer or owner to maintain the service pipe from the main into
the house or other building, including, but not limited to, the stand pipe or curb stop in all
equipment associated with the service line, stand pipe or curb stop. In case of failure upon the
part of any consumer or owner to repair any leak or any service line, stand pipe or curb stop,
within twenty-four (24) hours after oral or written notice has been given the owner or occupant
of the premises, the water may be shutoff and will not be turned on until a reconnection charge
has been paid and the water service has been repaired. When the waste of water is great or when
damage is likely to result from the leak, the water will be turned off if the repair is not proceeded
with immediately. Following notice as provided by this Section, at the sole option of the
Commission, the Commission may repair the leak and the service pipe, the stand pipe or curb
stop and all equipment associated with the service line, stand pipe curb stop and assess the cost
for the repair against the property benefited. The cost to be so assessed may include, but are not
limited to, materials, labor and professional fees and expenses incurred in the repair.
SECTION 617.01 ABANDONED SERVICE; DISCONNECTION FEES; IMPROPER
DISCONNECTION.
All service installations connected to the water system that have been abandoned, provide no
present service, or for any reason are useless for further service, shall be disconnected at the
main. The Commission shall perform the actual excavation and disconnection, and the owner
shall be responsible for all such Commission costs. In addition, the Commission may assess all
such costs against the subject property. The pipe and appurtenances removed from the street
right-of-way shall become the property of the City. In the event it is desired to reconnect water
service, a new permit shall be obtained and the regular connection charge shall be made as if this
were a new service. It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow any service pipe to be
hammered or squeezed together at the ends to stop the flow of water, or to improperly remove a
pipe from the main. Any such improper work shall be corrected by the Commission, and the
cost incurred shall be the responsibility of the person causing or allowing that improper work to
be performed, and any such City cost may be assessed against the subject property.
SECTION 618.01 PRIVATE WATER SUPPLIES; CONNECTION PROHIBITED.
No water pipe of the City water system shall be connected with any pump, well, pipe, tank or
any device that is connected with any other source of water supply, and when this type of
connection is found, the City shall notify the owner or occupant to disconnect the same and, if
not immediately done, the City water shall be turned off. Before any new connections to the
City’s system are permitted, the City shall ascertain that no cross connections will exist when the
new connection is made. When a building is connected to City water, the private water supply
shall be permanently disconnected.
SECTION 619.01 SHORTGAGES; RESTRICTED USES AND HOURS.
Whenever the City shall determine that a shortage of water threatens the City, it may limit the
times and hours during which water may be used from the City water system for lawn and
garden sprinkling, irrigation, car wash, air conditioning and other uses, or any of them. The City
Administrator or his or her designee shall have the authority to declare the terms and conditions
of the water use restrictions. The restriction shall be confirmed by the Council at the next
regularly scheduled meeting thereof. It is unlawful for any water consumer to cause or permit
water to be used in violation of this determination after public announcement thereof has been
made through the City’s web site, www.delano.mn.us, and the City’s official newspaper.
SECTION 620.01 PRIVATE FIRE CONNECTIONS.
Owners of structures with self-contained fire protection systems may not connect to the street
mains or hydrants, for use in case of fire, unless issued a permit therefor from the Fire Chief or
City at the owner’s installation expense, and upon other terms and conditions established by the
Fire Chief or Commission.
SECTION 621.01 OPENING HYDRANTS RESTRICTED.
It is unlawful for any person, other than members of the fire department or other persons duly
authorized by the City or Commission, in the pursuance of lawful purpose, to open any fire
hydrant or attempt to draw water from the same or in any manner interfere therewith. It is also
unlawful for any person to deliver or suffer to be delivered to any person any hydrant key or
wrench, except to City-authorized persons for the purposes strictly pertaining to there lawful use.
SECTION 622.01 WATER METERS.
A. All water meters and fittings shall be installed, maintained, and removed by the property
owner at the property owner’s expense and in all respects controlled by the Commission.,
Any remote-type meter in need of replacement by reason of normal usage shall be
furnished by the Commission; thereafter, the Commission shall own that meter. Water
meter remote wire shall be installed by the property owner at the property owner’s
expense.
B. All water utilities service shall be supplied through a meter which shall accurately
measure the amount thereof supplied to any property owner. The property owner shall
supply a safe and proper place for the installation of such meters. Meters shall be tested
for accuracy by the Commission upon request of any consumer who believes his meter to
be inaccurate. If, upon tests, it appears that such meter overruns to the extent of three
percent or more, the Commission shall pay the costs of such tests and shall make a refund
for overcharges collected since the known date of accuracy but for not longer than 6
months, on the basis of the extent of the inaccuracy found to exist at the time of the test.
If, upon test it appears that such meter is slow to the extent of 3 percent or more, the
consumer shall pay for undercharges since the last known date of accuracy but for not
longer than six months on the basis of the extent of the inaccuracy found to exist at the
time of the test. If, when any meter is tested upon the demand of a consumer, it is found
to be accurate, or varies less than three percent, the consumer shall pay the reasonable
cost of such testing.
SECTION 623.01 STATE BUILDING CODE; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
All piping, connections and appurtenances shall be installed and performed strictly in accordance
with the Minnesota State Building Code. Failure to install or maintain the same in accordance
therewith, or failure to have or permit required inspections shall, upon discovery by the City, be
an additional ground for termination of water service to any proper owner.
SECTION 624.01 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
All municipal utilities may be shutoff or discontinued whenever it is found:
A. The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any person working on any connection
with the municipal utility systems, has violated any requirement of this Code relative
thereto;
B. Any charge for a municipal utility service, or any other financial obligation imposed on
the present owner or occupant of the premises served, is unpaid after due notice thereof;
C. There is fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant in connection with any
application for service or delivery or charges therefor.
SECTION 625.01. COLD WEATHER RULE.
Subd. 1. Application; Notice to Residential Property Owners/Occupants.
A. The City and Commission shall not disconnect the utility service of a property
owner/occupant during the period between October 15 and April 15 if the disconnection
affects the primary heat source for the residential unit when the following conditions are
met:
1. The property owner/occupant has declared inability to pay on forms provided by
the Commission. For the purposes of this Section, a property owner/occupant that
is receiving energy assistance is deemed to have demonstrated an inability to pay;
2. The household income of the property owner/occupant is less than 50% of the
State median income;
3. Verification of the income may be conducted by the Commission, unless the
customer is automatically eligible for protection against disconnection as a
recipient of any form of public assistance, including energy assistance that uses
income eligibility in an amount at or below the income eligibility in Subparagraph
2 above;
4. A property owner/occupant whose account is current for the billing period
immediately prior to October 15 or who, at any time, enters into a payment
schedule that considers the financial resources of the household and is reasonably
current with payment under the schedule; and
5. The property owner/occupant receives referrals to energy assistance programs,
weatherization, conservation, or other programs likely to reduce the property
owner/occupant’s energy bills.
B. The Commission shall, between August 15 and October 15 of each year, notify all
residential property owners/occupants of the provisions of this Section.
Subd. 2. Notice to Residential Property Owners/Occupants Facing Disconnection.
A. Before disconnecting service to a residential property owner/occupant during the period
between October 15 and April 15, the Commission must provide the following
information to a property owner/occupant:
1. A notice of proposed disconnection;
2. A statement explaining the property owner/occupant’s rights and responsibilities;
3. A list of local energy assistance providers;
4. Forms on which to declare inability to pay; and
5. A statement explaining available time payment plans and other opportunities to
secure continued utility service.
Subd. 3. Restrictions on Disconnection.
A. If a residential property owner/occupant is involuntarily disconnected between October
15 and April 15 for failure to comply with the provisions of Subdivision 1, the
disconnection shall not occur on a Friday or on a day before a holiday. Further, the
disconnection shall not occur until at least 20 days after the notice required in
Subdivision 2 has been mailed to the property owner/occupant or 15 days after the notice
has been personally delivered to the property owner/occupant.
B. If a property owner/occupant does not respond to a disconnection notice, the property
owner/occupant must not be disconnected until the Commission investigates whether the
residential unit is actually occupied. If the unit is found to be occupied, the Commission
must immediately inform the property owner/occupant of the provisions of this Section.
If the unit is unoccupied, the Commission must give seven days notice of the proposed
disconnection to the local energy assistance provider before making the disconnection.
SECTION 626.01. PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY HAZARD.
Violations of this Chapter are hereby declared to be a public health and safety hazard.
APPENDIX 1
REF vs. PERCENTAGE IMPERVIOUS CALCULATION CHART
% IMPER CN RUNOFF
(Inches)
REF/.4 ACRE REF/ACRE
0 60 0.58 0.40 1.00
1 60 0.58 0.40 1.00
2 61 0.63 0.44 1.10
3 61 0.63 0.44 1.10
4 62 0.67 0.47 1.18
5 62 0.67 0.47 1.18
6 63 0.72 0.50 1.25
7 63 0.72 0.50 1.25
8 63 0.72 0.50 1.25
9 64 0.76 0.53 1.33
10 64 0.76 0.53 1.33
11 65 0.81 0.56 1.40
12 65 0.81 0.56 1.40
13 65 0.81 0.56 1.40
14 66 0.86 0.60 1.50
15 66 0.86 0.60 1.50
16 67 0.91 0.63 1.58
17 67 0.91 0.63 1.58
18 67 0.91 0.63 1.58
19 68 0.97 0.67 1.68
20 68 0.97 0.67 1.68
21 68 0.97 0.67 1.68
22 69 1.02 0.71 1.78
23 69 1.02 0.71 1.78
24 70 1.07 0.74 1.85
25 70 1.07 0.74 1.85
26 70 1.07 0.74 1.85
27 71 1.13 0.78 1.95
28 71 1.13 0.78 1.95
29 72 1.19 0.83 2.08
30 72 1.19 0.83 2.08
31 72 1.19 0.83 2.08
32 73 1.25 0.87 2.18
33 73 1.25 0.87 2.18
34 74 1.31 0.91 2.28
35 74 1.31 0.91 2.28
36 74 1.31 0.91 2.28
37 75 1.37 0.95 2.37
38 75 1.37 0.95 2.37
39 75 1.37 0.95 2.37
40 76 1.44 1.00 2.50
41 76 1.44 1.00 2.50
42 76 1.44 1.00 2.50
43 77 1.51 1.05 2.63
44 77 1.51 1.05 2.63
45 78 1.58 1.10 2.75
46 78 1.58 1.10 2.75
47 78 1.58 1.10 2.75
48 79 1.65 1.15 2.87
49 79 1.65 1.15 2.87
50 79 1.65 1.15 2.87
51 80 1.72 1.19 2.98
52 80 1.72 1.19 2.98
53 81 1.80 1.25 3.13
54 81 1.80 1.25 3.13
55 81 1.80 1.25 3.13
56 82 1.88 1.31 3.28
57 82 1.88 1.31 3.28
58 82 1.88 1.31 3.28
59 83 1.95 1.35 3.38
60 83 1.95 1.35 3.38
61 84 2.03 1.41 3.52
62 84 2.03 1.41 3.52
63 84 2.03 1.41 3.52
64 85 2.11 1.47 3.68
65 85 2.11 1.47 3.68
66 85 2.11 1.47 3.68
67 86 2.20 1.53 3.83
68 86 2.20 1.53 3.83
69 87 2.28 1.58 3.95
70 87 2.28 1.58 3.95
71 88 2.37 1.65 4.12
72 88 2.37 1.65 4.12
73 88 2.37 1.65 4.12
74 89 2.45 1.70 4.25
75 89 2.45 1.70 4.25
76 89 2.45 1.70 4.25
77 90 2.54 1.76 4.40
78 90 2.54 1.76 4.40
79 90 2.54 1.76 4.40
80 90 2.54 1.76 4.40
81 91 2.64 1.83 4.58
82 91 2.64 1.83 4.58
83 91 2.64 1.83 4.58
84 92 2.74 1.90 4.75
85 92 2.74 1.90 4.75
86 93 2.84 1.90 4.93
87 93 2.84 1.97 4.93
88 94 2.94 2.04 5.10
89 94 2.94 2.04 5.10
90 95 3.04 2.11 5.28
91 95 3.04 2.11 5.28
92 96 3.15 2.19 5.48
93 96 3.15 2.19 5.48
94 97 3.26 2.26 5.65
95 97 3.26 2.26 5.65
96 98 3.38 2.35 5.88
97 98 3.38 2.35 5.88
98 99 3.49 2.35 6.05
99 99 3.49 2.42 6.05
100 100 3.60 2.50 6.25
P:\Home\1500.309 -- Delano City Code\CHAPTER 6 SEWER AND WATER\CHAPTER 6 (clean) 2009 02 09.doc
DRAFT 04-02-2009
CHAPTER 7 TRAFFIC AND PARKING........................................................................
SECTION 701.01 STATE STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.............................. 7-2
SECTION 702.01 DEFINITIONS......................................................................................... 7-2
SECTION 70301 TURNS .................................................................................................... 7-2
SECTION 704.01 THROUGH STREETS; ONE-WAY STREETS..................................... 7-2
SECTION 705.01 TRUCK ROUTES ................................................................................... 7-2
SECTION 706.01 SEASONAL WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS ……............... ………… …7-3
SECTION 707.01 PARKING REGULATIONS................................................................... 7-3
SECTION 708.01 UNATTENDED CHILD IN MOTOR VEHICLE .................................. 7-5
SECTION 709.01 VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON SIDEWALKS....................................... 7-5
SECTION 710.01 CITY LOTS AND RAMPS…………………………………………… 7-5
SECTION 711.01 TRUCK ZONES, LOADING ZONES, ETC. ......................................... 7-5
SECTION 712.01 SNOW SEASON PARKING .................................................................. 7-6
SECTION 713.01 SNOW ACCUMULATION………………………………………….. 7-6
SECTION 714.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF SAFETY ZONES, LANES OF TRAFFIC ...... 7-6
SECTION 715.01 REMOVING KEYS................................................................................. 7-6
SECTION 716.01 OBSTRUCTION IN STREETS…………………………………… …7-7
SECTION 717.01 CURB AND GUTTER, STREET, AND SIDEWALK PAINTING OR…
COLORING……….…………………………………………………… 7-7
SECTION 718.01 SNOW AND ICE ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS....................................... 7-8
SECTION 719.01 SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR ..................................... 7-8
SECTION 720.01 VEHICLE REPAIR ON STREET........................................................... 7-9
SECTION 721.01 EXHIBITION DRIVING PROHIBITED................................................ 7-9
SECTION 722.01 DRIVING THROUGH PRIVATE PROPERTY, TO AVOID TRAFFIC
CONTROLLING DEVICE ..................................................................... 7-9
SECTION 723.01 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES................................................................... 7-9
SECTION 724.01 FLOOD CONTROL DIKE.................................................................... 7-11
SECTION 725.01 RESOLUTIONS .................................................................................... 7-11
SECTION 726.01 SNOWMOBILES .................................................................................. 7-11
SECTION 727.01 BICYCLE WAYS.................................................................................. 7-14
SECTION 728.01 USE OF BICYCLE, ROLLER-SKATES AND IN-LINE SKATES, ..........
SKATEBOARDS ON THE LAKE; DOWNTOWN BUSINESS………….
DISTRICT…………………………………………………………… 7-15
SECTION 729.01 OPERATION OF MOTORIZED FOOT SCOOTERS, ELECTRONIC
PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES, MOTORIZED
BICYCLES, AND NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLES AND
MEDIUM-SPEED ELECTRIC VEHICLES ……………………….. . 7-16
SECTION 730.01 MOTORIZED GOLF CARTS……………………………………… 7-18
7-2
CHAPTER 7
TRAFFIC AND PARKING
SECTION 701.01 STATE STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE. Except as
otherwise provided in this Code, Minnesota Statutes Chapter 169 (commonly referred to as the
Highway Traffic Regulation Act) as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby incorporated
herein and adopted by reference. The penalty for violation of provisions of Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time, are adopted by reference in this Section
and shall be identical with the penalty provided for in that Chapter for the same offense.
SECTION 702.01. DEFINITIONS. Any term used in this Chapter and defined in Minnesota
Statutes, Section 169.01 has the meaning given it by that Section.
SECTION 703.01. TURNS. The Council, by resolution, may, whenever necessary to
preserve a free flow of traffic or to prevent accidents:
A. Designate any intersection as one where the turning of vehicles to the left or to the right,
or both, is to be restricted at all times or during specified hours. The Public Works
Director shall mark, by appropriate signs, any intersections so designated. No
intersection on a trunk highway shall be so designated until the consent to such
designation of the appropriate state official is first obtained.
B. Designate any intersection or street as one where U-turns of vehicles is prohibited. The
Public Works Director shall mark, by appropriate signs, any intersection or street so
designated.
No person shall turn a vehicle contrary to the directions on such signs.
SECTION 704.01. THROUGH STREETS; ONE-WAY STREETS. The Council, by
resolution, my designate any street or portion of a street as a through highway or a one-way
roadway where necessary to preserve the free flow of traffic or to prevent accidents. The Public
Works Director or his/her designee shall post appropriate signs at the entrance to such streets.
No trunk highway shall be so designated unless the consent to such designation of the
appropriate state official is first secured.
SECTION 705.01. TRUCK ROUTES.
Subd. 1. No person shall operate a vehicle with a gross weight in excess of five tons in
through traffic upon any street except those which have been designated and sign-posted as truck
routes. A map showing all current truck routes in the City shall be kept and made available by
the Clerk. For the purpose of this Chapter, “through traffic” means traffic originating without
the City and with a designation without the City, as distinguished from “local traffic” which
means traffic either originating or having destination within the City.
Subd. 2. All truck routes in the City shall be designated by appropriate signs.
7-3
SECTION 706.01. SEASONAL WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS. The Council may prohibit
operation of vehicles upon any street within the City or establish weight restrictions on vehicles
to be operated on such street whenever the street, by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other
conditions, will be seriously damaged or destroyed, unless the use of vehicles on the street is
prohibited or the permissible weight thereof reduced. The City shall maintain appropriate signs
indicating the prohibition or restriction at each end of that portion of the street so affected. No
person shall operate a vehicle on a posted street in violation of the terms of this Section.
SECTION 707.01. PARKING REGULATIONS.
Subd. 1. Parallel Parking. Except where angle parking is specifically allowed and
indicated by curb marking or sign posting or both, each vehicle stopped or parked upon a twoway
road where there is an adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right hand wheels
of the vehicle parallel with and within 12 inches of the right hand curb; and where painted
markings occur on the curb or the street, such vehicles shall be within such front and rear
markings provided that upon a one-way roadway all vehicles shall be so parked except that the
left hand vehicle may be parallel with and within 12 inches from the left hand curb, but the front
of the vehicle in any event and with respect to the remainder of the vehicle shall be in the
direction of the flow of traffic upon such one-way street.
Subd. 2. Angle Parking. Where angle parking has been established on a public street or in
a public or private parking lot and is allowed as shown by curb marking or a sign posting or both,
each vehicle stopped or parked shall be at angle of approximately 45 to 60 degrees with the front
wheel touching the curb and within any parking lines painted on the curb or street provided that
the front wheel not touching the curb shall be the portion of the vehicle furthest in the direction
of the one-way traffic.
Subd. 3. No Parking, Stopping or Standing Zones. The Council may, by resolution,
designate certain streets or portions of streets as no parking, stopping or standing zones, and may
limit the hours in which the restrictions apply. The Public Works Director or his/her designee
shall mark by appropriate signs each zone so designated. Except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a law enforcement officer or a
traffic control device, no person shall stop or park a vehicle in an established no stopping or
standing zone when stopping or standing is prohibited. No vehicle shall be parked in a no
parking zone during hours when parking is prohibited except that a vehicle may be parked
temporarily in such zone for the purpose of forming a funeral procession and a truck may be
parked temporarily between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any business day for the
purpose of loading or unloading where access to the premises is not available otherwise.
Trailers, including, but not limited to, boat and construction trailers, shall not be parked on any
street while unattached to a vehicle or unattended.
Subd. 4. Time Limit Parking Zone. The Council may, by resolution, designate certain
areas where the right to park is limited during hours specified. The Public Works Director or
his/her designee shall mark, by appropriate signs, each zone so designated. During the hours
7-4
specified on any sign, no person shall park a vehicle in any limited parking zone for a longer
period than is so specified.
Subd. 5. Impoundment. Any law enforcement officer may remove a vehicle from a street
to a garage or other place of safety when the vehicle is left unattended and constitutes an
obstruction to traffic, hinders snow removal or street improvement or maintenance operations, or
is abandoned. Such vehicles shall not be released until the fees for towing and storage are paid
in addition to any fine imposed for violation of this Section.
Subd. 6. Owner Responsibility. The presence of any motor vehicle on any street in
violation of this Section is prima facie evidence that the registered owner of the vehicle
committed or authorized the commission of the violation.
Subd. 7. Parking for Purpose of Advertising or Sale Prohibited.
A. It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on any street for the purpose of advertising
that vehicle for sale, advertising for sale or selling merchandise, or advertising any
merchandise for sale at a forthcoming event or at another location.
B. The Council may, in its discretion, waive the enforcement of this Section for a particular
event.
Subd. 8 Physically Handicapped Parking.
Statutory parking privileges for the physically handicapped shall be strictly observed and
enforced. All handicapped parking signs are to be permanently affixed. The
handicapped parking sign shall be approximately 18” x 24,” or larger, with a blue
background and white letters bearing the handicapped insignia and shall state
“HANDICAPPED PARKING – STATE PERMIT REQUIRED – POLICE WILL
ENFORCE.” Police officers are authorized to tag vehicles on either private or public
property in violation of such statutory privileges. Police officers are also authorized to
tag any vehicles blocking assess to handicapped parking spaces even though they are not
actually parking the space.
Subd. 9. Parking On Private Property; Consent Required. It is unlawful to park or
abandon a motor vehicle on the property of another, or upon an area developed as an off-street
parking facility, without the consent of the owner, lessee or person in charge of that property or
facility.
Subd. 10. Fire Lane-Rush Hour. It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave
standing, a motor vehicle:
A. In a sign posted fire lane at any time; or
B. In lanes where, and during those hours when, parking is prohibited to accommodate
heavy traffic during morning and afternoon rush hours.
7-5
SECTION 708.01 UNATTENDED CHILD IN MOTOR VEHICLE.
A. A parent, legal guardian, or caretaker must not cause or permit a child under the age of 5
who is under the person’s care to remain unattended in a motor vehicle if:
1. The motor vehicle containing the child is out of the direct view of the parent, legal
guardian, or caretaker;
2. Weather conditions present a threat to the child because of dangerous
temperatures, air quality or lack of ventilation;
3. The child’s physical environment within the motor vehicle constitutes an
unreasonable threat to the child’s health, safety, or welfare;
4. The vehicle is left in a condition that is readily operable, such as with the keys in
the ignition or unlocked ignition; or
5. There are other factors that unreasonably threaten the child’s health, safety, or
welfare.
B. For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
1. “Caretaker” means anyone age 16 or older who assumes or has responsibility for
the welfare of the child left in the motor vehicle.
2. “Unattended” means left in a vehicle without a person over the age of 12.
SECTION 709.01. VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON SIDEWALKS. Except for crossing at
an alley, driveway, building or other authorized crossing, a person must not ride or drive a motor
vehicle upon any sidewalk, boulevard or portion of a right-of-way other than the driving surface.
SECTION 710.01. CITY LOTS AND RAMPS. In City owned parking lots and
ramps, the Council may limit the sizes and types of motor vehicles to be parked thereon, hours of
parking and prescribed method of parking, provided that the limitations and restrictions are
marked or sign posted thereon. It is unlawful to park or leave standing any vehicle in any City
owned parking lot or ramp contrary to the restrictions or limitations marked or sign posted
therein.
SECTION 711.01. TRUCK ZONES, LOADING ZONES, ETC.
Subd. 1. Establishment and Hours. The council may, by resolution, establish spaces in
streets as loading zones or truck zones. Loading zone or truck zone hours shall be between 7:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays, New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day, or such other times as the Council may specify in
the resolution establishing the zone. The Public Works Director shall mark each such zone by
appropriate signs.
7-6
Subd. 2. Truck Zone Regulations. During truck zone hours, no person shall stop, stand,
or park any vehicle except a truck in a truck zone. No person shall stop, stand or park a truck in
a truck zone during truck zone hours except to receive or discharge passengers or freight and
then only for a period no longer than is necessary for the purpose.
Subd. 3. Loading Zone Regulations. During loading zone hours, no person shall stop,
stand or park any vehicle in a loading zone except to receive or discharge passengers or freight
and then only for a period no longer than is necessary for the purpose. No person shall occupy a
loading zone with a vehicle other than a truck for more than five minutes during such hours.
Subd. 4. Procedure and Cost. Any person desiring the establishment of a loading zone or
truck zone shall make written application therefor to the Council. If the Council grants the
request, the Clerk shall bill the applicant for the estimated cost of placing signs and of painting
the curb. When the amount is paid to the Clerk, the Public Works Director shall install the
necessary signs and paint the curb.
Subd. 5. Semi-Trailers. No person shall allow a semi-trailer to stand or be parked
unattached from a tractor unit on any street in the City except in an emergency in order to change
tractors.
Subd. 6. Truck Parking. No vehicles with a gross weight of more than five tons shall
park on any City street in excess of two hours.
SECTION 712.01. SNOW SEASON PARKING. No person shall park any motor vehicle,
vehicle, machinery or implement on any street, avenue or alley within the boundaries of the City,
except for bona fide emergencies, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. from November
1 through April 1 of the following year.
SECTION 713.01. SNOW ACCUMULATION. It is unlawful for any person to park a
vehicle on any street after continuous or intermittent snow fall during which there has been an
accumulation of two inches or more of snow on any street until the same has been plowed or
removed from the full width of the roadway. This Section does not apply to the area zoned
“Central Business District” in the Delano Land Use and Zoning Code.
SECTION 714.01. ESTABLISHMENT OF SAFETY ZONES, LANES OF TRAFFIC.
To assist in the direction and control of traffic, to improve safe driving conditions at any
intersection or dangerous location, and to warn pedestrians or drivers of motor vehicles of
dangerous conditions or hazards, the Council may establish safety zones, lanes of traffic, and
stop intersections, and may order installation by the Public Works Director or his/her designee of
stop signs, yield signs, warning signs, signals, pavement markings or other devices. No
regulation may be established on a trunk highway unless the consent of the appropriate state
official is first secured.
SECTION 715.01. REMOVING KEYS. No person shall leave a motor vehicle, except a
truck which is engaged in loading or unloading, unattended on any street, used car lot, or
7-7
unattended parking lot without first stopping the engine and removing all ignition keys from the
vehicle. Whenever any designated law enforcement agent finds any motor vehicle standing in
violation of this provision, he shall remove the keys from the vehicle and deliver them to the
Clerk or the Clerk’s designee.
SECTION 716.01 OBSTRUCTION IN STREETS.
A. Obstructions. It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or erect any fence, or other
obstructions upon, over, across or under any street without first obtaining a written permit
from the Council, and then only in compliance in all respects with the terms and
conditions of that permit
B. Fires. It is unlawful for any person to ignite, build or maintain a fire upon a street.
C. Dumping in Streets. It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit in any street any
nails, dirt, glass or cans, discarded cloth or clothing, metal scraps, garbage, leaves, grass
or tree limbs, paper or paper products, shreds or rubbish, oil, grease or other petroleum
products, or to empty any water containing salt or other injurious chemical thereon. It is
a violation of this Section to haul any material of this type in an inadequately enclosed or
covered container, thereby permitting the same to fall upon streets. It is also a violation
of this Section to place or store any building materials or waste resulting from building
construction or demolition on any street without first having obtained a written permit
from the Council.
D. Placing Snow or Ice in a Roadway or on Public Sidewalk. It is unlawful for any person
not acting under specific authority from or contract with the City, to remove snow or ice
from private property and place the same in any roadway or public sidewalk. Snow or
ice on driveways, parking lots, sidewalks and lakes shall not be pushed across traveled
portions of roadways and may only be stored on private property. The City may assess
the cost of removal of snow or ice against the affected property owner pursuant to
Minnesota Statute § 429.101.
E. Continuing Violation. Each day that any person continues in violation of this Section
shall be a separate offense and punishable as such.
F. Condition. Before granting any permit under any of the provisions this Section, the
Council may impose insurance or bonding conditions thereon as it, considering the
projected danger to public or private property or to persons, deemed proper for
safeguarding those persons and property. The insurance or bond shall also protect the
City from any suit, action or cause of action arising by reason of the obstruction.
SECTION 717.01. CURB AND GUTTER, STREET, AND SIDEWALK PAINTING OR
COLORING.
It is unlawful for any person to paint, litter or color any street, sidewalk, trail or curb and gutter
for any purpose, except as the same may be done by City employees acting within the course or
scope of their employment or those acting pursuant to a contract with the City, provided,
7-8
however, that this provision shall not apply to uniformly painted house numbers, if specifically
approved by the City Administrator.
SECTION 718.01. SNOW AND ICE ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS.
A. Snow and Ice a Nuisance. All snow and ice remaining on public sidewalks is hereby
declared to constitute a public nuisance and shall be abated by the owner or tenant of the
abutting private property within 24 hours after the snow or ice ceased to be deposited.
B. City to Remove Snow or Ice. The City may cause to be removed from all public
sidewalks, beginning 24 hours after snow and ice has ceased to fall, all snow or ice which
may be discovered thereon, and then shall keep a record of the cost of that removal and
the private property adjacent to which accumulations were found and removed.
C. Cost of Removal and Assessment Authority. The owner and tenant of the abutting
private property shall be responsible for all City costs incurred in removing snow and ice
from the public sidewalks. The City Administrator shall, upon direction of the Council,
and on receipt of the information provided for in the preceding Subdivision, extend the
cost of the removal of snow or ice as a special assessment against the lots or parcel of
ground abutting on walks which were cleared, and these special assessments shall at the
time of certifying taxes to the County Auditor be certified for collection as other special
assessments are certified and collected.
SECTION 719.01. SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.
A. Primary Responsibility. It is the primary responsibility of the owner of the property upon
which there is an abutting sidewalk to keep and maintain that sidewalk in safe and
serviceable condition.
B. Construction, Reconstruction or Repair Specifications. All construction, reconstruction
or repair of sidewalks shall be done in strict accordance with specifications on file in the
office of the City Administrator.
C. Notice; No Emergency. Where, in the opinion of the Public Works Director or his/her
designee, no emergency exists, notice of the required repair or reconstruction shall be
given to the owner of the abutting property. The notice shall require completion of the
work within 90 days, and shall be mailed to the owner or owners shown to be owners on
the records of the County Officer who mails tax statements.
D. Failure of Owner to Reconstruct or Make Repairs. If the owner of the abutting property
fails to make repairs or accomplish reconstruction as is herein required, the Public Works
Director shall report that failure to the Council and the Council may order the work to be
done under its direction. The owner of the abutting property shall be responsible for all
City costs incurred in the sidewalk repair and reconstruction. The cost thereof may be
assessed to the abutting property owner as other special assessments.
E. Inspection. The Public Works Director or his/her designee shall make inspections as are
necessary to determine that sidewalks are kept in safe and serviceable condition.
7-9
SECTION 720.01. VEHICLE REPAIR ON STREET. It is unlawful for any person to
service, repair, assemble or dismantle any vehicle parked upon the street or attempt to do so
except to service such vehicle with motor fuel or to provide emergency repairs thereon but in no
event for more than 24 hours.
SECTION 721.01. EXHIBITION DRIVING PROHIBITED. No person shall turn,
accelerate, decelerate or otherwise operate a motor vehicle within the City in a manner which
causes unnecessary engine noise or backfire, squealing of tires, skidding, sliding, swaying,
throwing of sand or gravel or in a manner simulating a race. Squealing or screeching sounds
emitted by tires or the throwing of sand or gravel by the tires is prima facie evidence of a
violation of this Section.
SECTION 722.01. DRIVING THROUGH PRIVATE PROPERTY TO AVOID
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. It is unlawful for any person to avoid obedience to any
traffic control sign, signal or device by driving upon or through any private property.
SECTION 723.01. ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.
Subd. 1. Definitions The following terms as used in this Section shall have the same
meaning as in Minnesota Statute § 84.92.
A. “Operate” means to ride upon and control the operation of an all-terrain vehicle.
B. “Operator” means every person who operates or is in actual physical control of an allterrain
vehicle.
Subd. 2. Equipment.
A. Mufflers. Standard mufflers shall be properly attached and in constant operation to
reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. No
person shall use a muffler cutout, by pass, straight pipe, or similar device on an all-terrain
vehicle; and the exhaust system shall not emit or produce a sharp popping or crackling
sound.
B. Brakes. Brakes shall be adequate to control the movement and to stop and hold under
any conditions of operation.
C. Lights. At least one clear lamp shall be attached to the front of the all-terrain vehicle
with sufficient intensity to reveal persons or vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions. Such
headlamps shall be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an
oncoming vehicle operator. The all-terrain vehicle shall also be equipped with at least
one red tail lamp having a minimum candle power of sufficient intensity to exhibit a red
light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during the hours of darkness
under normal atmospheric conditions. This equipment shall be required and shall be in
7-10
operating condition when the all-terrain vehicle is operated between the hours of one
hour after sunset and one hour before sunrise or at times of reduced visibility.
Subd. 3. Requirements for Operation.
A. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle within the City unless the all-terrain vehicle
is registered pursuant to Minnesota Statute § 84.922.
B. Any person operating an all-terrain vehicle within the City shall meet the applicable
education and training requirements under Minnesota Statute § 84.925.
Subd. 4. Operating Restrictions. Except as herein specifically permitted and authorized,
no person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle:
A. On a public sidewalk or walkway provided for use for pedestrian travel;
B. On private property of another without lawful authority or written consent of the owner or
occupant;
C. On any publicly owned lands and frozen waters, including but not limited to, cemeteries,
park property, playgrounds, recreational areas and golf courses, except areas authorized for
use by the proper public authorities;
D. On any public or private school grounds unless permission is expressly obtained from
responsible school authorities;
E. In a manner so as to tow any person or thing on a public street or highway except through
use of the rigid tow bar attached to rear of the all-terrain vehicle;
F. In a manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs, annoys or
interferes with the peace and quite of other persons;
G. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the persons or property of
another or cause injury or damage to persons or property; or
H. At a speed greater than 10 mph when within 100 feet of any lakeshore, except in channels,
or of a fisherman, ice house, skating rink, or sliding area, nor where the operation would
conflict with the lawful use of property or would endanger other persons or property.
Subd. 5. Operations on Streets and Highways. No person shall operate an all-terrain
vehicle on any municipal street or roadway except as provided in this Subdivision.
A. An all-terrain vehicle may be operated, for transportation purposes only and not
recreational purposes, upon a municipal street, roadway or alley, so long as it maintains its
course on the far right hand side of such street, roadway, or alley and in the same direction
as the traffic on the nearest lane of the roadway adjacent thereto. Where available, alleys
shall be used for all-terrain vehicle traffic rather than municipal streets or roadways.
7-11
B. No all-terrain vehicle may be operated on any street, roadway or alley at a speed exceeding
10 mph.
C. No all-terrain vehicle shall enter any uncontrolled intersection without making a complete
stop. The operator of an all-terrain vehicle shall yield the right of way to any vehicle or
pedestrian.
D. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle on any street, roadway, alley or shoulder so as
to be traveling side-by-side with another all-terrain vehicle or other vehicle in the same
lane or immediate area.
E. No person under 16 years of age shall operate an all-terrain vehicle on any street, roadway,
alley or shoulder thereof.
F. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle on any street, roadway, alley or shoulder
thereof unless it is equipped with working turn signals and a sign indicating that it operates
at speeds slower than other traffic, and it has current public liability and bodily injury
insurance.
G. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle on any street, roadway, alley or shoulder
thereof, unless the person has a valid driver’s license.
Subd. 6. Operations of All-Terrain Vehicle While Under the Influence of Alcohol or a
Controlled Substance. It is unlawful for any person to operate or to be in physical control of
any all-terrain vehicle in the City while under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance
or under the influence of a combination of alcohol and a controlled substance.
Subd. 7. Littering. No persons shall deposit paper, litter, rubbish or debris on public or
private property, or throw paper, litter, rubbish or debris from an all-terrain vehicle.
Subd. 8. Chasing Animals. It is unlawful to intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any
bird, or animal domestic or wild, with an all-terrain vehicle.
Subd. 9. Hours of Operation. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle within the
City limits between the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
Subd. 10. Unattended All-Terrain Vehicles. It is unlawful for the owner or operator of an
all-terrain vehicle to leave or allow an all-terrain vehicle to remain unattended on public property
or on privately owned parking lots used by the public, while the motor is running, while the key
is available, or with the ignition unlocked.
SECTION 724.01. FLOOD CONTROL DIKE. No person shall operate or park any motor
vehicle or snowmobile upon a flood control dike without the advance permission of the Council.
7-12
SECTION 725.01. RESOLUTIONS. All traffic control resolutions in force on the effective
date of this Chapter shall hereby remain in force.
SECTION 726.01. SNOWMOBILES.
Subd. 1. Definitions. The following terms as used in this Section shall have the same
meaning as in Minnesota Statute § 84.81.
A. “Snowmobile” means a self-propelled vehicle designated for travel primarily on snow or
ice, steered by wheels, skis, or runners.
B. “Operate” means to ride upon and control the operation of a snowmobile.
C. “Operator” means every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile.
Subd. 2. Equipment. It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile within the
City unless it is equipped with the following:
A. Standard mufflers which are properly attached and in constant operation and which
reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. No
person shall use a muffler cut-out, bypass, straight pipe or similar device on the
snowmobile motor; and the exhaust systems shall not emit or produce a sharp popping or
cracking sound.
B. Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the snowmobile under
any conditions of operation.
C. A safety or so called “dead man” throttle and operating conditions so that when pressure
is removed from the accelerator or throttle, the motor is disengaged from the driving
track.
D. At least one clear lamp attached to the front with sufficient intensity to reveal persons and
vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead during the hours of darkness and under
normal atmospheric conditions. Such headlamps shall be so aimed that glaring rays are
not projected into the eyes of the oncoming vehicle operator. It shall also be equipped
with at least one red tail lamp having a minimum candle power of sufficient intensity to
exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during the hours
of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions. The head and tail lamp equipment is
to be used and in good operating condition when the vehicle is operated between the
hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or at any other hours of
reduced visibility.
E. Reflective material at least 16 inches on each side forward of the handlebars so as to
reflect to beam light at a 90 degree angle.
7-13
Subd. 3. Requirements for Operation.
A. No person shall operate a snowmobile within the City unless the snowmobile is
registered pursuant to Minnesota Statute § 84.82.
B. A person born after December 31, 1976 shall not operate a snowmobile within the City
unless the person has a valid snowmobile safety certificate issued or approved by the
Commissioner of Natural Resources, a driver’s license that has a valid snowmobile
qualification indicator issued under Minnesota Statute § 171.07, Subd. 12., or an
identification card that has a valid snowmobile qualification indicator issued under
Minnesota Statute §171.07, Subd. 12.
Subd. 4. Operating Restrictions. Except as herein specifically permitted and authorized,
no person shall operate a snowmobile:
A. On a public sidewalk or walkway provided or used for pedestrian travel;
B. On private property of another without lawful authority or written consent of the owner
or occupant;
C. On any publicly owned lands and frozen waters, including, but not limited to, cemeteries,
park property, playgrounds, recreational areas and golf courses, except areas authorized
for such use by the proper public authority;
D. On any public or private school grounds unless permission is expressly obtained from
responsible school authorities;
E. In a manner so as to tow any person or thing on a public street or highway except through
use of a rigid tow bar attached to the rear of the snowmobile;
F. At a speed greater than 10 mph within 100 feet of any sliding or recreational area, skating
rink, fisherman, ice house, or where the operation would conflict with the lawful use of
property or would endanger other persons or property; or
G. In a manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs, annoys
or interferes with the peace and quiet of other persons;
H. With more than 1 passenger while the snowmobile is in operation;
I. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the persons or property of
another or cause injury or damage to persons or property.
Subd. 5. Operation on Streets and Highways. No person shall operate a snowmobile
upon any municipal street or roadway except as provided in this Subdivision.
A. A snowmobile may be operated, for transportation purposes only and not recreational
purposes, upon a municipal street, roadway or alley, so long as it maintains its course on
7-14
the far right-hand side of such street, roadway or alley and in the same direction as the
traffic on the nearest lane of the roadway adjacent thereto. Where available, alleys shall
be used for snowmobile travel rather than municipal streets or roadways.
B. No snowmobile shall be operated on any street, roadway or alley at a speed exceeding 10
mph.
C. No snowmobile shall enter any uncontrolled intersection without making a complete stop.
The operator of a snowmobile shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle or pedestrian.
D. No person shall operate a snowmobile on any street, roadway, alley or shoulder, so as to
be traveling side by side with another snowmobile or other vehicle in the same lane or
immediate area.
E. Notwithstanding any prohibition in this Subdivision, a snowmobile may be operated on a
public thoroughfare in an emergency during the period of time when and at locations
where snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile impractical.
F. No person under 16 years of age shall operate a snowmobile on any street, roadway, alley
or shoulder thereof.
Subd. 6. Operations of Snowmobiles While Under the Influence of Alcohol or a
Controlled Substance. It is unlawful for any person to operate or to be in physical control of
any snowmobile in the City while under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance or
under the influence of a combination of alcohol and a controlled substance. The definitional and
regulatory provisions of Minnesota Statutes §§ 84.91 and 84.911 are hereby incorporated herein
and adopted by reference, including the penalty provisions thereof.
Subd. 7. Littering and Obstructions.
A. No person shall deposit paper, litter, rubbish or debris on public or private property, or
throw paper, litter, rubbish or debris from a snowmobile.
B. No person shall place obstructions, including ice blocks or barricades, on publicly owned
lands or frozen waters so as to interfere with the lawful use thereof by the public.
Subd. 8. Chasing Animals. It is unlawful to intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any
bird or animal domestic or wild, with a snowmobile.
Subd. 9. Hours of Operation. No person shall operate a snowmobile within the City
limits between the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
Subd.10. Unattended Snowmobiles. It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any
snowmobile to leave or allow a snowmobile to remain unattended on public property, or on
privately owned parking lots used by the public, while the motor is running, while the key is
available, or with the ignition unlocked.
7-15
SECTION 727.01. BICYCLE WAYS.
Subd. 1. Definitions. The following terms as used in this Section shall have the meaning
stated:
A. “Bicycle” means every device propelled solely by human power upon which any person
may ride, having two tandem wheels except scooters and similar devices, and including
any device generally recognized as a bicycle equipped with two front or rear wheels.
B. “Bicycle Ways” means those designated pursuant to Subdivision 2 hereof.
C. “Motor Vehicle” means every vehicle which is self propelled. Motor vehicle does not
include a vehicle moved solely by human power.
Subd. 2. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, all public sidewalks, trails and paths,
or parts thereof within the City having an improved surface of concrete, blacktop, bituminous or
similar material, excluding therefrom all streets, roads and highways, are hereby designated
bicycle ways pursuant to Minnesota Statute § 160.263.
Subd. 3. The Public Works Director shall designate and maintain all bicycle ways by
appropriate signs and markings.
Subd. 4. It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle or ride a horse or other
animal on or over the improved surface of a bicycle way within the City except when crossing
the same and except members, employees, or agents of the City while acting as a peace officer or
maintaining a bicycle way. Nothing herein shall limit the use of bicycle ways for pedestrian
access or travel.
SECTION 728.01. USE OF BICYCLES, ROLLER-SKATES, IN-LINE SKATES, AND
SKATEBOARDS IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
Subd. 1. Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
A. “Bicycle” has the same definition as found in Section 727.01, Subd. 1 (A).
B. “Central Business District” means the area of the City designated as such in the Delano
Land Use Code.
C. “Roller-skates or In-line Skates” means a skate with wheels for movement across a hard
surface.
D. “Skateboard” means a hard border frame with wheels attached for movement, propelled
through leg movement.
Subd. 2. Unlawful Acts. No person shall ride a bicycle, roller-skate or in-line skate or
skateboard upon a sidewalk within the Central Business District; provided, however, that
bicycles, roller-skates, in-line skates or skateboards may be walked or carried on these sidewalks.
7-16
SECTION 729.01. OPERATION OF MOTORIZED FOOT SCOOTERS,
ELECTRONIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES, AND MOTORIZED
BICYCLES, NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLES AND MEDIUM SPEED
ELECTRIC VEHICLES.
Subd. 1. Motorized Foot Scooters. Motorized Foot Scooters as defined by Minnesota
Statute §169.011, Subdivision 46, may be operated within the City pursuant to and in accordance
with Minnesota Statute § 169.225, except motorized foot scooters may not be operated on any
public path, lane, trail or bicycle way within the City.
Subd. 2. Electronic Personal Assistive Mobility Devices. Electronic Personal Assistive
Mobility Devices as defined by Minnesota Statute §169.011, Subd. 26, may be operated within
the City pursuant to and in accordance with Minnesota Statute §169.212.
Subd. 3. Motorized Bicycles. Motorized Bicycles, including Electronic Assisted Bicycles
as defined by Minnesota Statute § 169.011, Subd. 7, may be operated in the City pursuant to and
in accordance with Minnesota Statute § 169.223.
Subd. 4. Neighborhood Electric Vehicles and Medium-Speed Electric Vehicles.
Neighborhood Electric Vehicles and Medium-Speed Electric Vehicles as defined by Minnesota
Statute § 169.011, Subd. 47 and 39, may be operated in the City pursuant to and in accordance
with Minnesota Statute § 169.224 and the following requirements:
A. Operation. It is unlawful for any person to operate a neighborhood electric vehicle or
medium-speed electric vehicle within the City without first obtaining a permit as
provided herein.
B. Issuance of Permits.
1. Permits may be issued to persons 18 years of age or older who have a valid
Minnesota driver’s license;
2. Applications for neighborhood electric vehicle or medium-speed electric vehicle
permits shall be on forms supplied by the Clerk and shall include the full name
and address of the applicant; applicant’s date of birth; state of issuance of the
applicant’s driver’s license and number of the driver’s license; the date of
application and applicant’s signature; the name of the applicant’s insurance
company; the number of the applicant’s insurance policy; the date of expiration of
the insurance coverage for the neighborhood electric or medium-speed electric
vehicle; and such other information the Council may require;
3. Permits shall be granted for a period of 1 year and may be renewed annually,
January 1 to December 31;
4. An annual permit fee shall be established from time to time by resolution of the
Council.
7-17
C. Permit Issuance and Display and Vehicle Marking. All permits shall be issued for a
specific neighborhood electric vehicle or medium-speed electric vehicle and individual.
Permit tags, including number and year for which issued, shall be plainly visible on the
front of the neighborhood electric vehicle or medium-speed electric vehicle.
D. Insurance Required. Before a neighborhood electric vehicle or medium-speed electric
vehicle permit is issued by the Council, and at all times effective during such permit, the
permit holder shall have and maintain public liability and bodily injury insurance in the
amount established by Minnesota Statutes.
E. Occupants. The number of occupants in a neighborhood electric vehicle or mediumspeed
electric vehicle may not exceed the design occupant load.
F. Times of Operation. Neighborhood electric vehicles or medium-speed electric vehicles
may only be operated within the City from sunrise to sunset. Neighborhood electric
vehicles or medium-speed electric vehicles shall not operated in inclement weather or
when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions or any time when
there is insufficient light to clearly see persons in vehicles on a roadway at a distance of
500 feet.
G. Application of Traffic Law. Every person operating a neighborhood electric vehicle or
medium-speed electric vehicle under permit has all the rights and duties applicable to the
driver of any other vehicle under the provisions of any ordinance of the City or Chapter
169 of the Minnesota Statutes, except when these provisions cannot reasonably applied to
a neighborhood electric vehicle or medium-speed electric vehicle.
H. Slow Moving Vehicle Emblem. Neighborhood electric vehicles or medium-speed
electric vehicles shall display a slow moving vehicle emblem provided in Minnesota
Statutes 169.522 when operated within the City.
I. Revocation of Permit. A permit may be revoked by the Council if there is any material
misrepresentation on the permit application, liability insurance is no longer in effect, or if
there is evidence that the permitee cannot safely operate the neighborhood electric
vehicle or medium-speed electric vehicle. The permit shall also be revoked if the
permitee no longer has a valid driver’s license. The Council shall issue a notice of
revocation of a permit in writing and either hand deliver the notice to the permit holder or
send the notice by certified mail to the address on the application. The revocation shall
be in effect immediately after personal service or 3 days after mailing.
J. Appeal. Any person whose permit to operate of neighborhood electric vehicle or
medium-speed electric vehicle has been revoked may appeal the revocation to the
Council. Appeals shall be submitted in writing to the City Administrator within 30 days
of the date of revocation.
Subd. 5. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no motorized bicycle, motorized
vehicle or other motorized or electric, other than Electric Personal Assistance Mobility Device
may be operated on public sidewalks, trails or paths or bicycle ways within the City.
7-18
Subd. 6. Penalty. In addition to the revocation or suspension of a permit, any person who
violates any of the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
SECTION 730.01. MOTORIZED GOLF CARTS
Subd. 1. Definitions. Accept as otherwise defined in the Code, words and terms defined in
Minnesota Statute Chapter 169, as they may be amended from time to time, shall be applicable to
this Section.
Subd. 2. Operation. It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorized golf cart on streets
or roadways in the City without first obtaining a permit as provided herein. Persons who obtain
a permit as required by law may operate a motorized golf cart only on the streets or roadways
designated herein.
Subd. 3. Issuance of Permits.
A. Permits may only be issued to persons 18 years of age or older who have a valid
Minnesota driver’s license.
B. Applications for motorized golf cart permits shall be on forms supplied by the Clerk and
shall include the full name and address of the applicant; applicant’s date of birth; state of
issuance of the applicant’s driver’s license, the number of the driver’s license; the date of
application and applicant’s signature; the name of the applicant’s insurance company; the
number of applicant’s insurance policy; the date of expiration of the insurance coverage
for the golf cart; and such other information the Council may require.
C. Permits shall be granted for a period of one year and may be renewed annually, January 1
to December 31.
D. An annual permit fee shall be established from time-to-time by resolution of the Council.
Subd. 4. Permit Issuance and Display and Vehicle Marking. All permits shall be issued for
a specific motorized golf cart and individual. Permit tags, including number and year for which
issued, shall be plainly visible on the front of the motorized golf cart.
Subd. 5. Insurance Required. Before a motorized golf cart permit is issued by the Council,
and at all times effective during such a permit period, the permit holder shall have and maintain
public liability and bodily injury insurance in the amount established by Minnesota Statutes.
Subd. 6. Mechanical Condition. The motorized golf cart must be in good mechanical
condition and be thoroughly safe for transportation of passengers. Motorized golf carts operated
on any street, roadway, alley or shoulder within the City shall meet all equipment and vehicle
safety requirements set forth in Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49, Section 571.500, and
successor requirements.
Subd. 7. Occupants. The number of occupants in a motorized golf cart may not exceed the
design occupant load.
7-19
Subd. 8. Designation of Roadways. Motorized golf carts are permitted to be operated on
roadways within the City with a speed limit of 35 mph or less. Motorized golf carts are not
permitted to be operated on other City, County, State or Federal streets or highways except to
cross at designated intersections.
Subd. 9. Times of Operation. Motorized golf carts may only be operated on designated
streets and roadways from sunrise to sunset. Motorized golf carts shall not be operated in
inclement weather or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions, or
any time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles on the roadway at a
distance of 500 feet.
Subd. 10. Application of Traffic Law. Every person operating a motorized golf cart under
permit on designated streets and roadways has all the rights and duties applicable to the driver of
any other vehicle under the provisions of any ordinance of the City or Chapter 169 of the
Minnesota Statutes, except when these provisions cannot reasonably be applied to motorized golf
carts and except as otherwise specifically provided in Minnesota Statutes § 169.45, Subd. 7.
Subd. 11. Slow Moving Vehicle Emblem. Motorized golf carts shall display a slow moving
vehicle emblem provided in Minnesota Statutes § 169.522 when operated on designated streets
and roadways.
Subd. 12. Rearview Mirror. Motorized golf carts shall be equipped with a rearview mirror
to provide the driver with adequate vision from behind.
Subd. 13. Revocation of Permit. A permit may be revoked by the Council if there is any
material misrepresentation made on the permit application, liability insurance is no longer in
effect, or if there is evidence that permittee cannot safely operate the motorized golf cart. The
permit shall also be revoked if the permittee no longer has a valid driver’s license. The Council
shall issue a notice of revocation of a permit in writing and either hand-deliver the notice to the
permit holder or send the notice by certified mail to the address on the application. The
revocation shall be in effect immediately after personal service or 3 days after mailing.
Subd. 14. Appeal. Any person whose permit to operate of motorized golf cart has been
revoked may appeal the revocation to the Council. Appeals shall be submitted in writing to the
City Administrator within 30 days of the date of revocation.
Subd. 15. Penalty. In addition to the revocation or suspension of a permit, any person who
violates any of the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
7-20
P:\Home\1500.309 - Delano City Code\CHAPTER 7 TRAFFIC AND PARKING\CHAPTER 7-RED 2009 04 02.doc
8-1
CHAPTER 8 NUISANCES AND PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY
AND WELFARE OFFENSES.................................................................... 8-1
SECTION 801.01 PUBLIC NUISANCE AFFECTING HEALTH............................................ 8-2
SECTION 801.02 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY............ 8-2
SECTION 801.03 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY AND
THE GENERAL WELFARE ........................................................................8-3
SECTION 801.04 SPECIAL PROVISIONS – BUILDING MAINTENANCE AND
APPEARANCE.............................................................................................8-6
SECTION 801.05 ENFORCEMENT.......................................................................................... 8-7
SECTION 801.06 ABATEMENT............................................................................................... 8-7
SECTION 801.07 RECOVERY OF COST................................................................................. 8-8
SECTION 802.01 CLEAN-UP OF CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITES................................ 8-8
SECTION 803.01 SPECIAL PROVISIONS – OUTSIDE PARKING AND STORAGE........ 8-14
SECTION 804.01 SPECIAL PROVISIONS – ABANDONED OR INOPERABLE
MOTOR VEHICLES...................................................................................8-16
SECTION 805.01 SPECIAL PROVISIONS – LAWN MAINTENANCE .............................. 8-17
SECTION 806.01 BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES THAT ENDANGER PUBLIC
SAFETY, HEALTH OR PROPERTY WITHIN THE CITY...................... 8-19
SECTION 807.01 HAZARDOUS BUILDING AND EXCAVATIONS ................................. 8-20
SECTION 808.01 TREE DISEASES........................................................................................ 8-20
SECTION 809.01 CURFEW..................................................................................................... 8-23
SECTION 810.01 PUBLIC DECENCY ................................................................................... 8-23
SECTION 811.01 PUBLIC DRINKING................................................................................... 8-25
SECTION 812.01 FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS WEAPONS REGULATIONS............. 8-25
SECTION 813.01 ANTI-GRAFFITI REGULATIONS............................................................ 8-27
SECTION 814.01 NUISANCE A MISDEMEANOR............................................................... 8-30
8-2
CHAPTER 8 NUISANCES AND PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE
OFFENSES
SECTION 801.01. PUBLIC NUISANCE AFFECTING HEALTH. The following are
hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting health:
1. Exposed decayed or unwholesome food, and decayed vegetable matter, unless
contained within a composting area approved by the Council.
2. Diseased animals;
3. All ponds or pools of stagnant water;
4. Carcasses of animals not properly and legally buried or destroyed within 24 hours
after death;
5. Accumulations of manure, refuse, open food packaging, or other debris;
6. The discharge, disposal, accumulation, or collection of sewage or industrial waste
in violation of Chapter 6 of this Code;
7. Privy vaults or garbage cans which are not completely sealed, rodent-free and flytight
or which are maintained so as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul
and disagreeable odors;
8. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or body of water
by sewage, industrial waste, or other substances;
9. All noxious weeds, any weeds in excess of 10 inches in height, and other rank
growths of vegetation upon public or private property;
10. Dense smoke, noxious fumes or gases and soot, or cinders, sufficient to make the
occupancy of property uncomfortable to a person of ordinary sensibilities.;
11. All facilities or conditions contributing to the spread of a contagious disease;
12. Any trade or business not licensed by the City.
13. The influence from any cesspool, septic tank, drain field or sewage disposal
system discharging upon the surface of the ground.
14. Breeding sites of the aedes triseriatus (tree hole mosquito), including unused tires
(not mounted on wheels), pots, pans, cans, pails, bottles and other containers left
outdoors in which water or debris may accumulate.
SECTION 801.02. PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals and decency.
1. All gambling devices, activities and premises in violation of law;
2. All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or where prostitution occurs;
8-3
3. All places where alcoholic beverages are manufactured, disposed of, consumed,
or kept for sale in violation of law, and all alcoholic beverages and property used
for maintaining such a place;
4. Any vehicle used to transport illegal property, to conduct illegal activities, or for
any other illegal purpose.
SECTION 801.03. PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE, SAFETY AND THE
GENERAL WELFARE. The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety and the general welfare:
1. All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 24 hours after the snow or
other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall;
2. All trees, hedges, billboards, or other obstructions which prevent persons from
having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection;
3. All wires, limbs of trees, or other obstructions which are so close to the surface of
a sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
4. All excessive noises and vibrations;
5. Obstructions and excavations in, on or under public streets, alleys, sidewalks, or
public grounds except under such conditions as are permitted by this Code or
other applicable law;
6. Placing or storing on any street, sidewalk, alley, or public right-of-way any boxes,
goods, wares, merchandise, building materials, machinery, sandwich
board/commercial sign, business or trade article, except for the purpose of
immediately transferring the same to some other proper place or sandwich
boards/commercial signs that allow at least 36 inch clearance on the sidewalk (for
purposes of compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act) and are
removed when the business is not open.
7. Any tree, shrub, bush, or other vegetation located on private property which
obstructs routine use or travel on any public right-of-way;
8. Aerials or antennae erected or maintained in a dangerous manner;
9. Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public
street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing
traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk;
10. All hanging signs, awnings, and other similar structures over streets and
sidewalks, so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed and
maintained as provided by ordinance;
11. Rain water, ice, or snow allowed to fall from any building or structure upon any
street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk;
8-4
12. Any barbed wire fence or other fence that may inflict harm to persons or property
which is within 10 feet of a public sidewalk or way;
13. All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or situated or operated
on private property so as to attract the public;
14. Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other public property;
15. Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household
appliances, automobile bodies, or other like material;
16. Accumulation in the open of broken or unused metal, wood, lumber, cement,
electrical fixtures, plumbing fixtures, building materials (but excluding building
materials awaiting use in construction or improvement presently in progress on
the same premises);
17. Property that has been disturbed by construction, grading, or other activity and is
not seeded, sodded, or otherwise planted with a ground cover within 240 days,
unless the 240 days expires between November 1 and May 15, in which case the
ground cover must be established by the following July 15, unless the city
approves a time extension;
18. The accumulation of any piles of wood that are not:
a. neatly stacked; or
b. stacked or secured in a stable manner to avoid collapse.
19. A structure, or a portion of a structure, located in a residential zoning district, if
the exterior is not completed in accordance with city-approved construction plans
within 180 days after the date that the city building permit was issued;
20. Construction materials, including piles of dirt, sand, and sod, left in the open on
property more than 60 days after construction has been completed or a certificate
of occupancy has been issued, whichever occurred first;
21. A truck or other vehicle whose wheels or tires deposit mud, dirt, sticky
substances, litter or other material on any street or highway;
22. Discarded construction material or other litter at a construction site that is not
placed in an adequate waste container or that is allowed to blow around or off the
site;
23. Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting exceeding five-tenth
footcandles as measured on the property line of the property where the lighting is
located when abutting any residential parcel and one footcandle when abutting
any commercial or industrial parcel;
24. The placement of mailboxes and other delivery receptacles on public right of way,
except those that comply with the following:
8-5
a. Must be in compliance with united states postal service requirements for
location and type, and
b. Must be installed as far back from the street pavement as reasonably
practical to avoid snow plowing damage.
25. Gravel driveways maintained in such a manner that the gravel erodes into, or is
placed in, a public street or a water resource such as a wetland, creek, pond,
drainage ditch or swale, or lake;
26. Any well, hole, or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in such other
condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming on the
premises where it is located;
27. Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a public street
drain, storm sewer, gutter, or ditch with trash or other materials;
28. Digging, excavations, placing culverts, placing dams, or doing any act which may
alter or affect the drainage of public property streets, alleys or sidewalks; or alter
or affect flows of the public storm sewer and drainage ditch system, without
authorization by the City;
29. The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk, or other public property of any
glass, tacks, nails, bottles, or other substance which may injure any person or
animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over such substance;
30. Garbage or refuse deposited on a public right-of-way or on adjacent private
property;
31. Throwing, placing, or depositing dirt, sand, leaves, trash, lawn clippings, weeds,
grass, snow, or other materials in the streets, sidewalks, other public ways and the
gutters thereof;
32. Permitting dirt or mud from construction or landscaping activities to be carried or
deposited unto nearby streets, sidewalks, other public ways and the gutters
thereof;
33. Operation of any artificial lighting facilities upon any private property without an
effective shade or equivalent device to protect nearby residential premises from
being adversely affected thereby;
34. Any refrigerator, ice box, or freezer not in use with door latch intact which is
accessible to children.
35. All other public conditions or things which are likely to cause injury, to the
person or property of anyone, or which endanger the public health, safety or
welfare;
8-6
SECTION 801.04. SPECIAL PROVISIONS – BUILDING MAINTENANCE AND
APPEARANCE.
Subd. 1. Declaration of Nuisance. Building fences, and other structures that have been so
poorly maintained that their physical condition and appearance detract from the surrounding
neighborhood are declared to be public nuisances because they (a) are unsightly, (b) decrease
adjoining landowners’ and occupants’ enjoyment of their property and neighborhood, and (c)
adversely affect property values and neighborhood patterns.
Subd. 2. Standards. A building, fence, or other structure is a public nuisance if it does not
comply with the following requirements:
A. No part of any exterior surface may have deterioration, holes, breaks, gaps, loose or
rotting boards or timbers.
B. Every exterior surface that has had a surface finish such as paint applied must be
maintained to avoid noticeable deterioration of the finish. No wall or other exterior
surface may have peeling, cracked, chipped or otherwise deteriorated surface finish on
more than 20 percent of:
1. any one wall or other flat surface; or
2. all door and window moldings, eaves, gutters, and similar projections on any one
side or surface.
C. No glass, including windows and exterior light fixtures, may be broken or cracked, and
no screens may be torn or separated from moldings.
D. Exterior doors and shutters must be hung properly and have an operable mechanism to
keep them securely shut or in place.
E. Cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, bay or dormer windows, and similar projections must be
kept in good repair and free from cracks and defects that make them hazardous or
unsightly.
F. Roof surfaces must be tight and have no defects that admit water. All roof drainage
systems must be secured and hung properly.
G. Chimneys, antennae, air vents, and other similar projections must be structurally sound
and in good repair. These projections must be secured properly, where applicable, to an
exterior wall or exterior roof.
H. Foundations must be structurally sound and in good repair.
8-7
SECTION 801.05. ENFORCEMENT.
Subd. 1. Officers. The Building Official and Health Officer shall enforce the provisions of
this Chapter with reference to nuisances affecting public health. The Clerk, Building Official
and sheriff shall enforce the provisions relating to nuisances affecting peace, safety, and the
general welfare. The Sheriff’s Department shall enforce the provisions relating to nuisances
affecting public morals and shall assist the other designated officers in the enforcement of other
provisions of this Chapter. Such officers shall have the power to inspect private property,
including all interior areas within structures on private property, and take all reasonable
precautions to prevent and abate the commission and maintenance of public nuisances.
Subd. 2. Construction. The provisions of Section 805.01, Subdivision 1, shall be
construed to be directory only, and shall not be construed to create a duty on the part of the City
or its officers or employees to any person. The City and its officers and employees shall not be
liable for any failure to enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
SECTION 801.06 ABATEMENT.
Subd. 1. General. Whenever the officer charged with enforcement determines that a
public nuisance is being maintained or exists on premises in the City, the officer shall notify, in
writing, the owner or occupant of the premises of such fact and order that such nuisance be
terminated and abated. The notice shall be served in person or by certified or registered mail. If
the premises are not occupied and the owner is unknown, the notice may be served by posting it
on the premises. The notice shall specify the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and the time,
not exceeding 30 days, within which the nuisance is to be abated and shall state that the City may
proceed to abate the nuisance unless, within the specified time, the affected persons shall abate
the nuisance or the affected person shall demand a hearing by notifying the Clerk in writing. A
hearing shall be held within 30 days after any such demand, before the Council. The Council
may rescind, modify or affirm the abatement order. If the owner, occupant or agent fails or
neglects to comply with the requirements of the notice or order from the officer or Council, then
the officer shall proceed to report his findings to the Council, and the Council may thereafter
direct the appropriate staff to abate the nuisance and report the nuisance to the appropriate law
enforcement authority. If abatement by the City requires that City-authorized personnel enter the
interior of any structure on the property, the City shall, except in an emergency, first apply to the
appropriate court for permission to so enter and abate.
Subd. 2. Emergency Abatement. When the officer charged with enforcement determines
that a nuisance constitutes a serious and imminent danger to the public safety or health, the
officer may summarily abate the nuisance after a reasonable attempt to notify the owner or
occupant of the property. The officer shall immediately thereafter notify in writing the owner or
occupant of the premises of the action taken. The notice shall be served in person or by
registered or certified mail. The officer shall also immediately notify the Council of the action
taken.
8-8
SECTION 801.07. RECOVERY OF COST.
Subd. 1. Personal Liability. The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been abated
by the City shall be personally liable for all costs to the City of the abatement, including
administrative costs, legal fees and costs, engineering fees and costs, testing fees and costs and
contractor costs. When the work has been completed and such costs determined, the Clerk or
other official designated by the Council shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner.
The amount shall then be immediately due and payable at the office of the Clerk.
Subd. 2. Assessment. The Clerk shall, on or before September 1 next following abatement
of the nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with all other such charges as well as other
charges for current services to be assessed under Minnesota Statutes, Section 429.101, against
each separate lot or parcel to which the charges are attributable. The Council may then assess
the charges against such property under that statute and other pertinent statutes for certification
to the county auditor and collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual
installments, not exceeding ten, as the Council may determine in each case.
SECTION 802.01. CLEAN-UP OF CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITES.
Subd. 1. General Provisions.
A. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this Section is to reduce public exposure to health
risks associated with hazardous chemicals or residue from a clandestine drug lab site.
Professional testing and investigations show that chemicals used in the production of
illicit drugs can condense, penetrate, and contaminate surfaces, furnishings, and
equipment of surrounding structures. The Council finds that such sites, and the personal
property within such sites, may contain suspected chemicals and residues that place
people, particularly children or adults of child bearing age, at risk when exposed through
inhabiting or visiting the site or being exposed to contaminated personal property.
B. Interpretation and Application. The provisions of this Section must be construed to
protect the public health, safety and welfare. When the conditions imposed by this
Section conflict with comparable provisions imposed by another law, ordinance, statute,
or regulation, the regulations that are more restrictive or that impose higher standards will
prevail.
Subd. 2. Definitions. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the words and
phrases below are defined for the purpose of this Section as follows:
A. “Chemical dump site” means a place or area where chemicals or other waste materials
used in a clandestine drug lab operation have been located.
B. “Clandestine drug lab operation” means the unlawful manufacture or attempt to
manufacture a controlled substance.
8-9
C. “Clandestine drug lab site” or “site” means a place or area where law enforcement
personnel have determined that conditions associated with an unlawful clandestine drug
lab operation exist. A clandestine drug lab site may include dwellings, accessory
buildings, structures or units, a chemical dump site, a vehicle, boat, trailer, or other
appliance.
D. “Controlled substance” means a drug, substance or immediate precursor specified in
Minnesota Statute §52.02, Schedules I through V, as may be amended. The term does
not include distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages, intoxicating liquors or tobacco.
E. “Manufacture,” in places other than a pharmacy, includes the production, cultivation,
quality control, or standardization, by mechanical, physical, chemical or pharmaceutical
means, and the packing, re-packing, tableting, encapsulating, labeling, or filling of drugs.
F. “Owner” means a person, firm, corporation or other entity who or which owns, in whole
or in part, the land, building, structure, vehicle, boat, trailer or other location associated
with a clandestine drug lab site. Unless information is provided to prove otherwise, the
owner of real property is deemed to be the property taxpayer of record in the Wright
County files, and the owner of a vehicle, boat or trailer is deemed to be the person listed
as the owner on the most recent title to the vehicle, boat or trailer.
Subd. 3. Declaration of Public Health Nuisance. All dwellings, accessory structures,
buildings, vehicles, boats, trailers, personal property, adjacent property or other locations,
associated with a clandestine drug lab site are potentially unsafe due to health hazards and are
declared to be a public health nuisance.
Subd. 4. Law Enforcement Action.
A. Law enforcement authorities who identify conditions associated with a clandestine drug
lab site that may place the public or occupants at risk for exposure to harmful
contaminants and other associated conditions may:
1. Promptly notify the county and Health Officer, county child protection division,
the United States drug enforcement administration, and the site owner about the
site and the conditions found;
2. Treat, store, transport or dispose of all waste generated from the clandestine drug
lab operation and found at the site in a manner consistent with the Minnesota
Department of Health and Minnesota pollution control regulations;
3. Issue a temporary declaration of public health nuisance for the affected site and
post a copy of the declaration on all doorway entrances to the site or, in the case
of bare land, in several conspicuous places on the property. This temporary
declaration will expire after the Health Officer inspects the site and determines the
appropriateness of issuing a permanent declaration of public health nuisance;
4. Notify all people occupying the site that a temporary declaration of public health
nuisance has been issued;
8-10
5. Require all people occupying the site to immediately vacate the site, remove all
pets from the site, and not return without written authorization from the Health
Officer;
6. Notify the occupants vacating the site that the personal property at the site may be
contaminated with dangerous chemical residue; and
7. Put locks on each doorway entrance to the site to prohibit people from entering
the site without authorization.
B. The notification of the people and organizations mentioned above may be delayed to
accomplish appropriate law enforcement objectives.
Subd. 5. Seizure of Property. When a clandestine drug lab site is inside a vehicle, boat,
trailer or other form of moveable personal property, law enforcement authorities must
immediately seize it and not allow it to be transported except to a more secure location. All
other requirements of this Section must be followed as closely as possible given the specific type
of property in which the site is discovered.
Subd. 6. Action by City Health Officer.
A. Inspection and Declaration of Nuisance. Within 48 hours of notification that law
enforcement authorities have determined the existence of a clandestine drug lab site, the
Health Officer must inspect the site. The Health Officer may then promptly issue a
permanent declaration of public health nuisance and a Do Not Enter-Unsafe to Occupy
Order for the affected site to replace the temporary declaration. A copy of the permanent
declaration and order must be posted on all doorway entrances to the site or, in the case
of bare land, in several conspicuous places on the property.
B. Abatement Order. After issuing the permanent declaration, the Health Officer must send
written notice to the site owner ordering abatement of the public health nuisance. The
abatement order must include the following:
1. A copy of the declaration of public health nuisance and Do Not Enter-Unsafe to
Occupy Order;
2. Information about the potentially hazardous condition of the site;
3. A summary of the site owner’s and occupant’s responsibilities under this Section;
and
4. Information that may help the owner locate appropriate services necessary to
abate the public health nuisance.
C. Notice to Other Parties. The Health Officer must also mail a copy of the permanent
declaration of public health nuisance and a copy of this Section to the following parties at
their last known addresses:
1. Occupants or residents of the site if known;
8-11
2. Neighbors in proximity to the site who may be reasonably affected by the
conditions found;
3. The appropriate enforcement division of the United States Drug Enforcement
Administration; and
4. Other City, state and local authorities, such as the City Public Works Department,
the State Pollution Control Agency, the State Department of Health, and the
Department of Natural Resources, that are known to have public and protection
responsibilities applicable to the situation.
D. Modification or Removal of Declaration. The Health Officer may modify or remove the
declaration of public health nuisance after the Health Officer receives documentation
from a City-approved environmental hazard testing and cleaning firm stating that the
suspected health and safety risks, including those to neighbors and potential occupants,
either do not exist or have been sufficiently abated or corrected to justify amendment or
removal of the declaration.
Subd. 7. Site Owner’s Responsibility to Act.
A. Within 10 business days after the abatement order is mailed to the site owner, the owner
must accomplish the following:
1. Provide the Health Officer, in writing, with:
(a) Confirmation that all persons and their pets have vacated the site;
(b) The names of all children who the owner believes were residing at the site
during the time period the clandestine drug lab is suspected to have been
at the site; and
(c) Confirmation that the site will remain vacated and secured until the public
health nuisance is completely abated as required by this Section.
2. Contract with one or more City-approved environmental hazard testing and
cleaning firms to conduct the following work in accordance with the most current
state guidelines:
(a) A detailed on-site assessment of contamination at the site, including the
personal property in the site:
(b) Soil testing of the site and testing of all property and soil in proximity to
the site which the environmental hazard testing and cleaning firm
determines may have been affected by the conditions found at the site;
(c) A complete clean-up of the site (including the clean-up or removal of
plumbing, ventilation systems, fixtures and contaminated soil) or a
demolition of the structures on the site and a complete clean-up of the
demolished site;
8-12
(d) A complete clean-up, or disposal at an approved dump site, of all personal
property in the site that is found to have been affected by the conditions at
the site;
(e) A complete clean-up of all property and soil in proximity to the site that is
found to have been affected by the conditions at the site; and
(f) Remediation testing and follow-up testing, including testing of the
ventilation system and plumbing, to determine that all health risks are
sufficiently reduced to allow safe human occupancy and use of the site,
the personal property in it, and all property and soil in proximity to the
site.
3. Provide the Health Officer with the identity of the testing and cleaning firm with
which the owner has contracted for abatement of the public health nuisance as
required above; and
4. Sign an agreement with the Health Officer establishing a clean-up schedule. The
schedule must establish reasonable deadlines for completing all actions required
by this Section for abatement of the public health nuisance. The Health Officer
must consider practical limitations and the availability of contractors in approving
the clean-up schedules.
B. The owner must meet all deadlines established in the clean-up schedule. The owner must
provide the Health Officer written documentation of the clean-up, including a signed
statement from a City-approved environmental hazard testing and cleaning firm that the
site, all personal property in it, and all property and soil in proximity to the site is safe for
human occupancy and use and that the clean-up was conducted in accordance with the
most current state guidelines.
Subd. 8. Site Owner’s Responsibility for Costs. The site owner is responsible for all
costs of dealing with and abating the public health nuisance, including contractor’s fees and the
City’s costs for services performed in connection with the clandestine drug lab site clean-up.
The City’s costs may include:
A. Posting of the site;
B. Notification of affected parties;
C. Securing the site, providing limited access to the site, and prosecution of unauthorized
persons found at the site.
D. Expenses related to the recovery of costs, including the special assessment process.
E. Laboratory fees.
F. Clean-up services.
G. Administrative fees.
8-13
H. Legal fees; and
I. Other associated costs.
Subd. 9. City Action and Recovery of Costs.
A. If the site owner fails to comply with any of the requirements of this Section, the City
health officer is authorized to take all reasonable actions necessary to abate the public
health nuisance including contracting with a City-approved environmental hazard testing
and cleaning firm to conduct the work outlined in Subdivision 7(A)(2). The health
officer is also authorized to provide a copy of the declaration of public health nuisance to
the holders of mortgage or lien interests in the affected site.
B. If the costs to clean the site or to clean the personal property at the site are prohibitively
high in relation to the value of the site or the personal property, the City is authorized to
remove or demolish the site, structure or building and dispose of the personal property in
it. These actions must be taken in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Statatute
Chap. 463.
C. If the City abates the public health nuisance, the City is entitled to recover all of its actual
costs plus an additional 25% of such costs for administrative and legal expense, in
addition to any other legal remedy. The City may recover costs by civil action against
the site owner or by assessing the costs against the site as a special assessment.
Subd. 10. Recovery of Costs from Persons Causing Damage. Nothing in this Section
limits the rights of the site owner, occupants, neighbors, or the City to recover costs from the
persons contributing to the public health nuisance, such as the operators of the clandestine drug
lab, or from other lawful sources.
Subd. 11. Unauthorized Removal of Postings. It is unlawful for a person, except
authorized City personnel, to remove a temporary or permanent declaration of public health
nuisance or Do Not Enter—Unsafe to Occupy Order from a clandestine drug lab site.
Subd. 12. Entry Into or Unto Site. While a declaration of public health nuisance for a site
is in effect and has been posted at the site, no person, other than a law enforcement officer, the
Health Officer, or a person authorized by the City health officer, is permitted to be inside or on a
site.
Subd. 13. Removal of Personal Property from the Site. While a declaration of public
health nuisance for a site is in effect and has been posted at the site, no personal property may be
removed from the site without prior written consent from the Health Officer. Consent to remove
personal property may be granted at the reasonable discretion of the health authority, and only in
cases of hardship after:
A. A City-approved environmental hazard testing and cleaning firm has advised the City, in
writing, that the item(s) of personal property can be sufficiently cleaned to remove all
harmful contamination; and
8-14
B. The owner of the personal property agrees in writing that the owner;
1. Is aware of the danger of using the contaminated property;
2. Will thoroughly clean the property to remove all contamination before the
property is used; and
3. Releases and agrees to indemnify the City from all liability to the owner and third
parties for injuries or damages alleged to have been caused by the contaminated
property.
SECTION 803.01 SPECIAL PROVISIONS – OUTSIDE PARKING AND STORAGE.
Subd. 1. Definitions. For purposes of this Section the following words have the meanings
specified below.
A. “Vehicle” or “vehicles” means a motor vehicle or trailer as defined in Minn. Stat.
§169.01, including pioneer, classic collector and street rod vehicles, but excluding the
following:
1. small trailers that are clearly designed to be used for general yard and garden
purposes and not for travel on the roadways;
2. snowmobiles; and
3. all-terrain vehicles as defined in Minn. Stat. §84.92, Subd. 8.
B. “Front yard area” means all that area between the front property line and a line drawn
along the front face or faces of the principal structure on the property and extended to the
side property lines. The front side of the property will be determined as specified in the
zoning ordinance.
C. “Outside” means to be outside of an enclosed storage facility and visible from any other
property.
Subd. 2. Declaration of Nuisance. The outside parking and storage on residentially-zoned
property of large numbers of vehicles and vehicles, materials, supplies or equipment not
customarily used for residential purposes in violation of the requirements set forth below is
declared to be a public nuisance because it (a) obstructs views on streets and private property, (b)
creates cluttered and otherwise unsightly areas, (c) prevents the full use of residential streets for
residential parking, (d) introduces commercial advertising signs into areas where commercial
advertising signs are otherwise prohibited, (e) decreases adjoining landowners and occupants’
enjoyment of their property and neighborhood, and (f) otherwise adversely affects property
values and neighborhood patterns.
Subd. 3. Unlawful Parking and Storage.
8-15
A. A person must not place, store, or allow the placement or storage of ice fish houses,
skateboard ramps, playhouses or other similar non-permanent structures outside
continuously in the front-yard area of residentially-zoned property.
B. A person must not place, store, or allow the placement or storage of pipe, lumber, forms,
steel, machinery, or similar materials, including all materials used in connection with a
business, outside on residentially-zoned property, unless shielded from public view by an
opaque cover or fence.
C. A person must not cause, undertake, permit or allow the outside parking and storage of
vehicles on residentially-zoned property unless it complies with the following
requirements.
1. No more than four vehicles per lawful dwelling unit may be stored anywhere
outside on R-1 and R-2 zoned property, except as otherwise permitted or required
by the City because of non-residential characteristics of the property. This
maximum number does not include vehicles of occasioned guests who do not
reside on the property.
2. Vehicles that are parked or stored outside in the front-yard area must be on a
paved or graveled parking or driveway area.
3. Vehicles, watercraft and other articles stored outside on residential property must
be owned by a person who resides on that property. Students who are away at
school for periods of time but still claim the property as their legal residence will
be considered residents on the property.
D. A person owning, driving or in charge of a vehicle with a weight classification G through
T inclusive, as specified in Minnesota Statute §168.013, Subd. 1e, must not cause or
permit that vehicle to be parked outside or to stand continuously for more than two hours
on any property or public street within a residential zone in the City.
Subd 4. Exceptions. The prohibitions of this Section do not apply to the following:
A. A motor truck, pickup truck or similar vehicle being used by a public utility, moving
company, or similar company, that is actually being used to service a residence not
belonging to or occupied by the operator of the vehicle;
B. A vehicle that is actually making a pickup or delivery at that location where it is parked.
Parking for any period of time beyond the period of time reasonably necessary to make
the pickup or delivery and in excess of the 2 hour limit is unlawful;
Subd. 5. Abatement. A law enforcement officer or other authorized person may order a
vehicle constituting a public nuisance under subparagraphs 3(C) and 3(D) above to be
immediately removed and/or impounded. The impounded vehicle will be surrendered to the
owner by the towing contractor only upon payment of the required impound, towing and storage
fees.
8-16
SECTION 804.01 SPECIAL PROVISIONS – ABANDONED OR INOPERABLE
MOTOR VEHICLES.
Subd. 1. Definitions. For purposes of this Section the following words have the meanings
specified below:
A. “Abandoned vehicle” means a motor vehicle that has remained for a period of more than
48 hours on public property illegally or lacking vital component parts, or that has
remained in an inoperable condition for a period of more than 48 hours on private
property with or without consent of the person in control of the property, unless it is kept
in an enclosed garage or storage building. It also means a motor vehicle voluntarily
surrendered by its owner to the City or to a towing contractor hired by the City for its
removal.
B. “Junk vehicle” means a motor vehicle that is unlicensed or in an inoperable condition,
that is partially dismantled, that is used for sale of parts or as a source of repair or
replacement parts for other vehicles, or that is kept for scrapping, dismantling, or salvage
of any kind, unless the vehicle is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building. A junk
vehicle is also an abandoned vehicle for the purpose of this ordinance.
C. “Inoperable condition” means that the vehicle has no substantial potential use consistent
with its usual function, and includes a vehicle that (1) has a missing or defective part that
is necessary for the normal operation of the vehicle, (2) is stored on blocks, jacks or other
supports, or (3) has not had a current vehicle license for at least 6 months.
D. “Motor vehicle” or “vehicle” has the meaning contained in Minnesota Statute §169.01.
E. “Vital component parts” means those parts of the motor vehicle that are essential to the
mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, the motor, drive
train, and wheels.
F. “Outside” has the same meaning as in City Code Section.
Subd. 2. Vehicles Constituting A Public Nuisance.
A. Abandoned and junk vehicles are a public nuisance creating a hazard to the health and
safety of the public because they invite plundering, create fire hazards, attract vermin,
and present physical dangers to the safety and well-being of children and other citizens.
The accumulation and outside storage of these vehicles is in the nature of rubbish, litter,
and unsightly debris and is a blight on the landscape and a detriment to the environment.
B. A vehicle, whether occupied or not, that is found stopped, standing, or parked in violation
of a ordnance or state statute; that is reported stolen; or that is found impeding
firefighting, snow removal or plowing or the orderly flow of traffic, is a public nuisance.
C. A vehicle that is impeding public road or utility repair, construction or maintenance
activities if reasonable notice of the proposed activities was given to the vehicle owner or
user at least 12 hours in advance, is a public nuisance.
8-17
Subd. 3. Abatement.
A. Impounding. A police officer or other authorized person may order a vehicle constituting
a public nuisance to be immediately removed and/or impounded. The impounded vehicle
will be surrendered to the owner by the towing contractor only upon payment of the
required impound, towing and storage fees.
B. Sale. Notice and sale of a vehicle impounded under this ordinance will be conducted in
accordance with Minn. Chap. 168B, governing the sale of abandoned motor vehicles.
SECTION 805.01. SPECIAL PROVISIONS – LAWN MAINTENANCE.
Subd. 1. Preamble. The Council finds that there are a variety of landscapes in the City
that add diversity and a richness to the quality of life. Certain areas in the City have been left, or
allowed to go, unmaintained. These have been accepted by the vast majority of the City
residents as appropriate and as part of the unique quality of life in this community. There are
community expectations, however, that once an area has been disturbed, landscaped, or
otherwise maintained, that area will continue to be maintained in a consistent manner. When
vegetation in that area is not continually maintained, it becomes aesthetically unpleasing and
violates community standards. Property that appears neglected may decrease the value of
adjacent properties. In addition, if vegetation is not properly maintained, there may be the
following adverse impacts on public health, safety, and welfare:
A. Undesirable vegetation such as common buckthorn, quackgrass, and other weeds may
invade and threaten to supplant other more desirable vegetation;
B. Vegetation that causes allergic reactions, such as ragweed, may develop; and
C. Tall vegetation along driveways and public roads may impair visibility when entering or
exiting public roads.
The Council also finds that it is in the public interest to allow citizens to choose the type of
landscaping on their properties and to make changes in that vegetation. As a protection for the
larger community, however, this change in vegetation must be properly managed and maintained
and the length of the transition period must be minimized.
The Council finds that the establishment of prairie and meadow plant communities is an
acceptable landscape treatment in the City. This requires special consideration, however,
because weeds will grow during the first few years of transition before the new vegetation
predominates and will appear like neglect. Therefore, the Council finds that this type of
vegetation is acceptable if it is properly maintained to shorten the transition period and if notice
is given of the intended result.
In contrast, the transition to trees and other woody species does not require special consideration
because untended grass or weeds are not a necessary part of that transition period. Rather, the
transition period is shortened by eliminating competition around the seedlings through such
techniques as organic mulch.
8-18
The Council enacts this ordinance to balance the public interest in a variety of vegetation with
the public need to ensure proper maintenance of that vegetation. The Council finds that
establishing a height limitation for certain vegetation is in the best interest of the public health,
safety, and welfare as outlined above and is a reasonable maintenance standard.
Subd. 2. Definitions. For purposes of this Section the following words have the meanings
specified below:
A. “Meadow vegetation” is grasses and flowering broad-leaf plants that are native to, or
adapted to, the state of Minnesota, and that are commonly found in meadow and prairie
plant communities, except weeds.
B. “Noxious weeds” are those plants so designated by the state of Minnesota pursuant to
Minnesota Statute §18.77, Subd. 8 and those listed under Minnesota Rule, Parts
1505.0730 to 1505.750.
C. “Regularly cut” means mowing or otherwise cutting the vegetation so that it does not
exceed 10 inches in height.
D. “Turf grasses” are grasses commonly used in regularly cut low areas, such as bluegrass,
fescue and rye grass blends, and non-woody vegetation interspersed with them.
E. “Weeds” include all noxious weeds, buffalobur, burdock, common cocklebur, crabgrass,
dandelions, jimsonweed, quackgrass, common and giant ragweed, field sandbur,
velvetleaf, and wild sunflower. Weeds also include anything that is horticulturally out of
place. For example, a tree seedling is a weed in a vegetable garden. A property owner
may establish that a plant or plants are not horticulturally out of place by providing a
written landscape plan for the area in question, complete with a listing and locations of
plant species. The plants specifically listed above may not be included within the
landscape plan. Vegetation that does not comply with this plan are weeds.
Subd. 3. Maintenance Standard. The maintenance standard in this Section applies to
property that has been developed with a building as defined in the City’s Building Code,
including vacant property combined with developed property for tax purposes, and a parcel of
property that has been completely or partially disturbed by demolition, grading or other means in
preparation for development or redevelopment.
A. All turf grasses and weeds must not exceed a height of 10 inches, measured from the base
at ground level to the tip of each stalk, stem, blade, or leaf.
B. This requirement does not apply to the following:
1. A wetland or floodplain designated in the zoning ordinance and required wetland
buffers or those voluntarily created by a private land owner when compatible with
the character of the neighborhood and the intent of the wetland ordinance.
2. A drainage pond or ditch that stores or conveys stormwater.
3. A pasture that is (a) currently being used only for the exercise or feeding of
domestic hoofed animals; (b) physically surrounded by a permanent fence that
8-19
separates the pasture from property used for other purposes; (c) at least one-half
acre in size; and (d) undeveloped with any habitable buildings;
4. An area in which the land and vegetation appears not to have been graded,
landscaped, mowed, or otherwise disturbed by human or mechanical means at any
time. Determination of what constitutes this type of area will be based on a
reasonable judgment of the present appearance of the area. The recent history of
the area may be relevant to this determination; and
5. An area established with meadow vegetation if:
(a) The prior vegetation is eliminated and the meadow vegetation is planted
through transplanting or seed by human or mechanical means;
(b) The area is cut at least once per year to a height of no more than 10 inches,
if weeds cover more than 25 percent of the area; and
(c) A sign is posted on the property in a location likely to be seen by the
public, advising that a meadow or prairie is being established. This sign is
required only if the meadow vegetation is in an area likely to be seen by
the public. This sign must be in addition to any sign permitted by the sign
ordinance but must be no smaller than 10 inches square, no larger than one
square foot, and no higher than three feet tall. The sign is no longer
required when weeds cover 25 percent or less of the area.
Subd. 4. Declaration of Public Nuisance. The following are public nuisances subject to
abatement under this chapter:
A. Noxious weeds;
B. Vegetation that does not meet the maintenance standard specified in Subdivision 3 above.
SECTION 806.01. BUILDINGS OR STRUCURES THAT ENDANGER PUBLIC
SAFETY, HEALTH OR PROPERTY WITHIN THE CITY. A building or structure in the
City is a public nuisance affecting public safety and health if the Building Official or Fire
Marshal find it to be dangerous to public safety, health or to other property by reason of:
A. Damage by fire;
B. Defective chimneys or stovepipes;
C. Dilapidated condition or decay;
D. Defective electric writing;
E. Defective gas installation;
F. Defecting heating apparatus;
G. Defective sewage disposal system or plumbing; or
8-20
H. Any other defect endangering the public safety, health or other property.
Subd. 1. The Building Official or the fire marshal may order the nuisance abated by
ordering its repair, correction or removal. This order must be in writing and must order the
repair, correction or removal of the nuisance within 30 days or other time that the Building
Official or Fire Marshal deems reasonable. This order must be served upon the owner, the lessee
or the occupant by mail or by personal service. The order may provide that the building or
structure not be further used or occupied until the repair or correction of the defect.
SECTION 807.01. HAZARDOUS BUILDINGS AND EXCAVATIONS. The “Hazardous
Building Law,” Minnesota Statute §463.15 through 463.261, is adopted by reference. Any
hazardous building or dangerous excavation may be abated in accordance with the provisions
therein.
SECTION 808.01. TREE DISEASES. The Council has determined that the health of the
trees within the municipal boundaries is threatened by fatal tree diseases. It is further determined
that the loss of trees growing upon public and private property would substantially depreciate the
value of property within the City and impair the safety, good order, general welfare and
convenience of the public. It is declared to be the intention of the Council to control and prevent
the spread of tree diseases and this Section is enacted for that purpose.
Subd. 1. Forester.
A. Position created. The powers and duties of the City’s Forester as provided by this Chapter
are conferred on the Public Works Director or his/her designee.
B. Duties. It is the duty of the Forester to coordinate, under the direction and control of the
Council, all activities of the City relating to the control and prevention of tree diseases. The
Forester shall recommend to the Council the details of a program for the control of tree disease,
and perform the duties incident to such a program adopted by the Council.
Subd. 2. Nuisances Declared. The following are declared to be public nuisances whenever
they may be found within the City:
A. Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any degree with the Dutch Elm
Disease fungus, Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman) Moreau, or which harbors any of the elm
bark beetles, Scolytus multistrailus (eich.) or Hylurgopinus rufipes (March).
B. Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood, or other
elm material from which the bark has not been removed and burned or sprayed with an
effective elm bark beetle insecticide.
C. Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected to any degree with the oak wilt
disease fungus ceraloiystis fogacearum.
D. Any dead oak tree or part thereof which, in the opinion of the Forester, constitutes a
hazard, including, but not limited to, logs, branches, stumps, firewood, or other oak
8-21
material, which has not been stripped of its bark and burned or sprayed within an
effective fungicide.
E. Any other shade trees with an epidemic disease.
Subd. 3. Abatement. It is unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance as
defined in Subdivision 2 to remain on any premises owned or controlled by said person within
the City. Such nuisance may be abated in the manner prescribed in this Section.
Subd. 4. Inspection and Investigation. The Forester shall inspect all premises and places
with the City as often as practicable to determine whether any condition described in this Section
exists thereon and shall investigate all reported incidents of diseased trees.
Subd. 5. Entry on Private Premises. The Forester or a duly authorized agent of the
Forester may enter upon private premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out
any of the duties assigned under this Section.
Subd. 6. Diagnosis. The Forester shall, upon finding conditions indicating disease
infestation, immediately send appropriate specimens or samples to the Commissioner of
Agriculture or State Health Department for analysis, or take such other steps for diagnosis as
may be recommended by the Commissioner of Agriculture or State Health Department.
Subd. 7. Abatement of Tree Disease Nuisances. In abating the nuisances defined in
Subdivision 2, the Forester shall cause the infected tree or wood to be sprayed, removed, burned,
or otherwise effectively treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as possible the spread of tree
diseases. Such abatement procedures shall be carried out in accordance with current and
technical and expert opinions and plans as may be designed by the Commissioner of Agriculture.
Subd. 8. Procedures for Removal of Infected Trees and Wood.
A. Ordinary Procedure. Whenever the Forester finds with reasonable certainty that the
infection defined in Subdivision 2 exists in any tree or wood in any public or private
place in the City, the Forester shall proceed as follows: If the Forester finds that the
danger of infestation of other trees is not imminent, the Forester shall notify the abutting
property owner and/or the owner of the property upon which the tree is located, by
certified mail, that the nuisance will be abated within a specified time, not less than five
days from the date of mailing of such notice. The Forester shall immediately report such
action to the Council, which shall proceed by:
(1) abating the nuisance as a public improvement under Minnesota Statute §
429.101, or
(2) abating the nuisance as provided in subdivision 3.
B. Immediate Action. If the Forester finds with reasonable certainty that immediate action
is required to prevent the spread of the disease, the Forester may proceed to abate the
8-22
nuisance forthwith. The Forester shall report such action immediately to the Council and
to the owner of the property where the nuisance is located.
Subd. 9. Council Action. Upon receipt of the Forester’s report required by Subdivision 8,
the Council shall, by resolution, order the nuisance abated. Before action is taken on such
resolution, the Council shall publish notice of its intention to meet to consider taking action to
abate the nuisance. This notice shall be mailed to affected property owners and published once
no less than one week prior to such meeting. The notice shall state the time and place of the
meeting, the property affected, the action proposed, the estimated cost of the abatement, and the
proposed bases of assessment, if any, of costs. At the hearing or adjournment thereof, the
Council shall hear property owners with reference to the scope and desirability of the proposed
project. The Council shall thereafter adopt a resolution confirming the original resolution with
such modifications as it considers desirable and provide for abatement.
Subd. 10. Records. The Forester shall keep a record of the costs of abatements done under
this Section and shall report monthly to the Clerk all work done for which assessments are to be
made, stating and certifying the description of land, lots, parcels involved and the amount
chargeable to each.
Subd. 11. Assessments. On or before September 1 of each year the Clerk shall list the total
unpaid charges for each abatement against each separate lot or parcel to which they are
attributable under this Section. The Council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof
against the property involved as a special assessment under Minnesota Statute § 429.101 and
other pertinent statutes for certification to the county auditor and collection the following year
along with current taxes.
Subd. 12. Treatment. Whenever the Forester determines that any tree or wood within the
City is infected with disease, he may spray or otherwise treat all nearby trees, with an effective
disease destroying agent. Spraying and other treatment activities authorized by this Section shall
be conducted in accordance with technical and expert opinions and plans of the Commissioner of
Agriculture and under the supervision of the Commissioner and his agents whenever possible.
The notice provisions of Subdivision 9, apply to spraying and treatment operations conducted
under this Chapter.
Subd. 13. Transporting Diseased Wood Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to
transport within the City any diseased wood or any bark-bearing elm or oak wood without
having first obtained permission from the Forester. The Forester shall grant such permission
only when the purpose of this Section will be served thereby by minimizing the risk of spread of
the disease.
Subd. 14. Stockpiling. Any bark-bearing elm wood may be stockpiled within the City
limits during the period September 15 through April 1. Any such wood not utilized by April 1
must then be removed and disposed of as provided by law.
8-23
Subd. 15. Interference Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or
interfere with the Forester or his agents while they are engaged in the performance of duties
imposed by this Section.
SECTION 809.01. CURFEW.
Subd. 1. Curfew Imposed. No person 15 years of age or younger shall be, or remain
upon, any of the streets, avenues, alleys or other public places within the municipal boundaries of
the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., and no person between 16 and 18 years
of age shall be, or remain upon, any of the streets, avenues, alleys or other public places within
the municipal boundaries of the City between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless such
person is accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other person having legal custody of such minor
person, or unless such person is so directed by a parent, guardian, or any other person having
legal custody of such minor person, and it is necessary for such minor person to be upon said
streets, avenues, alleys, or other public places between the herein specified hours.
Subd. 2. Parental Responsibility. No parent, guardian, or other person having legal
custody of a person under eighteen years of age shall knowingly permit said minor to violate the
provisions of this Section.
Subd. 3. Waiver. The sheriff or mayor, may waive the restrictions of this Section in order
to accommodate school, religious, or community sponsored events, or other special
circumstances.
SECTION 810.01. PUBLIC DECENCY.
Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to prohibit public indecency in order
to deter criminal activity, to promote societal order and public health, and to protect children.
Subd. 2. Findings. The Council makes the following findings regarding the need to
prohibit public indecency:
A. Public indecency can increase the incidence of criminal activity, including but not limited
to prostitution, disorderly conduct and sexual assault.
B. Public indecency can expose children to an unhealthy and nurtureless environment.
C. Public indecency can present health concerns in places of public accommodation and
other public settings.
D. Public indecency can have a potentially negative impact on the value and marketability of
property.
Subd. 3. Definitions. The following words and terms when used in this Ordinance shall
have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
8-24
A. “Nudity” means:
1. The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals,
female breast; or,
2. A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male
genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast;
B. “Person” means a natural person 6 years of age or older, including employees or agents
of a public accommodation.
C. “Public Place” means any location frequented by the public, or where the public is
present or likely to be present, or where a person may reasonably be expected to be
observed by members of the public. Public places include, but are not limited to, streets,
sidewalks, parks, beaches, business and commercial establishments (whether for profit or
not for profit and whether open to the public at large or where entrance is limited by a
cover charge or membership requirement), bottle clubs, hotels, motels, restaurants, night
clubs, country clubs, cabarets and meeting facilities utilized by any religious, social
fraternal or similar organizations. Premises used solely as a private residence, whether
permanent or temporary in nature, shall not be deemed a public place. A public place
shall not include enclosed single sex public restrooms, enclosed single sex motel rooms
and hotel rooms designed and intended for sleeping accommodations, doctor’s offices,
portions of hospital and similar places in which nudity or exposure is necessarily and
customarily expected outside of the home and the sphere of privacy constitutionally
protected therein; nor shall it include a person appearing in a state of nudity in a modeling
class operated by (1) a proprietary school licensed by the state; a college or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation; or (2) a private college or university which
maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a
college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation or an
accredited private college.
Subd. 4. Public Indecency Prohibited: A person who knowingly or intentionally in a
public setting or place:
A. Engages in sexual intercourse;
B. Engages in sexual conduct;
C. Appears in a state of nudity;
D. Fondles the genitals of himself or herself; or
E. Fondles the genitals of another person
8-25
commits public indecency and is guilty of a misdemeanor under Minnesota law and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of up to $1,000 or by imprisonment for up to 90
days; or both.
Subd. 5. Indecency in Other than Public Place. No person shall, in a place other than a
public place, with the intent to be seen by persons other than invitees and occupants of that place:
A. Engage in sexual intercourse;
B. Engage in sexual conduct; or
C. Fondle the genitals of himself or another person
where he can be seen by persons other than invitees and occupants of that place.
Subd. 6. Exclusion. The provisions of City Code Section 811.01, Subd. 4, shall not apply
to:
A. Any theatrical production performed in a theater, by a professional or amateur theatrical
or musical company, which has serious artistic merit, or
B. A woman breastfeeding a child.
SECTION 811.01. PUBLIC DRINKING.
Subd. 1. Consumption. No person shall consume alcoholic beverages on any public
sidewalk or street, in a vehicle upon a public street, or in any of the City parks or playground,
except as permitted with a license or permit issued by the City.
Subd. 2. Possession. No person shall have in possession alcoholic beverages in any open
container on any public sidewalk or street, in a vehicle upon a public street, or in any City park
or playground.
SECTION 812.01. FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS WEAPONS REGULATIONS
Subd. 1. Declaration of Policy. The City of Delano is a developing community in which
the land uses have intensified causing a reduction in the amount of open land available for the
discharge of firearms and dangerous weapons to certain circumstances specifically provided for
herein.
Subd. 1. Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following terms shall have the
meaning given to them below:
8-26
A. “Carrying” means the actual physical transportation, use, holding or handling of a firearm
or other dangerous weapon on or about one’s person, concealed or otherwise.
B. “Dangerous Weapon” means any firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, explosive,
firework, bow and arrow, sling-shot, or any other device as defined in Minn. Stat.
§609.02, Subdivision 6, capable of producing death or great bodily harm.
C. “Discharge” means the shooting, activation or other use of a firearm or other dangerous
weapon.
D. “Encased” means placement or storage of firearm or other dangerous weapon within a
case or similar storage device which completely encloses said firearm or other dangerous
weapon so as to prevent its discharge and use, and, in the case of firearms, includes the
unloading of ammunition from all barrels, chambers and magazines.
E. “Firearm” means any rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver, air gun, BB gun, or similar device.
Subd. 3. Transporting Firearm. No person shall carry a firearm or other dangerous
weapon beyond the limits of private property where such person resides and which is owned by
such person unless said firearm or other weapon is properly encased, or unless that person is
currently engaged in an activity under Subdivision 5.
Subd. 4. Discharge of Firearm. No person shall discharge a firearm or other dangerous
weapon within the corporate limits of the City except as expressly provided in Subdivision 5,
below.
Subd. 5. Exceptions. Notwithstanding the general prohibitions of Subdivisions 3 and 4,
the following individuals may engage in the activities described below:
A. Persons duly authorized to act as law enforcement officers or members of the military
forces of the United States of the State of Minnesota in the discharge of their duties.
B. Persons engaged in the ceremonial discharge, carrying or other handling of a firearm
performed for national holidays, military funerals, parades, or similar occasions, provided
such discharge uses only “blank” or other non-projectile cartridges and further provided
such organization has obtained a permit from the City for such discharge. A bona fide
veterans’ organization engaged in any such activity is exempt from the permit
requirement.
C. Persons engaged in the use of bow and arrows for educational purposes, provided such
use is performed on school district property and subject to appropriate supervision by
authorized school district personnel; and persons engaged in bow and arrow use on
private property owned by such person or with the consent of the owner, provided the use
is in such a manner as to prevent the arrows from leaving the property limits, and further
provided that the use does not reasonably risk bodily harm to any individual. In any case,
bow and arrow use is limited to arrows equipped with practice or field tips only.
8-27
D. Persons engaged in cleaning a firearm on property owned by such person as long as such
cleaning involves no discharge of the firearm and is performed in a safe manner.
E. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the firing of a gun, pistol or other weapon
when done in a lawful defense of person or family.
Subd. 6. Minors. In addition to the limitations contained in this Section,
A. Under 14. No person shall, outside of the parent’s or guardian’s presence and without the
parent’s or guardian’s consent, furnish a child under 14 years of age a firearm, dangerous
weapon, or any ammunition. Further, no parent or guardian shall permit a child under 14
years of age to transport or use, outside of the parent’s or guardian’s presence, a firearm,
dangerous weapon, or any ammunition.
B. Under 18. No person shall furnish a minor under 18 years of age with a firearm,
dangerous weapon, ammunition, or explosive without the written consent of the parent or
guardian.
Subd. 7. Incorporation by Reference of Minnesota Weapons Regulations. The terms,
conditions, regulations and definitions of Minnesota State law regarding the issuance of permits
for weapons, and regarding possession, training, use and concealment of weapons is incorporated
herein by reference, including but not limited to Minnesota Statute §624.713 and 624.714.
SECTION 813.01 ANTI-GRAFFITI REGULATIONS.
Subd. 1. Purpose and Intent.
A. The Council is enacting this ordinance to help prevent the spread of graffiti vandalism
and to establish a program for the removal of graffiti from public and private property.
The Council is authorized to enact this ordinance pursuant to its police powers.
B. The Council finds that graffiti is a public nuisance and destructive of the rights and
values of property owners as well as the entire community. Unless the City acts to
remove graffiti from public and private property, the graffiti tends to remain. Other
properties then become the target of graffiti, and entire neighborhoods are affected and
become less desirable places in which to be, all to the detriment of the City.
C. The Council intends, through the adoption of this ordinance, to provide additional
enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of graffiti vandalism
and defacement. The Council does not intend for this ordinance to conflict with any
existing anti-graffiti state laws.
Subd. 2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Section, the following words will have the meaning provided to them in
this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
8-28
A. “Aerosol paint container” means any aerosol container that is adapted or made for the
purpose of applying spray paint or other substances capable of defacing property.
B. “Broad-tipped marker” means any felt tip indelible marker or similar implement with a
flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest width, is greater than one-fourth of an
inch, containing ink or other pigmented liquid that is not water soluble.
C. “Etching equipment” means any tool, device or substance that can be used to make
permanent marks on any natural or man-made surface.
D. “Graffiti” means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement
that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or
otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by any graffiti implement,
to the extent that the graffiti was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of
the property, or despite advance authorization is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by
the Council.
E. “Graffiti implement” means an aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped marker, gum label,
paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or any other device capable of
scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or man-made surface.
F. “Paint Stick” or “graffiti stick” means any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk,
wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure
and leaving a mark of at least one-fourth of an inch in width.
G. “Person” means any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation,
personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.
Subd. 3. Prohibited Acts.
A. Defacement. It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any natural or man-made
surface on any publicly-owned property or, without the permission of the owner or
occupant, on any privately-owned property.
B. Possession of Graffiti Implements. Unless otherwise authorized by the owner or
occupant, it is unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement while:
1. within 200 feet of any graffiti located in or on a public facility, park, playground,
swimming pool, recreational facility, or other public building or structure owned
or operated by a governmental agency; or
2. within 200 feet of any graffiti located in any public place, or on private property,
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
8-29
Subd. 4. Graffiti as Nuisance.
A. Declaration. The existence of graffiti on public or private property in violation of this
ordinance is expressly declared to be a public nuisance and, therefore, is subject to the
removal and abatement provisions specified in this ordinance.
B. Duty of Property Owner. It is the duty of both the owner of the property to which the
graffiti has been applied and any person who may be in possession or who has the right to
possess such property to at all times keep the property clear of graffiti.
Subd. 5. Removal of Graffiti.
A. By Perpetrator. Any person applying graffiti on public or private property has the duty to
remove the graffiti within 24 hours after notice by the City or private owner of the
property involved. This removal must be done in a manner prescribed by the City
Administrator, Chief of Police, Public Works Director or their designees. Any person
applying graffiti is responsible for the removal or for the payment of the removal. Failure
of any person to remove graffiti or pay for the removal will constitute an additional
violation of this ordinance. Where graffiti is applied by a person under 18 years old, the
parents or legal guardian will also be responsible for such removal or for the payment for
the removal.
B. By Property Owner or City. If graffiti is not removed by the perpetrator according to
paragraph 1, the City may order that the graffiti be removed by the property owner or any
person who may be in possession or who has the right to possess such property, pursuant
to the nuisance abatement procedure in Section 801.06. If the property owner or
responsible party fails to remove offending graffiti within the time specified by the City,
the City may commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the graffiti removal
in accordance with Section 801.07.
Subd. 6. Penalty. Any violation of this Section is a misdemeanor, punishable in
accordance with state law.
SECTION 814.01. NUISANCE A MISDEMEANOR. It is unlawful for any person to create,
maintain, or fail to abate any activity or condition that is declared by any Section in this Chapter
to be a nuisance and any violation shall be a misdemeanor.
P:\Home\1500.309 - Delano City Code\CHAPTER 8 NUISANCES AND OFFENSES\CHAPTER 8 (clean) - 2009 03 10.doc
8-30
CHAPTER 51
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING AN UPDATED AND CONTEMPORARY ZONING
ORDINANCE TEXT AND ZONING MAP FOR THE CITY OF DELANO, MINNESOTA.
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF DELANO DOES ORDAIN:
SECTION 51.01. TITLE / APPLICATION / RULES / DEFINITIONS
Subd. A. Title and Application.
1. Title. This Ordinance shall be known, cited and referred to as the “Delano
Zoning Ordinance” except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as “this
Ordinance.”
2. Intent and Purpose. The intent of this Ordinance is to:
a. Protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community
and its people through the establishment of minimum regulations
governing development and use.
b. This Ordinance shall divide the City into use districts and establish
regulations in regard to location, erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, and use of structures and land.
c. Protect neighborhoods.
d. Promote orderly development and redevelopment.
e. Provide adequate light, air, and convenience of access to property.
f. Prevent congestion in the public right-of-way.
g. Prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures by
regulating land, buildings, yards, and density of population.
h. Provide for compatibility of different land uses.
i. Provide for administration of this Ordinance.
j. Provide for amendments.
k. Prescribe penalties for violation of such regulations.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-1
l. To define powers and duties of the City staff, the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals, and the City Council in relation to the Zoning Ordinance.
3. Relation to Comprehensive Plan. It is the policy of the City of Delano that the
enforcement, amendment, and administration of this Ordinance be accomplished
with due consideration of the recommendations contained in the Comprehensive
Plan, as developed and amended from time to time by the City Council of the
City. The City Council recognizes the Comprehensive Plan as the policy guide
for responsible regulation of land use and development in accordance with the
policies and purpose herein set forth.
4. Minimum Requirements.
a. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Ordinance are
either more or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by
other ordinance, rule or regulation of the City, the ordinance, rule or
regulation which imposes the more restrictive condition, standard, or
requirement shall prevail. The Zoning Administrator shall determine which
is more “restrictive” and appeals from such determination may be made in
the manner provided herein.
b. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety and welfare.
5. Conformance With This Ordinance.
a. No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
altered, and no structure or land shall be used for any purpose nor in any
manner which is not in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
b. Except as herein provided, no building, structure or premises shall
hereafter be used or occupied and no building permit shall be granted that
does not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance.
6. Uses Not Provided for Within Zoning Districts. Whenever in any zoning
district, a use is neither specifically permitted nor denied, the use shall be
considered prohibited. In such case, the City Council on their own initiative or
upon request, may conduct a study to determine if the use is acceptable and if
so, what zoning district would be most appropriate and the determination as to
conditions and standards relating to development of the use. The City Council or
property owner, upon receipt of the staff study, shall, if appropriate, initiate an
amendment to the Zoning Ordinance to provide for the particular use under
consideration or shall find that the use is not compatible for development within
the City.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-2
7. Separability. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City that the several
provisions of this Ordinance are separable in accordance with the following:
a. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this
Ordinance to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision
of this Ordinance not specifically included in such judgment.
b. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application
of any provision of this Ordinance to a particular property, building, or
structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision
to any other property, building, or structure not specifically included in said
judgment.
8. Authority. This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the
Municipal Planning Act, Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.351 to 462.364.
9. Comprehensive Revision. This Ordinance shall be a comprehensive revision
to the Delano Zoning Ordinance, as amended. Except as otherwise provided
herein, the provisions of this Ordinance are not intended to alter, diminish, or
increase or otherwise modify any rights or liabilities existing on its effective date.
Any act done, offense committed, or rights accruing or accrued, or liability,
penalty incurred or imposed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance is not
affected by its enactment.
10. Repeal. The previous Chapter 51, Delano Zoning Ordinance, is hereby
amended in its entirety, as stated in this Ordinance.
11. Fees. No application for a Zoning Ordinance amendment, rezoning,
conditional use permit, interim use permit, variance, administrative permit, or site
and building plan review shall be accepted or considered by the City Council or
any other body of the City unless such application is complete and accompanied
by a deposit. The total fee for processing such application, which shall be paid
by the petitioner to the City, shall be paid whether or not such application is
approved or denied. The deposit shall be used to cover the total out of pocket
expenses incurred by the City in processing such application, for such necessary
items as, but not limited to, attorney’s, planner’s, and/or engineer’s fees and
costs, and any other costs incident thereto, and shall be in addition to a fee for
the City staff services, to be paid to the City, which separate fees and deposits
shall be established by City Council ordinance. The deposit shall not be
considered as the total amount to be paid. The total amount shall be the actual
amount expended plus the fee for the City staff services. Any unused portion of
the required deposits will be returned to the petitioner. The fees established
herein may be changed by the City Council from time to time, by resolution or
ordinance, as appropriate. A copy of said ordinance shall be on file in the office
of the City Clerk and available for inspection during regular City office hours.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-3
Subd. B. Rules and Definitions.
1. Rules. The language set forth in the text of this Ordinance shall be interpreted
in accordance with the following rules of construction:
1. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
2. The present tense includes the past and the future tenses, and the future
the present.
3. The words “shall” and “must” are mandatory while the word “may” is
permissive.
4. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
5. Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this
Ordinance, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in such definition
thereof.
6. In the event of conflicting provisions, the more restrictive shall apply.
7. All measured distances expressed in feet shall be the nearest tenth of a
foot.
8. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be held to be the minimum requirement for the promotion of health, safety,
and welfare.
2. Definitions. The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this
Ordinance, shall be interpreted as herein defined:
Accessory Building. A portion of the principal building or a detached structure
on the same lot which is used for an accessory use.
Accessory Use. A use of land or of a building or portion thereof customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located
on the same lot with such principal use.
Addition. A physical enlargement of an existing structure.
Alley. A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary
access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on a
street.
Agricultural Farm Building. An accessory building designed, constructed, used
or intended to house farm implements or agriculture areas, as defined by this
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-4
Ordinance, on an active farm operation of more than twenty (20) acres. A
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Permit may be required.
Agriculture. The production, keeping or maintenance, for sale, or personal use,
of plants and animals useful to man, including but not limited to: forages and sod
crops, grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products, poultry and
poultry products; livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies,
mules, or goats, or any mutations or hybrids thereof, including the breeding and
grazing of any or all of such animals; bees and apiary products; fruits of all kinds,
including grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental and
greenhouse products; or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry
management program. Agricultural land uses do not include slaughter houses or
the processing of crops, produce, animals for public purchase or consumption as
to constitute a commercial or industrial land use.
Animal Unit. A unit of measure used to compare differences in the production
of animal wastes which has a standard amount of waste produced on a regular
basis by a slaughter steer or heifer. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the
following equivalents apply. To determine the animal unit measure for any
animal not specific below, divide the average adult weight by one thousand
(1,000).
Animal Unit
(1) Slaughter Steer or Heifer 1.0
(1) Cow and Calf Pair 1.2
Mature Dairy Cow
(1) Over 1,000 lbs
(1) Under 1,000 lbs
1.4
1.0
Swine
(1) Over 300 lbs
(1) Between 55-300 lbs
(1) Under 55 lbs
.4
.3
.05
(1) Sheep .4
(1) Duck .01
Turkey
(1) Over 5 lbs
(1) Under 5 lbs
.018
.005
Chickens (Dry Manure)
(1) Over 5 lbs
(1) Under 5 lbs
.005
.003
(1) Chicken (Liquid Manure) .033
(1) Horse 1.0
Animals, Domestic. For purposes of this Ordinance, domestic animals shall be
defined as house pets such as dogs, cats, traditional and typical animal pets, and
birds (not including pigeons, chickens, geese, turkeys or other domestic fowl)
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-5
which can be contained within a principal structure throughout the entire year,
provided that the containment can be accomplished without special modification
to the structure requiring a building permit from the City. In addition, it includes
rabbits normally sheltered outside the home.
Animals, Farm. Cattle, hogs, bees, sheep, goats, chickens, turkeys, horses
and other animals traditionally and commonly accepted as farm animals in the
State of Minnesota.
Antenna Related.
1. Personal Wireless Service. A device consisting of a metal, carbon, fiber,
or other electromagnetically conducive rods or elements on a single
supporting pole or other structure, and used for the transmission and
reception of wireless communications including cellular, personal
communication services (PCS), enhanced specialized mobilized radio
(ESMR), paging and similar services.
2. Public or Commercial Radio and Television, Broadcast Transmitting. A
wire, set of wires, metal or carbon fiber rod or other electromagnetic
element used to transmit public or commercial broadcast radio, or
television programming and including the support structure thereof.
3. Public Utility Microwave. A parabolic dish or cornucopia shaped
electromagnetically reflective or conductive element used for the
transmission and/or reception of point to point UHF or VHF radio waves in
wireless telephone communications, and including the support structure
thereof.
4. Radio and Television Receiving. A wire, set of wires, metal or carbon
fiber element(s) other than satellite dish antennas, used to receive radio,
television, or electromagnetic waves, and including the support structure
thereof.
5. Satellite Dish. A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid,
open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone,
horn, or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit and/or receive
radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based
uses. This definition shall include, but not be limited to, what are
commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, TVROs (television receive
only) and satellite microwave antennas and support structure thereof.
6. Satellite Dish Height. The height of the antenna or dish measured
vertically from the highest point of the antenna or dish when positioned for
operation, to the top of the foundation which supports the antenna.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-6
7. Short-Wave Radio Transmitting and Receiving (Ham Radio). A wire, set
of wires or a device, consisting of a metal, carbon fiber, or other
electromagnetically conductive element used for the transmission and
reception of radio waves used for short-wave and citizen band radio
communications, and including the supporting structure thereof.
8. Secondary Use. A use of land or of a building or a portion thereof which
is subordinate to and does not constitute the primary use of the land or
building.
9. Structure, Public. An edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work
artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite
manner which is owned or rented, and operated by a federal, state, or
local government agency.
10. Support Structure. Any building or other structure other than a tower
which can be used for location of antennas.
11. Tower. Any ground mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination
thereof, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, masts, intended
primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna or similar apparatus
above grade.
12. Tower, Temporary Mobile. Any mobile tower, pole, or structure located on
a trailer, vehicle, or temporary platform intended primarily for the purpose
of mounting an antenna or similar apparatus for personal wireless
services, which is commonly referred to as Cellular on Wheels (COW).
Apartment. A room or suite of rooms which is part of a larger structure designed
for, intended for, or used as a residence by a single family or an individual, and is
equipped with cooking facilities. Includes dwelling unit and efficiency unit.
Applicant. The person(s) whose name(s) are on an application as owner, their
agent or person having legal control, ownership and/or interest in land for which
the provisions of this Ordinance are being considered or reviewed.
Basement. That portion of a building between floor and ceiling, which is partly
below and partly above grade, but so located that the vertical distance from
grade to the floor below is more than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling
for more than fifty (50) percent of its perimeter.
Bay. A part of a building projecting or cantilevered from the main part.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-7
Bluff. A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having the
following characteristics:
1. Part of all of the feature is located in a shoreland area.
2. The slope rises at least twenty-five (25) feet above the ordinary high water
level of the water body.
3. The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point twenty-five (25)
feet or more above the ordinary high water level averages thirty (30)
percent or greater.
4. The slope must drain toward the water body.
Bluff Impact Zone. A bluff and land located within twenty (20) feet from the top
of a bluff.
Bluff, Toe Of: The lower point of a fifty (50) foot segment with an average slope
exceeding eighteen (18) percent.
Bluff, Top Of: The highest point of a fifty (50) foot segment with an average
slope exceeding eighteen (18) percent.
Boarder. An individual other than a member of the family occupying the dwelling
unit or a part thereof who, for a consideration, is furnished sleeping
accommodations and may be furnished meals or other services as part of the
consideration.
Buffer Yard. A strip of land utilized to screen or partially screen a use or
property from another use or property or to shield or mitigate noise, lights, or
other impacts.
Buildable Land, Contiguous. Land area occurring within the property lines of a
parcel or lot excluding wetlands, water bodies, 100 year flood fringe,
transmission utility easements, or rights-of-way.
Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and
intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process,
equipment, goods or materials of any kind or nature.
Building Coverage. The horizontal area measured within the outside of the
exterior walls and supporting columns of the ground floor of all principal and
accessory buildings on a lot.
Building Height. A distance to be measured from the mean ground level to the
top of a flat roof, to the mean distance of the highest gable on a pitched or hip
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-8
roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, to the uppermost point on all other roof
types.
Building Line. A line measured across the width of the lot at the point where
the principal structure is placed in accordance with setback provisions.
Building, Pole. Any structure possessing the following characteristics: structural
wood poles or timbers buried in ground without footings or with individual
footings; metal wall coverings hung in a manner that the wall coverings provide
structural support for the wood frame. Such definition shall not include or apply
to decks, sign supports, earth retention structures, playground equipment,
electric utilities, or any other similar structure not covering or enclosing a specific
area.
Business. Any establishment, occupation, employment or enterprise where
merchandise is manufactured, exhibited or sold or where services are offered for
compensation.
Channel. A natural or artificial depression of perceptible extent, with definite
bed and banks to confine and conduct water either continuously or periodically.
Church. A building, together with its accessory buildings and use; where
persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which building, together
with its accessory buildings are uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious
body organized to sustain public worship.
City Council. The governing body for the City of Delano.
Club or Lodge. A club or lodge is a non-profit association of persons who are
bonafide members paying annual dues, use of premises being restricted to
members and their guests.
Commercial Use. The principal use of land or buildings for the sale, lease,
rental or trade of products, goods and services, including, but not limited to:
1. Automobile Repair-Major. General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning
engines, motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body, frame
or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint job; vehicle
steam cleaning.
2. Automobile Repair-Minor. An establishment providing goods or services
related to automobiles such as car washes, repair businesses limited to
minor engine repair, fluid changing, tire service and muffler repair and
other uses of similar character, but not including uses defined as a major
automobile business or automobile sales.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-9
3. Automobile Sales. The use of any building or land area for the display
and sale of new or used automobiles, trucks, vans, trailers or recreational
vehicles including any major or minor automobile repair or service uses
conducted as an accessory use.
4. Automobile Service Station. Any building, land area or other premises, or
portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail dispensing or
sales of vehicular fuels; and including as an accessory use the sale and
installation of lubricants, tires, batteries, and similar accessories.
5. Hospitality Business. An establishment offering transient lodging
accommodations on a daily rate to the general public, leasable events,
meeting or conference facilities and exhibition halls or other uses of similar
character including hotels, motels, convention facilities, and hospices.
6. Liquor Sales, Off-Sale. Licensed sale of intoxicating beverages for
consumption off site.
7. Liquor Sales, On-Sale. Licensed sale of intoxicating beverages for
consumption at the premises where the beverage is purchased.
8. Motor Fuel Station. A place where gasoline is stored only in underground
tanks, kerosene or motor oil and lubricants or grease, for operation of
automobiles, are retailed directly to the public on premises, and including
minor accessories and services for automobiles, but not including
automobile major repairs and rebuilding.
9. Office Business-Clinic. An establishment located within a building or
portion of a building providing out-patient health services to patrons,
including general medical clinics, mental health providers, chiropractor,
dentists, orthodontia, oral surgeons, opticians, and other uses of similar
character.
10. Office Business-General. An establishment located within a building or
portion of a building for the conduct of business activities involving
predominantly professional administrative or clerical service operations
including attorneys, financial advisors, insurance, travel, real estate, and
other uses of similar character.
11. Personal Service. Personal services shall include the following: barber
shops, beauty salon, electrolysis, manicurist, tanning parlor, physical
therapy, therapeutic massage, and tattooing.
12. Recreational Business. Arcade, health club, gymnasium, bowling alley,
billiard (pool) hall, dance hall, dance studio, skating rinks, theaters, and
indoor firearms range. Activities are contained within a building.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-10
13. Restaurant. An establishment that serves food in individual servings for
consumption on or off premises, including sit-down restaurants, take out,
pick up, or delivery food sales, but not including drive-through facilities.
Outdoor dining areas and drive-through facilities may or may not be
allowed in each zoning district: they are not automatically allowed when a
restaurant is an allowable use.
14. Retail Business. An establishment engaged in the display and sale of
products produced off-site directly to consumers within a building or
portion of a building excluding any exterior display and sales. (Exception –
sexually oriented uses)
15. Service Business, Off-Site. A company that provides useful labor,
maintenance, repair and activities incidental to business production or
distribution where the service is provided at the customer’s location,
including delivery services, catering services, plumbing and sewer
services, and other uses of similar character.
16. Service Business, On-Site. An establishment that provides useful labor,
maintenance, repair and activities incidental to business production or
distribution where the customer patronizes the location of the operation,
such as banks (not including drive-through facilities), copy centers,
laundromats, dry cleaners, funeral homes and mortuaries, appliance
repair, tailor shops, and travel bureaus.
Comprehensive Plan. A Comprehensive Plan prepared and approved by the
City, including a compilation of policy statements, goals, standards, fiscal
guidelines, and maps indicating the general locations recommended for the
various functional classes of land use, places and structures, and for the general
physical development of the City, including any unit or part of such plan
separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
Conditional Use. A land use or development that may not be appropriate
generally within a certain district but may be allowed in that district with
appropriate restrictions, conditions or limitations as imposed by the City Council
Conditional Use Permit. A permit issued by the City Council in accordance with
the procedures specified within this Ordinance as a device to enable the City
Council to assign conditions to a proposed use or development after
consideration of the adjacent land uses and the special characteristics which the
proposed use presents.
Condominium. A multiple family dwelling or development containing individually
owned dwelling units and jointly owned and shared areas and facilities, which
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-11
dwelling or development is subject to the provisions of the Minnesota
Condominium Law, Minnesota Statutes sections 515A.1-101 et seq.
Condominium Association. The community association that administers and
maintains the common property and common elements of a condominium.
Critical Root Zone (CRZ). An imaginary circle surrounding the tree trunk with a
radius distance of one (1) foot per one (1) inch of tree diameter, e.g., a twenty
(20) inch diameter tree has a CRZ with a radius of twenty (20) feet.
Day Care Facility. Any facility licensed by the State Department of Public
Welfare, public or private, which for gain or otherwise regularly provides one or
more persons with care, training, supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation or
developmental guidance on a regular basis, for periods of less than twenty-four
(24) hours per day, in a place other than the person’s own home. Day care
facilities include, but are not limited to, adult day care, family day care homes,
group family day care homes, day care centers, day nurseries, nursery schools,
daytime activity centers, day treatment programs and day services, as defined by
Minnesota State Statutes, Section 245A.02.
Deck. Horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached railings, seats,
trellises, or other features, attached or functionally related to a principal use or
site and at any point extending above grade.
District. A section or sections of the City for which the regulations and
provisions governing the use of buildings and lands are uniform for each class of
use permitted therein.
Drainage. The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains,
grading or other means which include runoff controls to minimize erosion and
sedimentation during and after construction or development, the means for
preserving the water supply and the prevention or alleviation of flooding.
Drainageway. Any natural or artificial watercourse, trench, ditch, swale or
similar depression into which surface water flows.
Drip Line. The farthest distance away from the trunk that rain or dew will fall
directly to the ground from the leaves or branches of the tree or one (1) foot per
one (1) inch of diameter, whichever is greater.
Drive-Through Facilities. Physical facilities that permit customers to receive
services or obtain goods while remaining in their motor vehicles. Examples
include, but are not limited to, bank, drug store, and restaurant drive-through
facilities.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-12
Driveway. A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking space,
garage, dwelling or other structures.
Dwelling. A building or portion thereof, designated exclusively for residential
occupancy, including one family, two family and multiple family dwellings, but not
including hotels, motels and boarding houses.
Dwelling, Efficiency. A dwelling unit consisting of not more than one habitable
room together with kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary facilities.
Dwelling, Multiple (Apartment). A building designed with three (3) or more
dwelling units exclusively for occupancy by three (3) or more families living
independently of each other, but sharing hallways and main entrances and exits.
Dwelling, Quadraminium. A single structure which contains four (4) separately
owned dwelling units, all of which have individually separate entrances from the
exterior of the structure.
Dwelling, Single Family Detached. A dwelling which is designed for and
occupied by not more than one family and surrounded by open space or yards
and which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means.
Dwelling, Townhouse. A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three (3) such
units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit
is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by
one or more common fire resistant walls.
Dwelling, Two-Family. A structure containing two dwelling units, each of which
is totally separated from the other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to
roof or an unpierced ceiling and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall,
except for a common stairwell exterior to both dwelling units.
Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping and sanitary
facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single family
maintaining a household.
Easement. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner
to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity.
Elderly (Senior Citizen) Housing. A public agency owned or controlled
multiple dwelling building with open occupancy limited to persons over fifty-five
(55) years of age or older.
Essential Services. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by
public utilities or municipal departments of underground or overhead telephone,
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-13
gas, electrical, communication, water or sewer transmission, distribution,
collection, supply or disposal systems including poles, wires, mains, drains,
sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection
therewith for the furnishing of adequate service by such private or public utilities
or municipal departments. Personal wireless service and commercial
broadcasting antennas and towers shall not be considered an essential service.
Exterior Storage/Storage Yards. An outside area where equipment, vehicles,
trailers, or material relating to the principal use of a parcel of land is stored. This
includes semi-trucks and trailers. The stored items are not for sale or display but
are used in the everyday operation of the principal use. Also referred to as
“outdoor storage.” Outdoor sales lots are not outdoor storage but are distinct
uses regulated by this ordinance.
Family. One (1) or more persons each related to the other by blood, marriage,
adoption, or foster care, or a group of not more than three (3) persons not so
related maintaining a common household and using common cooking and
kitchen facilities.
Farm. Real property used for commercial agriculture or horticulture comprising
at least twenty (20) contiguous acres and which may contain other contiguous or
noncontiguous acreage, all of which is owned or leased and operated by a single
family, family corporation, individual or corporation.
Farm, Limited (Hobby Farm). A limited farm is a food producing use primarily
intended for the use of the residents and on parcels of from one (1) to twenty (20)
contiguous acres in size. Limited farming uses may include the production of
crops, such as fruits, vegetables, flowers, plants, shrubs and trees. Animals and
domestic pets may be allowed subject to the provisions of City Code Sections
502 and 503.
Feedlot. A confined area or structure used for feeding, breeding, or holding
livestock for eventual sale in which animal waste may accumulate but not
including barns, pens or other structures used in a dairy farm operation.
Fence. A fence is defined for the purpose of this Ordinance as any partition,
structure, wall or gate erected as a dividing mark, barrier or enclosure.
Fence, Boundary Line. All fences located on or within one (1) foot of a
property line.
Fence, Interior Yard. All fences located two (2) feet or beyond a property line.
Filter Strip. A linear strip of land along a lake, wetland, river, creek, or
stormwater ponding area where vegetation is established and maintained as a
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-14
means to slow the velocity of stormwater drainage and to filter sediment and
pollutants from the stormwater.
Filling. The act of depositing any rock, soil, gravel, sand or other material on a
site.
Flood. A temporary rise in a stream flow or stage which results in inundation of
the areas adjacent to the channel.
Flood Fringe. That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.
Floodplain. The areas adjoining a watercourse which have been or hereafter
may be covered by the regional flood.
Floodway. The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining
floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the regional
flood.
Floor Area. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the
building or portion thereof devoted to a particular use, including accessory
storage areas located within selling or working space such as counters, racks or
closets, and any basement floor area devoted to retailing activities, to the
production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices.
However, the floor area shall not include: basement floor area other than area
devoted to retailing activities, the production or processing of goods, or to
business or professional offices.
Garage. An accessory building or accessory portion of the principal building
which is intended for and used to store the private passenger vehicles of the
family or families resident upon the premises, and in which no business service
or industry is carried on.
Gazebo. A freestanding accessory structure or pavilion from which views of
surrounding scenery are commonly offered. Such structures are characterized
by partly open construction, design symmetry, and the use of ornamental
architectural features.
Grade (Adjacent Ground Elevation). The lowest point of elevation of the
finished surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk within the area between the
building and property line, or when the property line is more than five (5) feet
from the building, between the building and a line five (5) feet from the building.
Grading Plan. Existing topography and proposed finished grades with a contour
interval of no greater than two (2) feet clearly indicating the relationship of
proposed changes to existing topography and remaining features.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-15
Greenway. Land shown in the Comprehensive Plan that is intended to:
1. Preserve contiguous open space to define neighborhoods.
2. Preserve ecologic features and function of unique environmentally
sensitive areas.
3. Protect a diversity of natural features and habitat.
4. Provide for passive recreational trail opportunities.
Hardship. The same as that term is defined in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter
462.
Home Occupation. An occupation or business activity that results in a product
or service and is conducted in whole or in part in a residential dwelling unit, and
is subordinate to the residential use of the dwelling.
Home Office. A room or den within a residential dwelling designed and/or
equipped to conduct the business or household affairs exclusive to the property
owner without on-site customer service, on-site production, and on-site product
storage. The office must not produce noise, odor, vibration, or traffic.
Homeowners Association. A community association, other than a
condominium association, which is organized in a development in which
individual owners share common interests in open space or facilities.
Impervious Surface. An artificial or natural surface through which water, air or
roots cannot penetrate.
Individual Sewage Treatment System or Individual Sewage Disposal
System. A sewage treatment system, or part thereof, serving a dwelling, or
other establishment, or group thereof, and using sewage tanks followed by soil
treatment and disposal or using advanced treatment devices that discharge
below final grade. Individual sewage treatment system includes holding tanks
and privies (per Minnesota Rules 7080).
Interim Use. A temporary use of property until a particular date, until the
occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer allow said
use.
Irrigation System. Any structure or equipment, mechanized or other, used to
supply water for landscaping, vegetation, commercial agriculture or horticulture,
including, but not limited to, wells, pumps, motors, pipes, culverts, gates, dams,
ditches, tanks, ponds, and reservoirs.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-16
Junk Yard. Any area, lot, land, parcel, building or structure or part thereof used
for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale or abandonment of
wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap or discarded goods, materials,
machinery or two (2) or more unregistered, inoperable motor vehicles or other
type of junk.
Kennel, Commercial. Any structure or premises on which three (3) or more
dogs or cats, of one species, over six (6) months of age are kept, owned,
boarded, groomed, sheltered, protected, bred, or offered for sale or any other
merchandising that is not defined as a private kennel. Every commercial kennel
shall be enclosed or fenced in such manner as to prevent the running at large or
escape of animals confined therein.
Kennel, Private. Any structure or premises on which between three (3) and six
(6) dogs, over six (6) months of age are kept for private enjoyment and not for
monetary gain. Every kennel shall be enclosed or fenced in such manner as to
prevent the running at large or escape of animals confined therein.
Land Reclamation. The process of the re-establishment of, acceptable
topography (i.e., slopes), vegetative cover, soil stability, and the establishment of
safe conditions appropriate to the subsequent use of the land.
Lighting Related:
1. Cutoff. The point at which all light rays emitted by a lamp, light source or
luminaire are completely eliminated at a specific angle above the ground.
2. Cutoff Angle. The angle formed by a line drawn from the direction of light
rays at the light source and a line perpendicular to the ground from the
light source above which no light is emitted (see Figure 1).
Figure 1. Cutoff Angle
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-17
3. Cutoff Type Luminaire. A luminaire with elements such as shields,
reflectors, or refractor panels which direct and cut off the light at a cutoff
angle that is less than ninety (90) degrees.
4. Flashing Light. A light source which is not constant in intensity or color at
all times while in use.
5. Foot candle. A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of
which are one (1) foot from a uniform point source of one (1) candle.
6. Light Source. A single artificial point source of luminescence that emits
measurable radiant energy in or near the visible spectrum.
7. Luminaire. A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all
necessary mechanical, electrical and decorative parts.
8. Outdoor Lighting. Any light source or collection of light sources, located
outside a building, including but not limited to, light sources attached to
any part of a structure, located on the surface of the ground or located on
freestanding poles.
9. Outdoor Light Fixture. Outdoor electrically powered illuminating devices,
outdoor lighting or reflective surfaces, lamps and similar devices,
permanently installed or portable, used for illumination or advertisement.
The fixture includes the hardware that houses the illumination source and
to which the illumination source is attached including, but not limited to,
the hardware casing. Such devices shall include, but are not limited to,
search, spot, and flood lights for:
a. Buildings and structures.
b. Recreational areas.
c. Parking lot lighting.
d. Landscaping lighting.
e. Signs.
f. Street lighting.
g. Product display area lighting.
h. Building overhangs and open canopies.
10. Security Lighting. Outdoor lighting fixtures installed exclusively as a
measure to reduce the possible occurrence of a crime on the property.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-18
Figure 2 – Shielding
11. Shielding. A technique or method of construction permanently covering
the top and sides of a light source by a material which restricts the light
emitted to be projected below an imaginary horizontal plane passing
through the light fixture (see Figure 2).
12. Spillage. Any reflection, glare or other artificial light that emits onto any
adjoining property or right-of-way and is above a defined maximum
illumination.
Lot. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings,
together with such open spaces as are required under the provisions of this
zoning regulation, having not less than the minimum area required by this
Ordinance for a building site in the district in which such lot is situated and having
its principal frontage on a street, or a proposed street approved by the Council.
Lot of Record. A contiguous parcel, tract or area of land established by plat,
subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, that has one legal description and
parcel identification number recorded with the Wright County Property Records
Department. Also referred to as a “parcel.”
Lot Area. The total area within the lot lines of a lot measured in a horizontal
plane.
Lot, Base. Lots meeting all the specifications in the zoning district prior to being
subdivided into a two family dwelling or townhome subdivision.
Lot, Corner. A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more
intersecting streets; or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a single
street, the interior angle of which is one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees or less.
Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear
lot line measured from a ninety (90) degree angle from the street right-of-way
within the lot boundaries.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-19
Lot, Double Frontage. A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two
(2) substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot.
Lot Front. The front of a lot shall be, for purposes of complying with this
Ordinance, that boundary abutting a public right-of-way having the least width.
Lot, Interior. A lot, other than corner lot, including through lots.
Lot Line. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate
ownership except that where any position of the lot extends into the abutting
street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or alley right-of-way.
Lot Line, Rear. The lot line opposite and most distant from the lot frontage
which connects the side lot lines. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the rear lot
line of a triangular lot shall be a line entirely within the lot at least ten (10) feet
long and parallel to and most distance point from the front lot line. If the front lot
line on such a lot is curved, the rear lot line shall be parallel to a line tangent to
the front lot line.
Lot, Triangular. A lot in which the side lot lines converge into a single vertex.
The vertex shall be deemed to be the rear lot line.
Lot, Unit. Lots created from the subdivisions of a two family dwelling or
townhome having different minimum lot size requirements than the conventional
base lots within the zoning district.
Lot Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot line of a lot measured at
the front building setback line and parallel to the front lot line. If the front lot line
is curved, such as on a cul-de-sac, the lot width is measured along a line parallel
to a tangent to the front lot line.
Marquee. A permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building wall at an
entrance to a building or extending along and projecting beyond the building’s
wall and generally designed and constructed to provide protection against the
weather.
Mini (Self) Storage. An enclosed storage facility containing independent, fully
enclosed bays that are leased to individuals exclusively for the storage of
household goods or personal belongings.
Model Home. A home which is similar to others in a development and which is
open to public inspection for the purpose of selling said other homes.
Non-Conforming Uses. A use or activity which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails, by reason of such
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-20
adoption, revision or amendment, to conform to the present requirements of the
zoning district.
Nuisance. Anything defined as a nuisance by Section 800 of the City Code.
Nursing Home (Rest Home). A building having accommodations where care
for pay is provided for two (2) or more invalids, infirm, aged or convalescent
persons who are not of the immediate family; but not including hospitals, clinics,
sanitariums, or similar institutions.
Off-Street Loading Space. A space accessible from the street, alley, or way, in
a building or on the lot, for the use of trucks while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials.
Open Sales Lot. Any open land used or occupied for the purpose of display of
merchandise for sale and/or rent.
Open Space. Any parcel or area of land or water, dedicated, designated or
reserved for public or private recreational and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land containing or adjoining such open space.
Ordinary High Water Level (OHWL). The boundary of public waters and
wetlands as determined by the Minnesota Dept. of Natural Resources: an
elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a
sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that
point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to
predominantly terrestrial.
Parcel. A contiguous tract or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as
otherwise permitted by law, that has one legal description and parcel
identification number recorded with the Wright County Property Records
Department. Also referred to as a “lot” or “lot of record.”
Parking Lot. An off-street, ground level area, usually surfaced and improved, for
the temporary storage of motor vehicles.
Parking Space. A space for the parking of a motor vehicle within a public or
private parking area.
Party Wall. A common shared wall between two (2) separate structures,
buildings, or dwelling units.
Permitted Use. Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the
restrictions applicable to that zoning district.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-21
Planned Unit Development. An area of a minimum contiguous size, as
specified by ordinance, to be planned and developed as a single entity containing
one or more residential clusters or planned residential developments and/or one
or more public, quasi-public, commercial or industrial areas in such ranges of
ratios of non-residential uses to residential uses as shall be specified.
Principal Building. A building in which the principal use of the lot is conducted.
Principal Use. The primary or predominant use of any lot and/or building.
Public Waters. As defined in Minnesota Statutes section 103G.005,
subdivision 15:
1. Public Waters, General Development. Those waters whose shores are
generally characterized by medium density residential development with or
without limited service-oriented commercial development.
2. Public Waters, Natural Environment. Generally small, often shallow lakes
with limited capacities for assimilating the impacts of development and
recreational use. They often have adjacent lands with substantial
constraints for development such as high water tables, exposed bedrock,
and unsuitable soils. These lakes, particularly in rural areas, usually do
not have much existing development or recreational use.
3. Public Waters, Recreational Development. Generally medium sized lakes
of varying depths and shapes with a variety of landform, soil and ground
water situations on the lands around them. They often are characterized
by moderate levels of recreational use and existing development.
Development consists mainly of seasonal and year round residences and
recreational-oriented commercial uses. Many of these lakes have
capacities for accommodating additional development and use.
4. Public Waters, Tributary Rivers. Segments consisting of watercourses
mapped in the Protected Waters Inventory that have not been assigned
one of the river classes. These segments have a wide variety of existing
land and recreational use characteristics. The segments have
considerable potential for additional development and recreational use,
particularly those located near roads and cities.
Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle designed and used for recreational purposes
and enjoyment including, but not limited to, snowmobiles, motorized all terrain
vehicles, boats, boat trailers, race cars, travel trailers, truck campers, camping
trailers, and self-propelled motor homes.
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. A point not less than one (1) foot
above the elevation of the floodplain, plus any increases in flood heights
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-22
attributable to encroachments on the floodplain. It is the elevation to which uses
regulated by this Ordinance are required to be elevated or flood proofed.
Relative. Father, mother, brother, sister, son, daughter, son-in-law or daughterin-
law related by blood or law.
Residential Facility, State Licensed. Any program, defined by Minnesota
Statutes section 245A.02, subdivision 14, that provides twenty four (24) hour a
day care, supervision, food, lodging, rehabilitation, training, education,
habilitation, or treatment outside a person's own home, including a nursing home
or hospital that receives public funds, administered by the commissioner of the
Department of Human Services to provide services for five (5) or more persons
whose primary diagnosis is mental retardation or a related condition or mental
illness and who do not have a significant physical or medical problem that
necessitates nursing home care; a program in an intermediate care facility for
four (4) or more persons with mental retardation or a related condition; a nursing
home or hospital that was licensed by the commissioner of the Department of
Human Services on July 1, 1987, to provide a program for persons with a
physical handicap that is not the result of the normal aging process and
considered to be a chronic condition; and chemical dependency or chemical
abuse programs that are located in a hospital or nursing home and receive public
funds for providing chemical abuse or chemical dependency treatment services
under Minnesota Statutes 254B. Residential programs include home and
community-based services for persons with mental retardation or a related
condition that are provided in or outside of a person's own home.
Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure, individual
sewage treatment system, or other facility, and an ordinary high water level,
sewage treatment system, top of bluff, road, highway, property line, or other
facility.
Sexually Oriented Activities Related Terms.
1. Sexually Oriented Uses. Sexually oriented uses include adult
bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult
steam room/boathouse/sauna facilities, adult companionship
establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult health/sport clubs,
adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades,
adult modeling studios, adult hotels/motels, adult body painting studios,
and other premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses or places
open to some or all members of the public, at or in which there is an
emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” which are
capable of being seen by members of the public. Activities classified as
obscene as defined by Minnesota Statutes 617.241 are not included.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-23
a. Specified Anatomical Areas:
1) Less than completely opaquely covered human genitals,
pubic region, buttock anus, or female breast(s) below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and
2) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
b. Specified Sexual Activities:
1) Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal
intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical
stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the
context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory
functions in the context of a relationship, and any of the
following: sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus,
buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism,
zooerasty; or
2) Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual
stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or
3) Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral
copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or
4) Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or female breast; or
5) Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are
nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing
costumes, and who are engaged in activities involving the
flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical
restraint of any such persons; or
6) Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented
contact with an animal by a human being; or
7) Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal
irrigation.
2. Sexually Oriented Use - Accessory. The offering of retail goods for sale
which are classified as sexually oriented uses on a limited scale and which
are incidental to the primary activity and goods and/or services offered by
the establishment. Examples of such items include the sale of adult
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-24
magazines, the sale and/or rental of adult motion pictures, the sale of
adult novelties, and the like.
3. Sexually Oriented Uses - Principal: The offering of goods and/or
services which are classified as sexually oriented uses as a primary or
sole activity of a business or establishment and include but are not limited
to the following:
a. Sexually Oriented Use - Body Painting Studio. An establishment or
business which provides the service of applying paint or other
substance, whether transparent or non-transparent, to or on the
body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in
terms of “specified anatomical areas.”
b. Sexually Oriented Use - Bookstore. A building or portion of a
building used for barter, rental or sale of items consisting of printed
matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tape, videotape, compact
discs, computer software, digital recordings, motion picture film, or
other communication mediums if such building or portion of a
building is not open to the public generally but only to one or more
classes of the public excluding any minor by reason of age or if a
substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
c. Sexually Oriented Use - Cabaret. A building or portion of a building
used for providing dancing or other live entertainment, if such
building or portion of a building excludes minors by virtue of age or
if such dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display,
depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”
d. Sexually Oriented Use - Companionship Establishment. A
companionship establishment which excludes minors by reason of
age, or which provides the service of engaging in or listening to
conversation, talk or discussion between an employee of the
establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas.”
e. Sexually Oriented Use - Conversation/Rap Parlor. A
conversation/rap parlor which excludes minors by reason of age, or
which provides the service of engaging in or listening to
conversation, talk, or discussion, if such service is distinguished or
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-25
characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas.”
f. Sexually Oriented Use - Health/Sport Club. A health/sport club
which excludes minors by reason of age, or if such club is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
g. Sexually Oriented Use - Hotel or Motel. Adult hotel or motel means
a hotel or motel from which minors are specifically excluded from
patronage and wherein material is presented which is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas.”
h. Sexually Oriented Use - Massage Parlor, Health Club. A massage
parlor or health club which restricts minors by reason of age, and
which provides the services of massage, if such service is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
i. Sexually Oriented Use - Mini-Motion Picture Theater. A building or
portion of a building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used
for presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a
prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such
material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for
observation by patrons therein.
j. Sexually Oriented Use - Modeling Studio. An establishment whose
major business is the provision, to customers, of figure models who
are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or
sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in “specified
sexual activities” or display “specified anatomical areas” while being
observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured,
photographed, or otherwise depicted by such customers.
k. Sexually Oriented Use - Motion Picture Arcade. Any place to which
the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still
or motor picture machines, projectors or other image-producing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per
machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing ”specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas.”
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-26
l. Sexually Oriented Use - Motion Picture Theater. A building or
portion of a building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons
used for presenting material if such building or portion of a building
as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age or if such
material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
“specified anatomical areas” for observation by patrons therein.
m. Sexually Oriented Use - Novelty Business. A business which has
as a principal activity the sale of devices which stimulate human
genitals or devices which are designed for sexual stimulation.
n. Sexually Oriented Use - Sauna. A sauna which excludes minors by
reason of age, or which provides a steam bath or heat bathing
room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing,
utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if
the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”
o. Sexually Oriented Use - Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility. A
building or a portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or
heat bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing,
relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning,
relaxing or reducing agent if such building or portion of a building
restricts minors by reason of age or if the service provided by the
steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”
Shoreland. Land located within the following distances from public waters: one
thousand (1000) feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond or
flowage and three hundred (300) feet from a river or stream or the landward
extent of a floodplain designated in Delano Ordinance No. O-06-08 on a river or
stream, whichever is greater. The limits of shorelands may be reduced
whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend
landward from the waters for lesser distances and when approved by the
Commissioner of Natural Resources.
Shoreland Impact Zone. Land located between the ordinary high water level
of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of fifty (50) percent of the
structure setback.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-27
Sign Related:
1. Sign. Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or
attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters,
figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images.
2. Sign, Address. A sign communicating only a street address.
3. Sign, Advertising. A sign used to advertise products, goods or services
not exclusively related to the premise on which the sign is located.
4. Sign Area. The area within the marginal lines of the surface of a sign
which bears the advertisement or, in the case of messages, figures or
symbols attached directly to a building or sign structure, that area which is
included in the smallest rectangle or series of geometric figures used to
circumscribe the message, figure or symbol displayed thereon.
5. Sign, Area Identification Sign. A freestanding sign identifying the name of
a single or two family residential subdivision consisting of twenty (20) or
more lots; a residential planned unit development; a multiple residential
complex consisting of three (3) or more independent operations; a single
business consisting of three (3) or more separate structures; or any
integrated combination of the above. The sign shall only identify an area,
complex or development and shall not, unless approved by the Council,
contain the name of individual owners or tenants. The sign may not
contain advertising.
6. Sign, Banners and Pennants. Attention getting devices which resemble
flags and are of a paper, cloth or plastic-like consistency.
7. Sign, Billboard. An advertising sign.
8. Sign, Building Façade. That portion of the exterior elevation of a building
extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire
width of the building elevation.
9. Sign, Business Identification Sign. Any sign which identifies a business or
group of businesses, either retail or wholesale, or any sign which identifies
a profession or used in the identification or promotion of any principal
commodity or service, including entertainment, offered or sold upon the
premises where the sign is located.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-28
10. Sign, Campaign. A temporary sign promoting the candidacy of a person
running for governmental office, or promoting an issue to be voted on at a
governmental election.
11. Sign, Canopy. Message or identification affixed to a canopy or marquee
that provides a shelter to cover over the approach to any building
entrance.
12. Sign, Construction. A sign at a construction site identifying the project or
the name of the architect, engineer, contractor, financier or other involved
parties.
13. Sign, Directional. A sign erected with the address and/or name of a
business, institution, church or other use or activity plus directional arrows
or information on location.
14. Sign, Directory. An exterior informational wall sign which identifies the
names of businesses served by a common public entrance in a shopping
center or office building.
15. Sign, Flashing. An illuminated sign upon which the artificial light is not
kept constant in terms of intensity or color when the sign is illuminated.
16. Sign, Freestanding. Self-supported sign not affixed to another structure
(see pylon and monument signs).
17. Sign, Height. The vertical distance measured from the grade to the top of
such a sign.
18. Sign, Holiday. A sign promoting an event associated with a religious,
national or civic holiday.
19. Sign, Illuminated. Sign illuminated by an artificial light source either
directed upon it or illuminated from an interior source.
20. Sign, Informational. Any sign giving information to employees, visitors or
delivery vehicles, but containing no advertising or identification. Gas price
and menu board signs are examples of informational signs.
21. Sign, Institutional. A sign which identifies the name and other
characteristics of a public or semi-public institution on the premises where
the sign is located.
22. Sign, Integral. A sign carrying the name of a building, its date of erected,
monumental citations, commemorative tablets and the like when carved
into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-29
other permanent type of construction and made an integral part of the
structure.
23. Sign, Logo. Any letter, character, symbol, or abbreviation used to
represent an entire word or group of words denoting the name of purpose
of any business. For purposes of this Ordinance, a trademark may qualify
as a symbol, but only if any brand name or other word used therein is a
single letter, character or an abbreviation.
24. Sign, Menu Board. An outdoor sign containing a food price list for
convenience food restaurant customers, utilizing drive through facilities.
25. Sign, Monument. Any sign that is not affixed to any other structure and is
self-supported vertically by a solid base extending horizontally for a
minimum of the entire length of the sign face, with a base height of three
(3) feet above ground. The base and supporting material shall constitute
at least forty (40) percent of the total allowable sign square footage, and
shall be attached to the ground for its entire horizontal length. The base
shall be decay resistive wood, stone, brick, decorative masonry or colored
metal, and shall not contain any sign copy.
26. Sign, Motion. Any sign which revolves, rotates, has moving parts, or
gives the illusion of motion.
27. Sign, Portable. A sign so designed as to be movable from one location to
another and which is not permanently attached to the ground, sales
display device, or structure.
28. Sign, Projecting. A sign, other than a wall sign, which is affixed to a
building and perpendicular to the building wall.
29. Sign, Pylon. A freestanding sign supported by means of wood, metal or
other posts, pillars, beams, etc. anchored in the ground to form a stable
base for the attachment of a sign structure.
30. Sign, Reader Board. A sign with an electronic changing message.
31. Sign, Real Estate. A business sign placed upon a property advertising
that particular property for sale, for rent or lease.
32. Sign, Roof. Any sign which is erected, constructed, or attached wholly or
in part upon or over the roof of a building.
33. Sign, Structure. The supports, uprights, bracing and framework for a sign
including the sign area.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-30
34. Sign, Temporary. Any sign which is erected or displayed for a specified
period of time.
35. Sign, Wall. A sign which is affixed to the exterior wall of a building and
which is parallel to the building wall. A wall sign does not project more
than twelve (12) inches from the surface to which is attached, nor extend
beyond the top of the parapet wall.
36. Sign, Wall Graphic. A sign which is painted directly on an exterior wall
surface.
37. Sign, Window. A sign affixed to or inside of a window in view of the
general public. This does not include merchandise on display.
Site Plan. The development plan for one or more lots on which is shown the
existing and proposed conditions of the lot including: topography, vegetation,
drainage, floodplains, marshes and waterways, open spaces, walkways, means
of ingress and egress, utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting
and screening device; any other information that reasonably may be required in
order that an informed decision can be made by the approving authority.
Slope. The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually,
expressed in percent or degrees.
Slope, Steep. Land where agricultural activity or development is either not
recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and the
site’s soil characteristics, as mapped and described in available county soil
surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and construction
techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the provisions of
this Ordinance. Where specific information is not available, steep slopes are
lands having average slopes over twelve (12) percent, as measured over
horizontal distances of fifty (50) feet or more, that are not bluffs.
Sport Court. A facility that typically includes a paved playing surface for one or
more sport activities such as, but not limited to, tennis, basketball, or volleyball.
Stable, Commercial. The business of boarding horses for fee for persons not
residing on the premises and may include instruction, exhibition and sale of
horses. This shall include the raising and breeding of horses.
Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor
and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall
be that upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the
finished floor level directly above a basement or unused under-floor space is
more than six (6) feet above grade as defined herein for more than fifty (50)
percent of the total perimeter or is more than twelve (12) feet above grade as
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-31
defined herein at any point, such basement or unused under-floor space shall be
considered as a story.
Story, First. The lowest story in a building which qualifies as a story, as defined
herein, except that a floor level in a building having only one floor level shall be
classified as a first story, provided such floor level is not more than four (4) feet
below grade, as defined herein, for more than fifty (50) percent of the total
perimeter, or more than eight (8) feet below grade, as defined herein, at any
point.
Street. A right-of-way affording access by pedestrians and vehicles, whether
designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road,
avenue, boulevard, court, way, trail or however otherwise designated. Private,
ingress and egress easements shall not be considered streets.
Street, Cul-de-Sac. A local street, one end of which is closed and consists of a
circular turn around.
Street, Collector. A street which collects traffic from local streets and connects
with minor and major arterials. See City’s Functional Classification System for
Roadways contained in the Comprehensive Plan.
Street, Local. A street designed to provide vehicular access to abutting property
and to discourage through traffic. See City’s Functional Classification System for
Roadways contained in the Comprehensive Plan.
Street, Minor Arterial. A street with signals at important intersections and stop
signs on the side streets, and which collects and distributes traffic to and from
collector streets. See City’s Functional Classification System for Roadways
contained in the Comprehensive Plan.
Structure. Anything which is built, constructed or erected, an edifice or building
of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up and/or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner whether temporary or permanent in
character.
Structure Alteration. Any change in either the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams and girders, or in the
dimensions or configurations of the roof or exterior walls.
Substantial Improvement. Any extension, repair, reconstruction, or other
improvement of a property, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent
of the fair market value of a property either before the improvement is started or if
the property has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage
occurred.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-32
Swimming Pool. A water-filled enclosure, permanently constructed or portable,
having a depth of more than eighteen (18) inches below the level of the
surrounding land, or an above surface pool having a depth of more than thirty
(30) inches designed, used and maintained for swimming and bathing.
Temporary Structure. A structure without any foundation or footings and which
is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the
temporary structure was erected has ceased.
Tree. Any of the following type of trees, as each is defined herein:
1. Coniferous Tree. A woody plant which, at maturity, is at least twelve (12)
feet or more in height, having foliage on the outermost portion of the
branches year round.
2. Deciduous Tree. A woody plant which, at maturity, is at least fifteen (15)
feet or more in height, having a defined crown, and which sheds leaves
annually.
3. Significant Tree. A healthy tree measuring a minimum of six (6) inches in
diameter for deciduous trees, or a minimum of twelve (12) feet in height for
coniferous trees.
4. Significant Tree Stand. A grouping or cluster of coniferous and/or
deciduous trees with contiguous crown cover, occupying five hundred
(500) or more square feet of property, which are comprised of deciduous
trees six (6) inches or larger in diameter or coniferous trees twelve (12)
feet or higher in height.
5. Specimen Tree. A healthy hardwood tree measuring equal to or greater
than thirty (30) inches in diameter and/or a coniferous tree measuring fifty
(50) feet or greater in height.
Tree Certification. A certified inventory of trees on the site after work is
complete listing all trees and their final disposition, which is signed by a licensed
forester or landscape architect.
Tree Preservation Plan. A plan and inventory certified by a forester or
landscape architect indicating all of the significant trees and their locations in the
proposed development or on the lot. The tree preservation plan shall include the
size, species, tag numbers, and location of all significant trees proposed to be
saved and removed on the area of development, and the measures proposed to
protect the significant trees to be saved.
Trucking Terminal. Land or buildings used primarily as a relay station for the
transfer of freight from one vehicle to another or one party to another rather than
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-33
permanent or long term storage. The terminal facility might include storage
areas for trucks and buildings for truck maintenance and repair.
Variance. A modification of the strict provisions of this Ordinance as applied to a
specific piece of property in order to provide relief for a property owner because
of undue hardship imposed upon the property by this Ordinance. A variance
shall normally be limited to height, density and yard requirements. A modification
in the allowable uses within a district shall not be considered a variance.
Waterbody or Watercourse. Any natural or man-made passageway on the
surface of the earth so situated and having such a topographical nature that
surface water stands or flows through it from other areas. The term includes
ponding areas, drainage channels, swales, waterways, creeks, rivers, lakes,
streams, wetland areas, and any other open surface water flow which is the
result of storm water or ground water discharge. This term does not include
man-made piping systems commonly referred to as storm sewers.
Wetlands. An area where water stands near, or above the soil surface during a
significant portion of most years, saturating the soil and supporting a
predominantly aquatic form of vegetation, and which may have the following
characteristics:
1. Vegetation belonging to the marsh (emergent aquatic), bog, fen, sedge
meadow, shrub land, southern lowland forest (lowland hardwood), and
northern lowland forest (conifer swamp) communities. (These
communities correspond roughly to wetland types 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, and 8
described by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Circular 39,
“Wetlands of the U.S. 1956".)
2. Mineral soils with gley horizons or organic soils belonging to the Histosol
order (peat and mulch).
3. Soil which is water logged or covered with water at least three (3) months
of the year.
4. Swamps, bogs, marshes, potholes, wet meadows, and sloughs are
wetlands, and such property, may be shallow water bodies, the waters of
which are stagnant or actuated by very feeble currents, and may at times
be sufficiently dry to permit tillage, but would require drainage to be made
arable. The edge of a wetland is commonly that point where the natural
vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to preeminently terrestrial.
Yard. An open space that lies between the principal or accessory building or
buildings and the nearest lot line. Such yard is unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward except as may be specifically provided in the Zoning
Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-34
Yard, Front. An open space that lies between the principal or accessory building
or buildings and the nearest lot line. Such yard is unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward except as may be specifically provided in the Zoning
Ordinance.
Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between
the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal building.
Yard, Side. A yard on each side of the building between the building and the
side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
Zero Lot Line. The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or
more of the building’s sides rests directly on a lot line.
Zoning Administrator. The City staff person who is charged with the
administration and enforcement of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-35
Delano Zoning Ordinance Title / Application / Rules / Definitions
1-36
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-1
SECTION 51.02. ADMINISTRATION
Subd. A. Administration: Amendments and Rezonings. In accordance with the
provisions of Minnesota Statutes, the City Council may from time to time amend the
Zoning Ordinance text or map (rezoning). Amendments may be initiated by City
Council, Planning Commission, or property owner. The procedure for an amendment to
the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning District Map (rezone) shall be as follows:
1. Application. Requests for amendments or rezonings, as provided within this
Ordinance, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application
form. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided for by Section
51.01, Subd. A.12 of this Ordinance. Such application shall also be
accompanied by eight (8) large scale copies of detailed written and graphic
materials fully explaining the proposed zoning change, development, or use, an
eleven (11) inch by seventeen (17) inch reduced paper copy of all graphic
materials, one (1) digital electronic copy in a format compatible with the City’s
computer system, and a list of affected property owners within three hundred fifty
(350) feet of the subject property obtained from the current tax rolls provided in
the City Hall or Wright County Offices and have the list verified by the City
Administrator.
2. Staff Review/Technical Assistance Reports. Upon receipt of an application
for an amendment or rezoning, the Zoning Administrator shall, when deemed
necessary, refer the request to appropriate staff to ensure that informational
requirements are complied with. When all informational requirements have been
complied with, the request shall be considered officially submitted. Also, when
deemed necessary, the Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff
persons to prepare technical reports and/or provide general assistance in
preparing a recommendation on the request to the Planning Commission and
City Council.
3. Public Hearing. Upon official submission of the request, the Zoning
Administrator shall set a public hearing on the request for the next regularly
scheduled Planning Commission meeting occurring at least ten (10) working
days from such date as a notice of the hearing is published in the official
newspaper. Such notice shall contain a legal property description and
description of the request, and shall be published no more than thirty (30) days
and no less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing. When an amendment
involves changes in district boundaries affecting an area of five (5) acres or less,
a similar notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days before the day of the
hearing to each owner of affected property and property situated wholly or partly
within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the property to which the amendment
relates. Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any
such proceedings as set forth within this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-2
4. Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall conduct the
public hearing at which time the applicant or a representative thereof shall
appear to answer questions concerning the proposed request.
a. The Planning Commission shall consider possible adverse effects of the
proposed amendment or rezoning. Its judgment shall be based upon (but
not limited to) the following factors:
1) The proposed action has been considered in relation to the specific
policies and provisions of and has been found to be consistent with
the official City Comprehensive Plan.
2) The proposed use is or will be compatible with present and future
land uses of the area.
3) The proposed use conforms with all performance standards
contained herein.
4) The proposed use can be accommodated with existing public
services and will not overburden the City’s service capacity when:
a) The proposed development shall be served with adequate
and safe water supply.
b) The proposed development shall be served with an
adequate and safe sanitary sewer system.
c) The proposed development shall not result in the premature
expenditures of City funds on capital improvements
necessary to accommodate the proposed development.
5) Traffic generation by the proposed use is within capabilities of the
streets serving the property when:
a) If the existing level of service (LOS) outside of the proposed
site is A or B, traffic generated by a proposed site will not
degrade the level of service more than one grade.
b) If the existing LOS outside of the proposed site is C, traffic
generated by a proposed site will not degrade the level of
service below C.
c) The existing LOS must be C or better for all streets and
intersections providing access to the site. If the existing
level of service is D, E or F, the site developer must provide,
as part of the proposed project, improvements needed to
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-3
ensure a level of service C or better or the City may deem
the development premature.
d) Existing roads and intersections providing access to the site
must have the structural capacity to accommodate projected
traffic from the proposed site or the developer will pay to
correct any structural deficiencies.
e) The traffic generated from a proposed site shall not require
City street improvements that are inconsistent with the
Delano Capital Improvement Plan. However, the City may,
at its discretion, consider developer-financed improvements
to correct any street deficiencies.
b. The Planning Commission and City staff shall have the authority to
request additional information from the applicant concerning operational
factors or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense
of the applicant concerning operational factors, said information to be
declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all
pertinent sections of this Ordinance.
c. The Planning Commission shall make a finding of fact and recommend
such actions or conditions relating to the request as they deem necessary
to carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance. Such
recommendation shall be in writing and accompanied by any report and
recommendation of the City staff. The written recommendation of the
Planning Commission shall be forwarded to the Zoning Administrator for
referral to the City Council.
5. Referral to City Council. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission report and
recommendation, the Zoning Administrator shall place the request and any report
and recommendation on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the City Council. The Planning Commission must act and report its
recommendation in a timely manner so that the City Council can act on the
application within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application, unless the
review period for the applicant has been extended pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes 15.99.
6. City Council Action. Upon receiving the request and any report and
recommendation of the Planning Commission and the City staff, the City Council
shall have the option to set and hold a public hearing if deemed necessary and
shall make a recorded and written finding of fact, and provide this written finding
to the applicant within sixty (60) days of receipt of a completed application,
unless the review period for the application has been extended pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes 15.99.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-4
a. Approval of a proposed amendment shall require passage by a majority
vote of all members of the City Council except that the adoption or
amendment of any portion of a zoning ordinance which changes all or part
of the existing classification of a zoning district from residential to either
commercial or industrial requires a two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of all
members of the City Council.
b. In the case of an amendment, the amendment shall not become effective
until such time as the City Council approves an ordinance reflecting said
amendment and after said ordinance is published in the official
newspaper.
c. Whenever an application for an amendment or rezoning has been
considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application for the
amendment or rezoning affecting substantially the same property shall not
be considered again by the Planning Commission or City Council for at
least six (6) months from the date of its denial, unless a decision to
reconsider such matter is made by not less than a majority vote of the full
City Council.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-5
Subd. B. Administration: Conditional Use Permits. Certain uses, while generally
not suitable in a particular zoning district, may under some circumstances be suitable.
When such circumstances exist, a conditional use permit may be granted. Conditions
may be applied to issuance of the permit and an annual review of the permit may be
required. The permit shall be granted for a particular use and not for a particular person
or firm. Conditional use permits may be granted in accordance with this subdivision for
any use or purpose for which such permits are required or permitted by this ordinance
or as listed as a conditional use for the zoning districts of this Ordinance.
1. Application. Requests for conditional use permits, as provided within this
Ordinance, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application
form. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided for by Section
51.01, Subd. A.12 of this Ordinance. Such application shall also be
accompanied by eight (8) large scale copies of detailed written and graphic
materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use, an eleven
(11) inch by seventeen (17) inch reduced paper copy of all graphic materials, one
(1) digital electronic copy in a format compatible with the City’s computer system,
and a list of affected property owners within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the
subject property obtained from the current tax rolls provided in the City Hall or
Wright County Offices and have the list verified by the City Administrator.
2. Staff Review/Technical Assistance Reports. Upon receipt of an application
for a conditional use permit, the Zoning Administrator shall, when deemed
necessary, refer the request to appropriate staff to ensure that informational
requirements are complied with. When all informational requirements have been
complied with, the request shall be considered officially submitted. Also, when
deemed necessary, the Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff
persons to prepare technical reports and/or provide general assistance in
preparing a recommendation on the request to the Planning Commission and
City Council.
3. Public Hearing. Upon official submission of the request, the Zoning
Administrator shall set a public hearing on the request for the next regularly
scheduled Planning Commission meeting occurring at least ten (10) working
days from such date as a notice of the hearing is published in the official
newspaper. Such notice shall contain a legal property description and
description of the request, and shall be published no more than thirty (30) days
and no less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Written notification of the
hearing shall also be mailed at least ten (10) working days prior to the date of the
hearing to all owners of land within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the boundary
of the property in question. Failure of a property owner to receive said notice
shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this Ordinance.
4. Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall conduct the
public hearing at which time the applicant or a representative thereof shall
appear to answer questions concerning the proposed request.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-6
a. The Planning Commission shall consider possible adverse effects of the
proposed conditional use permit. Its judgment shall be based upon (but
not limited to) the following factors:
1) The proposed action has been considered in relation to the specific
policies and provisions of and has been found to be consistent with
the official City Comprehensive Plan.
2) The proposed use is or will be compatible with present and future
land uses of the area.
3) The proposed use conforms with all performance standards
contained herein.
4) The proposed use can be accommodated with existing public
services and will not overburden the City’s service capacity when:
a) The proposed development shall be served with adequate
and safe water supply.
b) The proposed development shall be served with an
adequate and safe sanitary sewer system.
c) The proposed development shall not result in the premature
expenditures of City funds on capital improvements
necessary to accommodate the proposed development.
5) Traffic generation by the proposed use is within capabilities of the
streets serving the property when:
a) If the existing level of service (LOS) outside of the proposed
site is A or B, traffic generated by a proposed site will not
degrade the level of service more than one grade.
b) If the existing LOS outside of the proposed site is C, traffic
generated by a proposed site will not degrade the level of
service below C.
c) The existing LOS must be C or better for all streets and
intersections providing access to the site. If the existing
level of service is D, E or F, the site developer must provide,
as part of the proposed project, improvements needed to
ensure a level of service C or better, or the City may deem
the development premature.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-7
d) Existing roads and intersections providing access to the site
must have the structural capacity to accommodate projected
traffic from the proposed site or the developer will pay to
correct any structural deficiencies.
e) The traffic generated from a proposed site shall not require
City street improvements that are inconsistent with the
Delano Capital Improvement Plan. However, the City may,
at its discretion, consider developer-financed improvements
to correct any street deficiencies.
b. The Planning Commission and City staff shall have the authority to
request additional information from the applicant concerning operational
factors or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense
of the applicant concerning operational factors, said information to be
declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all
pertinent sections of this Ordinance.
c. The Planning Commission shall make a finding of fact and recommend
such actions or conditions relating to the request as they deem necessary
to carry out the intent and purpose of this Ordinance. Such
recommendation shall be in writing and accompanied by any report and
recommendation of the City staff. The written recommendation of the
Planning Commission shall be forwarded to the Zoning Administrator for
referral to the City Council.
5. Referral to City Council. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission report and
recommendation, the Zoning Administrator shall place the request and any report
and recommendation on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the City Council. The Planning Commission must act and report its
recommendation in a timely manner so that the City Council can act on the
application within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application, unless the
review period for the applicant has been extended pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes 15.99.
6. City Council Action. Upon receiving the request and any report and
recommendation of the Planning Commission and the City staff, the City Council
shall have the option to set and hold a public hearing if deemed necessary and
shall make a recorded and written finding of fact, and provide this written finding
to the applicant within sixty (60) days of receipt of a completed application,
unless the review period for the application has been extended pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes 15.99.
a. Approval of a proposed conditional use permit shall require passage by a
majority vote of all members of the City Council.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-8
b. In the case of a conditional use permit, the City Council may impose any
condition it considers necessary to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare.
c. Whenever an application for a conditional use permit has been considered
and denied by the City Council, a similar application for the conditional use
permit affecting substantially the same property shall not be considered
again by the Planning Commission or City Council for at least six (6)
months from the date of its denial, unless a decision to reconsider such
matter is made by not less than a majority vote of the full City Council.
7. Recording Conditional Use Permit. Following approval of the conditional use
permit, the City shall file a certified copy thereof including a legal description of
the property with the County Recorder and/or Registrar of Title.
8. Performance Security.
a. Except in the case of non-income producing residential property, upon
approval of a conditional use permit the City may require a letter of credit,
cash escrow, certificate of deposit, securities, or cash deposit prior to the
issuing of building permits or initiation of work on the proposed
improvements or development. Said security shall be non-cancelable and
shall guarantee conformance and compliance with the conditions of the
conditional use permit and the ordinances of the City.
b. The security shall be in the amount of one and one-half (1-1/2) times the
City Engineer’s or a certified appraiser’s estimated costs of labor and
materials for the proposed improvements or development. Said project
can be handled in stages upon the discretion of the City Engineer and
Building Official.
c. The City shall hold the security until completion of the proposed
improvements or development and a certificate of occupancy indicating
compliance with the conditional use permit and ordinances of the City has
been issued by the City Building Official.
d. Failure to comply with the conditional use permit or the ordinances of the
City shall resulting forfeiture of the security.
9. Lapse of Conditional Use Permit by Non-Use.
a. Whenever within one (1) year after granting a conditional use permit, the
use as permitted by the permit shall not have been completed or utilized,
then such permit shall become null and void unless a petition for an
extension of time in which to complete or utilize the use has been granted
by the City Council. Such extension shall be requested in writing and filed
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-9
with the Zoning Administrator at least thirty (30) days before the expiration
of the original conditional use permit. There shall be no charge for the
filing of such petition. The request for extension shall state facts showing
a good faith attempt to complete or utilize the use permitted in the
conditional use permit. Such petition shall be presented to the Planning
Commission for a recommendation and to the City Council for a decision.
b. All unused conditional use permits that were approved prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance shall be utilized within one (1) year of the
effective date of this Ordinance amendment, otherwise said permit shall
become null and void, unless a petition for an extension of time in which to
complete or utilize the permit has been granted by the City Council. Such
extension shall be requested in writing and filed with the Zoning
Administrator at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the
conditional use permit. The request for extension shall state facts
showing a good faith attempt to complete or utilize the use permitted in the
conditional use permit. Such petition shall be presented to the Planning
Commission for a recommendation to the City Council.
10. Periodic Review. If a time limit or periodic review is included as a condition by
which a conditional use permit is granted, the conditional use permit may be
reviewed at a public hearing with notice of said hearing published at least ten
(10) days prior to the review; it shall be the responsibility of the City Clerk to
schedule such public hearings and the owner of land having a conditional use
permit shall not be required to pay a fee for said review.
11. Conditional Use Permit Amendments. Any change involving structural
alteration, enlargement, intensification of use, or similar change not specifically
permitted by the conditional use permit issued shall require an amended
conditional use permit and all procedures shall apply as if a new permit were
being issued. An amended conditional use permit application and requests for
changes in conditions shall be administered in a manner similar to that required
for a conditional use permit.
12. Revocation. If an approved conditional use permit is in violation of this
Ordinance or the conditions of permit approval, the City may initiate a process to
revoke the conditional use permit. The City shall then conduct a public hearing
to consider the revocation of a conditional use permit. Notifications shall be
distributed and published according to Section 51.02, Subd. 2.C. The public
hearing shall be conducted by the Planning Commission, which shall make a
recommendation to the City Council. In considering revocation, the Planning
Commission and the City Council shall consider compliance with the approved
conditions of the conditional use permit and the standards listed in Section 51.02,
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-10
Subd. 2.D. The City may also conduct a public hearing and consider revocation
if the time requirements of Section 51.02, Subd. 2.I. have not been met.
Following a vote by the City Council to revoke the conditional use permit, the
City shall file a certified copy thereof including a legal description of the property
with the County Recorder and/or Registrar of Title.
13. Application and Submittal Requirements. Application for conditional use
permits shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator and shall be accompanied by
the appropriate fee and following information requirements:
a. Proof of title and contract/purchase agreement and property owner
signature on the application form when applicable.
b. Eight (8) large scale copies and reduced (11" x 17") copies of detailed
written materials, plans and specifications. One (1) electronic copy in a
format compatible with the City’s computer system.
Note: One or two additional large scale copies shall be provided for each of
the following, if applicable:
• Project adjacent to a County Road or County State Aid Highway – (2 sets)
• Project adjacent to a State Highway – (2 sets)
• Project lies within a Shoreland District – (1 set)
• Project lies within a Floodplain District – (1 set)
c. Certificate of Survey prepared by a licensed land surveyor identifying the
following:
1) Scale (engineering only) at one (1) inch equals one hundred (100)
feet or less.
2) North point indication.
3) Existing boundaries with lot dimension and lot area.
4) Existing buildings, structures and improvements.
5) Easements of record.
6) Delineated wetland boundary, to include the OHWL of any lakes or
DNR waters.
7) All encroachments.
8) Legal description.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-11
d. Site Plan using the current Certificate of Survey as a base depicting the
following:
1) Name of project or development.
2) Name and address of developer and/or owner.
3) Name and address of engineer/architect/designer.
4) Date of plan preparation and dates of any subsequent revisions.
5) All proposed improvements, including:
a) Required and proposed setbacks.
b) Location, setback and dimensions of all proposed buildings
and structures.
c) Location of all adjacent buildings and structures within one
hundred (100) feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject
property.
d) Location, number, dimensions of all proposed parking stalls,
loading areas and drive aisles, with curbing shown.
e) Location and width of all proposed street accesses and
driveways.
f) Location and type of all proposed lighting, including fixture
details.
g) Provisions for storage and disposal of waste, garbage and
recyclables, including details for enclosing and screening
exterior containers.
h) Location of freestanding signs.
i) Location of HVAC equipment whether ground mounted or
roof mounted.
6) Calculations for impervious/pervious surfaces.
e. Grading Plan (using the current Certificate of Survey as a base) depicting
the following:
1) Existing contours at two- (2) foot intervals.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-12
2) Proposed grade elevations at two- (2) foot maximum intervals.
3) Drainage plan, including the configuration of drainage areas and
calculations.
4) Spot elevations.
5) Surface water ponding and treatment areas.
6) Erosion control measures.
7) Wetland replacement plan (when applicable).
8) Drainage calculations for 2-, 10-, & 100-year storm events.
9) Delineated wetland boundary, to include OHWL of any lakes or
DNR waters.
10) Date of plan preparation and dates of any subsequent revisions.
f. Landscaping Plan using the current Certificate of Survey as a base
depicting the following:
1) Planting schedule including:
a) Symbols.
b) Quantities.
c) Common and botanical names.
d) Sizes of plant materials.
e) Root specification (bare root, balled/burlapped, potted, etc.).
f) Special installation instructions.
2) Location, type and size of all significant trees to be removed or
preserved.
3) Location and species of proposed plantings of all species.
4) Typical sections with details of fences, walls, and planter boxes.
5) Typical sections with details of landscape islands, planter beds, and
foundation plantings with identification of materials to be used.
6) Delineation of both sodded and seeded areas with respective areas
measured in square feet.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-13
7) Coverage plan for underground irrigation systems, if any.
8) Other existing or proposed conditions that could be anticipated to
affect landscaping.
9) Date of plan preparation and dates of any subsequent revisions.
g. Photometric Lighting Plan, to include fixture details/cut sheets/drawings.
1) Date of plan preparation and dates of any subsequent revisions.
h. Architectural Plans.
1) Date of plan preparation and dates of any subsequent revisions.
2) Architectural elevations of all principal and accessory buildings and
structures (type and materials used in all exterior surfaces).
3) Typical floor plans and typical room plans drawn to scale with a
summary of square footage by use or activity.
i. Utility Plan.
1) Location, sizing, and type of water and sewer system mains and
proposed service connections, hydrants, valves, and manholes; or,
2) Location and size of proposed primary and secondary on-site
treatment systems, when allowed (if ISIS is proposed).
3) Storm sewer, catch basins, invert elevation, type of castings and
type of materials (refer to Engineering Manual for City standards).
4) Date of plan preparations and dates of any subsequent revisions.
5) Estimates of forecasted water consumption.
6) Location of electrical services and any transformers and meters.
j. Other plans and information as may be required by the Zoning
Administrator which may include (but not be limited to) the following:
1) Location, type and size (area and height) of all signs to be erected
upon the subject property.
2) Vicinity map showing the subject property in relation to nearby
highways or major street intersections.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-14
3) Sound source control plan.
4) Fire protection plan.
5) Proposed protective covenants or private restrictions.
6) Where landscaping or man-made materials are used to provide
screening from adjacent properties, a cross section shall be
provided showing the perspective of the site from neighboring
properties at the property line elevation.
7) Traffic study.
k. For applications for new communication towers, the application shall
include information to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of
Section 51.03, Subd. M, including but not limited to:
1) Demonstration that a significant gap in coverage exists that would
be resolved by the proposed location and that adequate service
cannot be provided utilizing existing structures within a two (2) mile
search radius of the proposed site.
2) Structural design information to ensure compliance with
manufacturer specifications and to ensure the tower can
accommodate additional antennas (co-location).
3) Authorization from the property owner if different from applicant.
4) Lease or agreement requiring removal of the tower and facilities
after cessation of use.
5) Copies of applicable federal, state, and local licenses, permits,
approvals.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-15
Subd. C. Administration: Interim Use Permits.
1. Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of allowing interim uses is:
a. To allow a use for a brief period of time until a permanent location is
obtained or while the permanent location is under construction.
b. To allow a use that is presently judged acceptable by the City Council, but
that with anticipated development or redevelopment, will not be
acceptable in the future or will be replaced in the future by a permitted or
conditional use allowed within the respective district.
c. To allow a use which is reflective of anticipated long range change to an
area and which is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan provided
that said use maintains harmony and compatibility with surrounding uses
and is in keeping with the architectural character and design standards of
existing uses and development.
2. Procedure.
a. Existing Uses. All uses existing as of the effective date of this Ordinance
that are included in the list of interim uses for the zoning district in which
they are located shall be considered as having an interim use permit
which contains conditions that permit the land use and structures as they
existed on said date. Any enlargement, structural alteration, or
intensification of such use shall require an amended interim use permit
regulated by the Section 51.02, Subd. C of this Ordinance and shall be
processed according to the submittal requirements, standards and
procedures for a conditional use permit as established by Section 51.02,
Subd. B of this Ordinance.
b. New Uses. Uses defined as interim uses which do not presently exist
within a respective zoning district shall be processed according to the
submittal requirements, standards and procedures for a conditional use
permit as established by Section 51.02, Subd. B. of this Ordinance.
3. General Standards.
a. Existing Uses. Existing uses shall be in conformance with zoning and
building standards in effect at the time of initial construction and
development, and may not be enlarged or expanded except under the
terms for newly established uses, and shall continue to be governed by
such regulations in the future.
b. New Uses. New interim uses shall comply with the following:
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-16
1) The standards of a conditional use permit set forth in Section 51.02,
Subd. B of this Ordinance shall be satisfied.
2) The use shall conform to the applicable performance standards of
this Ordinance.
3) The use shall be listed as an allowed interim use in the respective
zoning district.
4) The date or event that will terminate the use can be identified with
certainty.
5) The use will not impose additional costs on the public if it is
necessary for the public to take the property in the future.
6) The user agrees to any conditions that the City Council deem
appropriate for permission of the use.
4. Termination. An interim use shall terminate on the happening of any of the
following events, whichever first occurs:
a. The date stated in the permit.
b. Upon violation of conditions under which the permit was issued.
c. Upon change in the City’s zoning regulations which renders the use nonconforming.
d. The redevelopment of the use and property upon which it is located to a
permitted or conditional use as allowed within the respective zoning
district.
5. Revocation. If an approved interim use permit is in violation of this Ordinance
or the conditions of permit approval, the City may initiate a process to revoke the
interim use permit. The City shall then conduct a public hearing to consider the
revocation of an interim use permit. Notifications shall be distributed and
published according to Section 51.02, Subd. B.3. The public hearing shall be
conducted by the Planning Commission, which shall make a recommendation to
the City Council. In considering revocation, the Board and the City Council shall
consider compliance with the approved conditions of the interim use permit and
the standards listed in Section 51.02, Subd. B.4.
Subd. D. Administration: Variances and Appeals.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-17
1. Variances. Variances from the literal provisions of the ordinance may be
granted in instances where their strict enforcement would cause undue hardship
because of circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration.
a. Findings of Fact. In considering all requests for variance or appeal and in
taking subsequent action, the City shall make a finding of fact:
1) That the property in question cannot be put to a reasonable use if
used under conditions allowed by the official controls.
2) That the plight of the landowners is due to physical circumstances
unique to his property not created by the land owner.
3) That the hardship is not due to economic considerations alone if
reasonable use for the property exists under the terms of the
ordinance.
4) That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that would be denied by this
ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same
district.
5) That the proposed actions will be in keeping with the spirit and
intent of the ordinance.
b. Application. Requests for variances, as provided within this Ordinance,
shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application form.
Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided for by the
City Council resolution. This fee shall not be refunded. Such application
shall also be accompanied by eight (8) large scale copies of detailed
written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change,
development, or use, an eleven (11) inch by seventeen (17) inch reduced
paper copy of all graphic materials, one (1) digital electronic copy in a
format compatible with the City’s computer system, and a list of affected
property owners within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the subject
property obtained form the current tax rolls provided in the City Hall or
Wright County offices and have the list verified by the City Administrator.
c. Staff Review/Technical Assistance Reports. Upon receipt of an
application for appeal or variance, the Zoning Administrator shall, when
deemed necessary, refer the request to appropriate staff to ensure that
informational requirements are complied with. When all informational
requirements have been complied with, the request shall be considered
officially submitted. Also, when deemed necessary, the Zoning
Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare
technical reports and/or provide general assistance in preparing a
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-18
recommendation on the request to the Planning Commission and City
Council.
d. Public Hearing. Upon official submission of the request, the Zoning
Administrator shall set a public hearing on the request for the next
regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting occurring at least ten
(10) working days from such date as a notice of the hearing is published in
the official newspaper. Such notice shall contain a legal property
description and description of the request, and shall be published no more
than thirty (30) days and no less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
Written notification of the hearing shall also be mailed at least ten (10)
working days prior to the date of the hearing to all owners of land within
three hundred fifty (350) feet of the boundary of the property in question.
Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any
such proceedings as set forth within this Ordinance.
e. Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall conduct
the public hearing at which time the applicant or a representative thereof
shall appear to answer questions concerning the proposed request.
1) The Planning Commission shall consider possible adverse effects
of the variance. In the case of a variance request, the Planning
Commission’s judgment shall be based upon (but not limited to) the
conditions set forth in Section 51.02, Subd. D.1.a of this Ordinance.
2) The Planning Commission and City staff shall have the authority to
request any additional information from the applicant deemed
necessary to establish performance conditions pertaining to the
request.
3) The Planning Commission shall make a finding of fact and
recommend such actions or conditions relating to the request as
they deem necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of the
Ordinance. Such recommendations shall be in writing and
accompanied by any report and recommendation of the City staff.
The written recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be
forwarded to the Zoning Administrator for referral to the City
Council within sixty (60) days of the receipt of a complete
application, unless the review period is extended pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes 15.99.
f. Referral to City Council. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission report
and recommendation, the Zoning Administrator shall place the request
and any report and recommendation on the agenda of the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the City Council. The Planning Commission must
act and report its recommendation in a timely manner so that the City
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-19
Council can act on the application within sixty (60) days of receipt of a
complete application, unless the review period for the applicant has been
extended pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 15.99.
g. City Council Action. Upon receiving the request and any report and
recommendation of the Planning Commission and the City staff, the City
Council shall have the option to set and hold a public hearing if deemed
necessary and shall make a recorded and written finding of fact, and
provide this written finding to the applicant within sixty (60) days of receipt
of a completed application, unless the review period for the application
has been extended pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 15.99.
1) Approval of a request shall require passage by a majority vote of
the City Council.
2) The City Council may impose any condition it considers necessary
to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
3) Whenever an application for a variance has been considered and
denied by the City Council, a similar application for the variance
affecting substantially the same property shall not be considered
again by the Planning Commission or City Council for at least six
(6) months from the date of its denial; and a subsequent application
affecting substantially the same property shall likewise not be
considered again by the Planning Commission or City Council for
an additional six (6) months from the date of the second denial
unless a decision to reconsider such matter is made by not less
than a majority vote of the full City Council.
h. Recording a Variance. Following approval of the variance, the City shall
file a certified copy thereof including a legal description of the property
with the County Recorder and/or Registrar of Title.
i. Lapse of Variance or Appeal.
1) Whenever within one (1) year after granting a variance, the use as
permitted by the variance shall not have been completed or utilized,
then such variance shall become null and void unless a petition for
extension of time in which to complete or to utilize the use has been
granted by the City Council. Such extension shall be requested in
writing and filed with the Zoning Administrator at least thirty (30)
days before the expiration of the original variance. There shall be
no charge for the filing of such petition. The request for extension
shall state facts showing a good faith attempt to complete or utilize
the use permitted in the variance. Such petition shall be presented
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-20
to the Planning Commission for a recommendation to the City
Council for a decision.
2) All unused variances that were approved prior to the effective date
of this Ordinance shall be utilized within one (1) year of the effective
date of this Ordinance amendment. Otherwise, said variance shall
become null and void unless a petition for extension of time in
which to complete or utilize the use has been granted by the City
Council. Such extension shall be requested in writing and filed with
the Zoning Administrator at least thirty (30) days before the
expiration of the original variance. There shall be no charge for the
filing of such petition. The request for extension shall state facts
showing a good faith attempt to complete or utilize the use
permitted in the variance. Such petition shall be presented to the
Planning Commission for a recommendation to the City Council for
a decision.
j. Performance Security. In such cases as a variance is approved
contingent upon certain conditions imposed by the Council, the Council
may require a performance security to be provided.
1) Upon approval of a variance, the City may require a letter of credit,
cash escrow, certificate of deposit, securities or cash deposit prior
to the issuing of building permits or initiation of work on the
proposed improvements or development. Said security shall be
non-cancelable and shall guarantee conformance and compliance
with the conditions of the variance and the ordinances of the City.
2) The security shall be in the amount of one and one-half (1-1/2)
times the City Engineer’s or a certified appraiser’s estimated costs
of labor and materials for the proposed improvements or
development.
3) The City shall hold the security until completion of the proposed
improvements or development and a certificate of occupancy
indicating compliance with the variance and ordinances of the City
has been issued by the City Building Official.
4) Failure to comply with the conditions of the variance and the
ordinances of the City shall result in forfeiture of the security for
action necessary on the part of the City to correct problems or
deficiencies.
k. Submittal Requirements. Applications for variances shall be filed with the
City and shall be accompanied by the following submittal information:
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-21
1) Proof of title and contract/purchase agreement and/or property
owner signature on the application form when applicable.
2) Five (5) large scale copies and reduced (11" x 17") copies of
detailed written materials, plans and specifications to include the
following information:
Note: One or two additional large scale copies shall be provided for each of the
following, if applicable:
• Project adjacent to a County Road or County State Aid Highway – (2 sets)
• Project adjacent to a State Highway – (2 sets)
• Project lies within a Shoreland District – (1 set)
• Project lies within a Floodplain District – (1 set)
3) Certificate of survey prepared by a licensed land surveyor
identifying the following: The City may waive the certificate of
survey when the survey will not provide information relevant to the
variance necessary to review the application.
a) Scale (engineering only) at one (1) inch equals one hundred
(100) feet or less.
b) North point indication.
c) Existing boundaries with lot dimension and lot area.
d) Existing buildings, structures and improvements.
e) Easements of record.
f) Delineated wetland boundary, to include the OHWL of any
lakes or DNR waters.
g) All encroachments.
h) Legal description.
4) Graphic information, plans, specifications, or other materials that
illustrate the requested variance.
5) Narrative description that sets forth the reasons the variance is
justified in order to make reasonable use of the land, structure or
building and that the variance is the minimum variance required.
2. Appeal. An appeal shall only be applicable to an administrative permit, order,
requirement or interpretation of intent of provisions of this Ordinance. Opinions
and evaluations as they pertain to the impact or result of a request are not
subject to the appeal procedure. The City Council shall be the Board of Appeals
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-22
and Adjustments with powers listed in Minnesota Statutes 462.357, subdivision
6.
a. Appeal Procedures.
1) The property owner or their agent shall file with the Zoning
Administrator an application for appeal stating the specific grounds
upon which the appeal is made. Said application shall be
accompanied by a fee as established by City Council ordinance. In
cases where the application is judged to be incomplete, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant, in writing, within fifteen (15)
days of the date of submission.
2) An appeal stays all proceedings and the furtherance of the action
being appealed unless it is certified to the Board of Adjustment
Appeals, after the notice of appeal is filed, that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate a stay would cause imminent peril to life and
property.
3) The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff
persons to prepare technical reports when appropriate and shall
provide general assistance in preparing a recommendation on the
action to the Board of Adjustments and Appeals.
4) The Board of Appeals and Adjustment shall consider the application
for appeal at a public meeting and consider testimony of the
property owner and City staff.
5) Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 15.99, the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals shall make a recorded and written finding of fact, and
provide this written finding to the applicant within sixty (60) days of
receipt of a completed application, unless the review period for the
application has been extended pursuant to Minnesota Statutes
15.99.
6) The Zoning Administrator shall serve a copy of the final order of the
Board upon the applicant by mail.
Subd. E. Administration: Administrative Permits.
The purpose of this section is to establish regulations and procedures for the processing
and consideration of activities allowed by administrative permit, and of matters requiring
the approvals of the Zoning Administrator with the goal of protecting the health, safety,
and welfare of the citizens of the City.
1. Application. Requests for administrative permits, as provided within this
Ordinance, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-23
form. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided for by Section
51.01, Subd. A.12 of this Ordinance. Such application shall also be
accompanied by eight (8) large scale copies of detailed written and graphic
materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use, and an
eleven (11) inch by seventeen (17) inch reduced paper copy of all graphic
materials, one (1) digital electronic copy in a format compatible with the City’s
computer system.
2. Staff Review/Technical Assistance Reports. Upon receipt of an application
for an administrative permit, the Zoning Administrator shall, when deemed
necessary, refer the request to appropriate staff to ensure that informational
requirements are complied with. When all informational requirements have been
complied with, the request shall be considered officially submitted. Also, when
deemed necessary, the Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff
persons to prepare technical reports and/or provide general assistance in
preparing a recommendation on the request to the Planning Commission and
City Council.
3. Administrative Action.
a. Zoning Administrator Action. The Zoning Administrator shall make a
determination on approval or denial of the administrative permit within
sixty (60) days from the date of submission of a complete application
unless the review is extended as allowed by Minnesota Statutes 15.99.
b. Review Criteria. The Zoning Administrator shall consider possible
adverse effects of the proposed administrative permit. Its decision shall
be based upon (but not limited to) the following factors:
1) The proposed action has been considered in relation to the specific
policies and provisions of and has been found to be consistent with
the official City Comprehensive Plan.
2) The proposed use is or will be compatible with present and future
land uses of the area.
3) The proposed use conforms with all performance standards
contained herein.
4) The proposed use can be accommodated with existing public
services and will not overburden the City’s service capacity when:
a) The proposed development shall be served with adequate
and safe water supply.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-24
b) The proposed development shall be served with an
adequate and safe sanitary sewer system.
c) The proposed development shall not result in the premature
expenditures of City funds on capital improvements
necessary to accommodate the proposed development.
5) Traffic generation by the proposed use is within capabilities of the
streets serving the property when:
a) If the existing level of service (LOS) outside of the proposed
site is A or B, traffic generated by a proposed site will not
degrade the level of service more than one grade.
b) If the existing LOS outside of the proposed site is C, traffic
generated by a proposed site will not degrade the level of
service below C.
c) The existing LOS must be C or better for all streets and
intersections providing access to the site. If the existing
level of service is D, E or F, the site developer must provide,
as part of the proposed project, improvements needed to
ensure a level of service C or better, or the City may deem
the development premature.
d) Existing roads and intersections providing access to the site
must have the structural capacity to accommodate projected
traffic from the proposed subdivision or the developer will
pay to correct any structural deficiencies.
e) The traffic generated from a proposed subdivision shall not
require City street improvements that are inconsistent with
the Delano Capital Improvement Plan. However, the City
may, at its discretion, consider developer-financed
improvements to correct any street deficiencies.
c. Approval Report. A written report or letter of approval shall be issued to
the applicant when a determination of compliance has been made.
Specific conditions to assure compliance with applicable evaluation
criteria, codes, ordinances, and the standards of this Ordinance shall be
attached to the permit or letter.
d. Non-Compliance. Determination of non-compliance with applicable
codes, ordinances, and the standards in this paragraph shall be
communicated to the applicant in writing and the application for the permit
shall be considered denied; unless, within ten (10) days of the date of
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-25
such notice, the applicant submits revised plans and/or information with
which the Zoning Administrator is able to determine compliance.
e. Disputes. Unresolved disputes as to administrative application of the
requirements of this paragraph shall be subject to appeal as outlined in
Section 51.02, Subd. D.2 of this Ordinance.
4. Information Requirement. The information required for all administrative
permit or approval applications shall include:
a. The applicant shall include as part of the application, the applicable
submission information as identified in Section 51.02, Subd. F, Site and
Building Plan Review. The Zoning Administrator may waive submission
information not deemed necessary for the administrative review.
b. A concise statement describing the proposed use, event or activity,
including the purpose, type of merchandise involved, dates and times of
operation, number of employees involved, provisions for on-site security,
provisions for on-site parking, and other pertinent information required by
the Zoning Administrator to fully evaluate the application.
5. Performance Standards. All uses, events, or activities allowed by
administrative permit shall conform to the applicable standards outlined in the
zoning district in which such use, event or activity is proposed.
6. Administration and Enforcement.
a. The Zoning Administrator shall keep a record of applications and
administrative permits or approvals.
b. A copy of all administrative permits issued shall be forwarded to
appropriate staff as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
c. Enforcement of the provisions of this paragraph shall be in accordance
with Section 51.02, Subd. I of this Ordinance. Violation of an issued
permit or of the provisions of this section also shall be grounds for denial
of future permit applications.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-26
Subd. F. Site and Building Plan Review. The purpose of this section is to
establish a formal plan review procedure and provide regulations pertaining to the
enforcement of site design and construction standards as agreed to by the contractor
through their officially submitted plan documents.
1. Application. Requests for site and building plan review, as provided within this
Ordinance, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application
form. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided for by Section
51.01, Subd. A.12 of this Ordinance. Such application shall also be
accompanied by detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the
proposed change, development, or use including but not limited to the following:
a. Proof of title and contract/purchase agreement and property owner
signature on the application form when applicable.
b. Eight (8) large scale copies and reduced (11" x 17") copies of detailed
written materials, plans and specifications. One electronic copy in a
format compatible with the City’s computer system.
Note: One or two additional large scale copies shall be provided for each of
the following, if applicable:
• Project adjacent to a County Road or County State Aid Highway – (2 sets)
• Project adjacent to a State Highway – (2 sets)
• Project lies within a Shoreland District – (1 set)
• Project lies within a Floodplain District – (1 set)
c. Certificate of Survey prepared by a licensed land surveyor identifying the
following:
1) Scale (engineering only) at one (1) inch equals one hundred (100)
feet or less.
2) North point indication.
3) Existing boundaries with lot dimension and lot area.
4) Existing buildings, structures and improvements.
5) Easements of record.
6) Delineated wetland boundary, to include the OHWL of any lakes or
DNR waters.
7) All encroachments.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-27
8) Legal description.
d. Site Plan using the current Certificate of Survey as a base depicting the
following:
1) Scale (engineering only) at one (1) inch equals one hundred (100)
feet or less.
2) Name of project or development.
3) Name and address of developer and/or owner.
4) Name and address of engineer/architect/designer.
5) Date of plan preparation and dates of any subsequent revisions.
6) All proposed improvements, including:
a) Required and proposed setbacks.
b) Location, setback and dimensions of all proposed buildings
and structures.
c) Location of all adjacent buildings and structures within one
hundred (100) feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject
property.
d) Location, number, dimensions of all proposed parking stalls,
loading areas and drive aisles, with curbing shown.
e) Location and width of all proposed street accesses and
driveways.
f) Location and type of all proposed lighting, including fixture
details.
g) Provisions for storage and disposal of waste, garbage and
recyclables, including details for enclosing and screening
exterior containers.
h) Location of freestanding signs.
i) Location of HVAC equipment whether ground mounted or
roof mounted.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-28
7) Calculations for impervious/pervious surfaces.
e. Grading Plan (using the current Certificate of Survey as a base) depicting
the following:
1) Existing contours at two- (2) foot intervals.
2) Proposed grade elevations at two- (2) foot maximum intervals.
3) Drainage plan, including the configuration of drainage areas and
calculations.
4) Spot elevations.
5) Surface water ponding and treatment areas.
6) Erosion control measures.
7) Wetland replacement plan (when applicable).
8) Drainage calculations for 2-, 10-, & 100-year storm events.
9) Delineated wetland boundary, to include OHWL of any lakes or
DNR waters.
10) Date of plan preparation and dates of any subsequent revisions.
f. Landscaping Plan using the current Certificate of Survey as a base
depicting the following:
1) Planting schedule including:
a) Symbols.
b) Quantities.
c) Common and botanical names.
d) Sizes of plant materials.
e) Root specification (bare root, balled/burlapped, potted, etc.).
f) Special installation instructions.
2) Location, type and size of all significant trees to be removed or
preserved.
3) Location and species of proposed plantings of all species.
4) Typical sections with details of fences, walls, and planter boxes.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-29
5) Typical sections with details of landscape islands, planter beds, and
foundation plantings with identification of materials to be used.
6) Delineation of both sodded and seeded areas with respective areas
measured in square feet.
7) Coverage plan for underground irrigation systems, if any.
8) Other existing or proposed conditions that could be anticipated to
affect landscaping.
9) Date of plan preparation and dates of any subsequent revisions.
g. Photometric Lighting Plan, to include fixture details/cut sheets/drawings.
1) Date of plan preparation and dates of any subsequent revisions.
h. Architectural Plans.
1) Date of plan preparation and dates of any subsequent revisions.
2) Architectural elevations of all principal and accessory buildings and
structures (type and materials used in all exterior surfaces).
3) Typical floor plans and typical room plans drawn to scale with a
summary of square footage by use or activity.
i. Utility Plan.
1) Location, sizing, and type of water and sewer system mains and
proposed service connections, hydrants, valves, and manholes; or,
2) Location and size of proposed primary and secondary on-site
treatment systems, when allowed (if ISIS is proposed).
3) Storm sewer, catch basins, invert elevation, type of castings and
type of materials (refer to Engineering Manual for City standards).
4) Date of plan preparations and dates of any subsequent revisions.
5) Estimates of forecasted water consumption.
6) Location of electrical services and any transformers and meters.
j. Other plans and information as may be required by the Zoning
Administrator which may include (but not be limited to) the following:
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-30
1) Location, type and size (area and height) of all signs to be erected
upon the subject property.
2) Vicinity map showing the subject property in relation to nearby
highways or major street intersections.
3) Sound source control plan.
4) Fire protection plan.
5) Proposed protective covenants or private restrictions.
6) Where landscaping or man-made materials are used to provide
screening from adjacent properties, a cross section shall be
provided showing the perspective of the site from neighboring
properties at the property line elevation.
7) Traffic study.
2. Staff Review/Technical Assistance Reports. Upon receipt of an application
for site and building plan review. The Zoning Administrator shall, when deemed
necessary, refer the request to appropriate staff to ensure that informational
requirements are complied with. When all informational requirements have been
complied with, the request shall be considered officially submitted. Also, when
deemed necessary, the Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff
persons to prepare technical reports and/or provide general assistance in
preparing a recommendation on the request to the Planning Commission and
City Council.
3. City Council Action. Except in the case of minor projects, additions or
alterations as determined by the Zoning Administrator, all building and site plans
for multiple family, commercial or industrial construction shall be subject to
review by the Planning Commission and approval by the City Council.
a. The City shall approve or deny the application for site and building plan
review within sixty (60) days of receiving a complete application and shall
make a recorded and written finding of fact, and provide this written finding
to the applicant within sixty (60) days of receipt of a completed application,
unless the review period for the application has been extended pursuant
to Minnesota Statutes 15.99.
b. The applicant may appeal any denial or decision by the City according to
Section 51.02, Subd. D.2.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-31
c. No application for a site and building plan review shall be resubmitted for a
period of twelve (12) months from the date of said order of denial.
d. The City shall provide to the City Council reports summarizing submitted
site and building plan applications and outcomes regarding approval or
denial as they occur.
4. Review Criteria. The Zoning Administrator shall consider possible adverse
effects of the proposed site and building plan review. Its decision shall be based
upon (but not limited to) the following factors:
a. The proposed use conforms with all performance standards contained
herein.
b. The proposed use can be accommodated with existing public services and
will not overburden the City’s service capacity when:
1) The proposed development shall be served with adequate and safe
water supply.
2) The proposed development shall be served with an adequate and
safe sanitary sewer system.
3) The proposed development shall not result in the premature
expenditures of City funds on capital improvements necessary to
accommodate the proposed development.
c. Traffic generation by the proposed use is within capabilities of the streets
serving the property when:
1) If the existing level of service (LOS) outside of the proposed site is
A or B, traffic generated by a proposed site will not degrade the
level of service more than one grade.
2) If the existing LOS outside of the proposed site is C, traffic
generated by a proposed site will not degrade the level of service
below C.
3) The existing LOS shall be D or better for all streets and
intersections providing access to the site. If the existing level of
service is E or F, the site developer must provide, as part of the
proposed project, improvements needed to ensure a level of
service D or better.
4) Existing roads and intersections providing access to the site shall
have the structural capacity to accommodate projected traffic from
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-32
the proposed site or the developer will pay to correct any structural
deficiencies.
5) The traffic generated from a proposed site shall not require City
street improvements that are inconsistent with the Delano Capital
Improvement Plan. However, the City may, at its discretion,
consider developer-financed improvements to correct any street
deficiencies.
d. Approval Report. A written report or letter of approval shall be issued to
the applicant when a determination of compliance has been made.
Specific conditions to assure compliance with applicable evaluation
criteria, codes, ordinances, and the standards of this Ordinance shall be
attached to the permit or letter.
e. Non-Compliance. Determination of non-compliance with applicable codes,
ordinances, and the standards in this paragraph shall be communicated to
the applicant in writing and the application for the permit shall be
considered denied; unless, within ten (10) days of the date of such notice,
the applicant submits revised plans and/or information with which the
Zoning Administrator is able to determine compliance.
f. Disputes. Unresolved disputes as to administrative application of the
requirements of this paragraph shall be subject to appeal as outlined in
Section 51.02, Subd. D.2 of this Ordinance.
5. Plan Agreements. All site and construction plans officially submitted to the
City shall be treated as a formal agreement between the building contractor and
the City. Once approved, no changes, modifications, or alterations shall be
made to any plan detail, standard or specification without prior submission of a
plan modification request to the Zoning Administrator for City review and
approval.
6. Performance Security.
a. Except in the case of non-income producing residential property, upon
approval of a conditional use permit the City may require a letter of credit,
cash escrow, certificate of deposit, securities, or cash deposit prior to the
issuing of building permits or initiation of work on the proposed
improvements or development. Said security shall be non-cancelable and
shall guarantee conformance and compliance with the conditions of the
conditional use permit and the ordinances of the City.
b. The security shall be in the amount of one and one-half (1-1/2) times the
City Engineer’s or a certified appraiser’s estimated costs of labor and
materials for the proposed improvements or development. Said project
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-33
can be handled in stages upon the discretion of the City Engineer and
Building Official.
c. The City shall hold the security until completion of the proposed
improvements or development and a certificate of occupancy indicating
compliance with the conditional use permit and ordinances of the City has
been issued by the City Building Official.
d. Failure to comply with the conditional use permit or the ordinances of the
City shall resulting forfeiture of the security.
7. Enforcement. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to order the
stopping of any and all site improvement activities, when and where a violation of
the provisions of this section has been officially documented by the Zoning
Administrator.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-34
Subd. G. Duties of City Staff.
1. Duties of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall be
appointed by the City Council. The Zoning Administrator shall enforce the
provisions of this ordinance as provided herein; in addition to the duties and
powers of the Zoning Administrator under this Ordinance, express or implied, the
Zoning Administrator shall have the duty and power to:
a. Issue permits required by this ordinance.
b. Maintain all records necessary for the enforcement of this ordinance;
including, but not limited to, all data, maps, amendments, rezonings, and
conditional use permits, variances, appeal notices, certificates of
occupancy, and applications thereof, nonconforming uses.
c. Receive, file and forward all appeals, notices, applications for variances,
conditional use permits, certificates of occupancy, or other matters to the
appropriate officials or boards.
d. Perform annual and/or periodic review of all conditional use permits.
e. Institute in the name of the City any appropriate actions or proceedings to
enforce this Ordinance.
2. Duties of the Building Official. The Building Official shall enforce the
provisions of this ordinance as provided herein; in addition to the duties and
powers of the Building Official under this ordinance, express or implied, the
Building Official shall have the duty and power to:
a. Conduct inspections of land, buildings or structures at reasonable times,
to determine compliance with and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
b. Perform all duties set forth in job description.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-35
Subd. H. Certificate of Occupancy.
1. No person may change the use of any land except for construction of essential
services and transmission lines or occupy or utilize a new structurally altered
building (except single-family detached dwellings or their accessory buildings or
private garages in any district) or change the use of any building after the
effective date of this ordinance unless they have first obtained a certificate of
occupancy.
2. Application for a certificate of occupancy for a new building or for an existing
building which has been so altered or the reuse of any land may be filed with the
Building Official any time after the application for a building permit. The
Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued within ten (10) days after the
construction or alteration of such building or part thereof or site has been
completed in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance and building code.
The Building Official shall require an as-built certificate of survey prior to
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy as a means of verifying that construction
and site grading has been completed in full conformance of City approvals and
City regulations. Pending the issuance of said certificate, a temporary certificate
of occupancy may be issued, subject to the provisions of the building code and
zoning ordinance for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months during the
completion of the erection or the alteration of such a building. The temporary
certificate shall not be construed as in any way altering the respective rights,
duties or obligations of the owners or of the community relating to the use or
occupancy of the premises or any other matter, except under such restrictions
and provisions as will adequately insure the safety of the occupants. Prior to
issuance of a temporary occupancy permit, the City may require the applicant to
furnish an escrow equal to one hundred fifty (150) percent of unfinished
improvements required as part of a development application. The use of any
structure for which a building permit is required or the use of any land shall be
considered a violation of this ordinance unless a certificate of occupancy has
been issued.
3. Application for a certificate of occupancy for a new use of land shall be made to
the Building Official before any such land shall be so used. Such certificate of
occupancy shall be issued within ten (10) days after this application if the use is
in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
4. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file with the City.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-36
Subd. I. Enforcement and Penalties.
1. Administration and Enforcement.
a. This Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning
Administrator who is appointed by the City Council. The Zoning
Administrator may institute in the name of the City of Delano any
appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator as provided by
statute, ordinance, or code.
b. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than the maximum penalty for a
misdemeanor prescribed under State law. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-37
Subd. J. PUD, Planned Unit Development.
1. Purpose. This section is established to provide comprehensive procedures and
standards designed for both district and conditional use permit planned unit
development to allow the development of neighborhoods or portions thereof
incorporating a variety of residential types and non-residential uses. Recognizing
that traditional density, bulk, setbacks, use, and subdivision regulations which
may be useful in protecting the character of substantially developed areas, may
not be appropriate to control development in less developed areas.
The PUD, by allowing deviation from the strict provisions of this Ordinance
related to setbacks, heights, lot area, width and depths, yards, etc., by
conditional use permit or a mixture of uses by rezoning to a PUD District, is
intended to encourage:
a. A development pattern in harmony with the objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan.
b. Innovations in development that address growing demands for all styles of
economic expansion, greater variety in type, design, architectural
standards, and siting of structures through the conservation and more
efficient use of land in such developments.
c. Higher standards of site and building design through the use of trained
and experienced land planners, architects and landscape architects.
d. The preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics such
as environmentally sensitive areas, existing vegetation, natural
topography, greenway corridors, open space, geologic features, and the
prevention of soil erosion.
e. A creative use of land and related physical development which allows a
phased and orderly transition of varying land uses in close proximity to
each other.
f. More convenience in location of accessory commercial and service areas.
g. An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets
thereby lowering development costs and public investments.
h. To give the landowner and developer reasonable assurance of ultimate
approval before expending complete design monies while providing City
officials with assurance that the project will retain the character envisioned
at the time of occurrence.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-38
i. Promotion of a desirable and creative environment that might be
prevented through the strict application of City zoning and subdivision
regulations.
2. PUD Types.
a. Conditional Use Permit. Planned unit development allows for design
flexibility related to density, setbacks, building heights, lot area, lot width,
etc. However, the range of uses allowed in a conditional use planned unit
development is limited to those uses allowed in the base zoning district.
b. Planned Unit Development Zoning. A mixed use planned unit
development that may include land uses from a variety of zoning districts
must utilize the PUD Zoning District.
3. General Requirements and Standards for a PUD.
a. Ownership. An application for PUD approval shall be filed by the
landowner or jointly by all landowners of the property included in a project.
The application and all submissions shall be directed to the development
of the property as a unified whole. In the case of multiple ownership, the
approved PUD shall be binding on all owners.
b. Comprehensive Plan Consistency. The proposed PUD shall be
consistent with the City Comprehensive Plan.
c. Public or Common Open Space. Public or common open space at least
sufficient to meet the minimum requirements established in this Ordinance
and such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary
and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of the residents of the PUD
shall be provided within the area of the PUD.
d. Operating and Maintenance Requirements for PUD Common Open
Space/Facilities. Whenever common open space or service facilities are
provided within the PUD, the PUD plan shall contain provisions to assure
the continued operation and maintenance of such open space and service
facilities to a predetermined reasonable standard. Common open space
and service facilities within a PUD may be placed under the ownership of
one or more of the following, as approved by the City Council:
1) Dedicated to public, where a community-wide use is anticipated
and the City Council agrees to accept the dedication.
2) Landlord control, where only use by tenants is anticipated.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-39
3) Property owners association, provided all of the following conditions
are met:
a) Prior to the use or occupancy or sale or the execution of
controls for sale of an individual building unit, parcel, tracts,
townhouse, apartment, or common area, a declaration of
covenants, conditions and restrictions or an equivalent
document or a document such as specified by Minnesota
Common Interest Ownership Act set out in Minnesota
Statutes Chapter 515B and a set of floor plans such as
specified by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 515B shall be filed
with the City of Delano. Said filing with the City to be made
prior to the filings of said declaration or document or floor
plans with the recording officers of Wright County,
Minnesota.
b) The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or
equivalent documents shall specify that deeds, leases or
documents of conveyance affecting buildings, units, parcels,
tracts, townhouses, or apartments shall subject such
properties to the terms of said declaration.
c) The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions
shall provide that an owner’s association or corporation shall
be formed and that all owners shall be members of said
association or corporation which shall maintain all properties
and common areas in good repair and which shall assess
individual property owners proportionate shares of joint or
common costs. The intent of this requirement is to protect
the property values of the individual owner through
establishing private control. The homeowners association
documents or the declaration of covenants, conditions and
restrictions shall be submitted as part of the preliminary plat
application and shall contain the following information:
(1) The legal description of the common lands or
facilities.
(2) The restrictions placed upon the use and enjoyment
of the lands or facilities including the persons or
entities entitled to enforce the restrictions.
(3) A mechanism for resolving disputes among the
owners or association members.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-40
(4) A mechanism to assess and enforce the common
expenses for the land or facilities including upkeep
and maintenance expenses, real estate taxes, and
insurance premiums.
(5) The conditions and timing of the transfer of ownership
and control of land or facilities to the association or to
common ownership.
(6) Membership must be mandatory for each owner, and
any successive buyer.
(7) The open space restrictions must be permanent and
not for a given period of years.
(8) The association must be responsible for liability
insurance, local taxes, and the maintenance of the
open space facilities to be deeded to it.
(9) Property owners must pay their prorata share of the
cost of the association by means of an assessment to
be levied by the association which meets the
requirements for becoming a lien on the property in
accordance with Minnesota Statutes.
(10) The bylaws and rules of the association and all
covenants and restrictions to be recorded must be
approved by the City Council prior to the approval of
the final PUD plan.
d) The declaration shall additionally, among other things,
provide that in the event the association or corporation fails
to maintain properties in accordance with the applicable
rules and regulations of the City of Delano or fails to pay
taxes or assessments on properties as they become due
and in the event the said City of Delano incurs any expenses
in enforcing its rules and regulations, which expenses are
not immediately reimbursed by the association or
corporation, then the City of Delano shall have the right to
assess each property its prorata share of said expenses.
Such assessments, together with interest thereon and costs
of collection, shall be a lien on each property against which
each such assessment is made.
e) Natural Habitat. Open space may be deeded to an
established land trust, a government agency, or non-profit
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-41
organization. Management shall be the responsibility of the
land trust or non-profit organization. Maintenance may be
performed by the neighborhood homeowner association,
through written agreement between the association and the
land trust or non-profit organization.
(1) Open space may be protected by establishing
conservation easements in perpetuity in favor of an
established land trust or non-profit organization as
provided in Minnesota Statutes 84.64 – 84.65.
Unless the document establishing the restrictions
specifically provides to the contrary, the City shall
have no responsibility for the maintenance or
management of the area subject to the restrictions.
The form and content of the deed or other instrument
establishing the restrictions must be approved by the
City prior to the execution and delivery thereof.
Notwithstanding any provision of this Ordinance to the
contrary, the City may, in cases where conservation
restrictions are utilized to meet open space dedication
requirements of this Ordinance, waive the
requirement that the area subject to the restrictions be
platted as a separate outlot.
(2) Stormwater drainage systems located within open
spaces or the residential lots shall be covered by
utility and drainage easements dedicated on the final
plat to the City.
f) Neighborhood Recreational and Trail Corridor. Recreational
open space or trail corridors intended as public parks or
public trails shall be dedicated to the City. Management and
maintenance of the public recreational areas shall be the
responsibility of the City.
e. Staging of Public and Common Open Space. When a PUD provides for
common or public open space, the total area of common or public open
space or land escrow security in any stage of development shall, at
minimum, bear the same relationship to the total open space to be
provided in the entire PUD as the stages or units completed or under
development bear to the entire PUD.
f. Density. The maximum allowable density in a PUD shall be determined
by reference to the Comprehensive Plan. Within that limit, the exact
density allowable shall be determined by standards agreed upon between
the applicant and the City. Whenever any PUD is to be developed in
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-42
stages, no such stage shall, when averaged with all previously completed
stages, have a residential density that exceeds one hundred twenty-five
(125) percent of the proposed residential density of the entire PUD.
g. Utilities. In any PUD, all utilities, including telephone, electricity, gas and
telecable shall be installed underground within a joint trench, whenever
possible.
h. Utility Connections.
1) Water Connections. Where more than one (1) property is served
from the same service line, a shut off valve must be located in such
a way that each unit’s service may be shut off by the City, in
addition to the normally supplied shut off at the street.
2) Sewer Connections. Where more than one (1) unit is served by a
sanitary sewer lateral which exceeds three hundred (300) feet in
length, provision must be made for a manhole to allow adequate
cleaning and maintenance of the lateral. All maintenance and
cleaning shall be the responsibility of the property owners
association or owner.
i. Roadways.
1) All public streets shall conform to the design standards contained in
the Delano Subdivision Ordinance, as may be amended.
2) Private roadways within the project shall have an improved surface
to twenty-four (24) feet in width, signed no parking, or twenty-eight
(28) feet in width with parking allowed on one side, and shall be so
designed as to permit the City fire trucks to provide protection to
each building.
j. Landscaping. In any PUD, landscaping shall be provided according to a
plan approved by the City Council, which shall include a detailed planting
list with sizes and species indicated as part of the final plan. In assessing
the landscaping plan, the City Council shall consider the natural features
of the particular site, the architectural characteristics of the proposed
structure(s) and the overall scheme of the PUD plan. Common
landscaped open space exclusive of natural habitat areas shall be
irrigated.
k. Development Agreement. Prior to a rezoning or the issuance of a building
permit as part of Planned Unit Development, the permit, applicant, builder,
or developer shall execute and deliver to the City Council a development
agreement. The agreement shall detail all use restrictions and required on
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-43
and off-site improvements conditional to the PUD rezoning or CUP
approval. The agreement shall provide for the installation within one (1)
year of the off-site and on-site improvements (exclusive of building permit)
as approved by the City Council, secured by a cash escrow or letter of
credit in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to the City,
to insure the City that such improvements will be actually constructed and
installed according to specifications and plans approved by the City as
expressed in such agreement.
l. Residential Planned Unit Developments, Conditional Use Permit
Requirements. It is the intent of this section to establish special
requirements for the granting of a conditional use permit for residential
PUD projects which are in compliance with the density, permitted and
conditional uses allowed in a specific base district including dwellings,
offices and institutional uses of one (1) or more buildings in relation to an
overall design, and integrated physical plan and in accordance with the
provisions and procedures as prescribed in Sections 51.02, Subd. B of
this Ordinance.
1) Townhouse, quadraminium, cooperative, and condominiums
apartments shall comply with the design standards of Section
51.03, Subd. C.3.b of this Ordinance.
2) Setbacks.
a) The setback requirements at the periphery of the planned
unit development site at minimum shall be the same as
imposed in the respective districts.
b) Garages shall be located no less than twenty-five (25) feet
from the back of the curb line along those roadways which
are part of an internal street pattern to provide adequate offstreet
parking.
c) No building within the project shall be nearer to another
building than one-half (1/2) the sum of the building heights of
the two (2) buildings.
3) Density Bonus. As a consequence of a planned unit
development’s planned and integrated character, the number of
dwelling units allowed within the respective base zoning district may
be increased up to twenty (20) percent based upon a finding by the
City Council that such an increase is consistent with the goals of
the Comprehensive Plan and achieves the PUD stated objectives
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-44
as follows. The building, parking and similar requirements for these
extra units shall be observed in compliance with this Ordinance.
Bonus Feature Required Lot Area
Reduction Per Unit
1) Construction. Durable exterior wall finishes
consisting of at least two (2) of the following: glass,
brick, stone or stucco on at least seventy (70)
percent of all wall faces.
300 square feet
2) Underground Parking. One (1) stall per unit of
the required free parking shall be underground or
within the principal structure (not including attached
or detached garages).
300 square feet
3) Recreation, Indoor. Indoor recreation and
social rooms equal to a minimum of twenty-five
(25) square feet per unit or seven hundred fifty
(750) square feet total, whichever is greater.
100 square feet
4) Recreation, Outdoor. Outdoor recreational
facilities such as swimming pools, porches, tennis
courts, or similar facilities requiring a substantial
investment equaling at minimum five (5) percent of
the construction cost of the principal structure.
100 square feet
5) Open Space. The preservation of natural
open space, greenway corridors, and woodland
areas.
200 square feet
m. Commercial or Industrial Planned Unit Development, Conditional Use
Permit Requirements. The intent of this section is to establish special
requirements for the granting of a conditional use permit to allow
commercial or industrial PUD projects which are in compliance with the
permitted and conditional uses allowed in a specific district in one (1) or
more buildings in relation to an overall design, an integrated physical plan
and in accordance with the provisions and procedures prescribed in
Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.
1) The site and building design comply with the performance
standards of this Ordinance.
2) The PUD/CUP flexibility results in greater open space.
3) The utility and drainage system is subject to review and approval of
the City Engineer.
4) The commercial or industrial PUD is consistent with the goals and
objectives of the Delano Comprehensive Plan, Sanitary Sewer
Plan, Water Master Study, and Stormwater Management Plan.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-45
4. Procedure for Processing a Planned Unit Development.
a. Stages of PUD. The processing steps for a PUD are intended to provide
for an orderly development and progression of the Plan, with the greatest
expenditure of developmental funds being made only after the City has
had ample opportunity for informed decisions as to the acceptability of the
various segments of the whole as the plan affects the public interest. The
various steps represent separate applications for purpose of review,
compliant with Minnesota Statutes 15.99, outlined in detail in the following
sections:
1) Application Conference. Preliminary discussions.
2) General Concept Plan Application. Consideration of overall
concept and plan. The concept plan review is voluntary but
strongly recommended.
3) Development Stage Plan Application. One or more detailed Plans
as part of the whole final plan.
4) Final Plan Application. The summary of the entire concept and
each Development Stage Plan in an integrated complete and final
plan.
b. Application Conference. Upon filing of an application for PUD, the
applicant of the proposed PUD shall arrange for and attend a conference
with the Zoning Administrator. At such conference, the applicant shall be
prepared to generally describe the proposal for a PUD. The primary
purpose of the conference shall be to provide the applicant with an
opportunity to gather information and obtain guidance as to the general
suitability of the proposal for the area for which it is proposed and its
conformity to the provisions of this Ordinance before incurring substantial
expense in the preparation of plans, surveys and other data.
c. Neighborhood Meeting. The City may recommend the property
owner/applicant hold a neighborhood meeting for informal comment and
feedback prior to submitting a formal concept application.
d. Application. The person applying for a planned unit development shall fill
out and submit to the Zoning Administrator an official application form
together with a fee per Section 51.01, Subd. A.12. The request for
planned unit development shall be placed on the agendas of the Park
Board and Planning Commission according to the City’s deadline and
meeting schedule.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-46
e. Planned Unit Development/Rezoning. Planned unit development/
rezoning application shall be posted and advertised in accordance with
Section 51.02, Subd. A of this Ordinance at time of development stage
PUD.
f. Planned Unit Development/Conditional Use Permit. Planned unit
development/conditional use permit applications shall be posted and
advertised in accordance with Section 51.02, Subd. B.3 of this Ordinance
at time of development stage PUD.
g. Public Hearings. Public hearings shall be held at the PUD development
stage.
h. General Concept Plan.
1) Purpose. The General Concept Plan provides an opportunity for
the applicant to submit a plan to the City showing the basic intent
and the general nature of the entire development without incurring
substantial cost. This Concept Plan serves as the basis for public
hearing so that the proposal may be publicly considered at an early
stage. The following elements of the proposed General Concept
Plan represent the immediately significant elements which the City
shall review and for which a decision shall be rendered:
a) Overall maximum PUD density range.
b) General location of major streets and pedestrian ways.
c) General location and extent of public and common open
space.
d) General location of residential and non-residential land uses
with approximate type and intensities of development.
e) A staging and time schedule of development.
f) Other special criteria for development.
2) General Concept Plan Submission Information.
a) General Information.
(1) Owner. The landowner's name, address and
telephone number and his interest in the subject
property.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-47
(2) Applicant. The applicant's name, address and
telephone number if different from the landowner.
The applicant may designate an agent to be
contacted by the City, who may speak for the
applicant.
(3) Consultants. The names and addresses of all
professional consultants who have contributed to the
development of the PUD plan being submitted,
including attorney, land planner, engineer and
surveyor.
(4) Title of Applicant. Evidence that the applicant has
sufficient control over the subject property to
effectuate the proposed PUD, including a statement
of all legal, beneficial, tenancy and contractual
interests held in or affecting the subject property and
including an up-to-date certified abstract of title or
registered property report, and such other evidence
as the City Attorney may require to show the status of
title or control of the subject property.
b) Present Status of Premises and Adjacent Properties.
(1) Description. The address and legal description of the
subject property. A survey is required.
(2) Zoning. The existing zoning classification and present
use of the subject property and all lands within three
hundred fifty (350) feet of the subject property.
(3) Map. A single reproducible map or aerial photograph
at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one
hundred (100) feet, depicting the existing
development of the subject property and all land
within one hundred (100) feet thereof and showing the
precise location of existing streets, property lines,
utilities, easements, and wetlands.
c) Narrative Description. A written statement generally
describing the proposed PUD and the market which it is
intended to serve, showing its relationship to the City's
Comprehensive Plan and how the proposed PUD is to be
designed, arranged and operated in order to permit the
development and use of neighboring property in accordance
with the applicable regulations of the City.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-48
d) Site Conditions: Where deemed necessary by the City,
graphic reproductions of the existing site conditions at a
scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet or less
shall be submitted and shall contain the following:
(1) Survey showing lot dimensions and existing
easements and utilities.
(2) Contours - minimum two (2) foot intervals.
(3) Location, type, and extent of tree cover.
(4) Slope analysis.
(5) Location and extent of water bodies, wetlands, and
streams and flood plains within three hundred (300)
feet of the subject property.
(6) Existing drainage patterns.
(7) Vistas and significant views.
(8) Soil conditions as they affect development.
All of the graphics should be the same scale as the final plan
to allow easy cross reference. The use of overlays is
recommended for clear reference.
e) Concept Drawing. Schematic drawing of the proposed
development concept including, but not limited to, the
general location of major circulation elements, public and
common open space, residential and other land uses.
f) Number of Units. A statement of the estimated total number
of dwelling and/or other units proposed for the PUD and a
tabulation of the proposed approximate allocations of land
use expressed in acres and as a percent of the total project
area, which shall include at least the following:
(1) Area devoted to residential uses.
(2) Area devoted to residential use by building or
structure or use type.
(3) Area devoted to common open space.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-49
(4) Area devoted to public open space.
(5) Approximate area devoted to streets.
(6) Approximate area, and potential floor area, devoted to
commercial uses.
(7) Approximate area, and potential floor area, devoted to
industrial or office uses.
g) Staged Development. When the PUD is to be constructed in
stages during a period of time extending beyond a single
construction season, a schedule for the development of such
stages or units shall be submitted stating the approximate
beginning and completion date for each such stage or unit
and the proportion of the total PUD public or common open
space and dwelling units to be provided or constructed
during each such stage and the overall chronology of
development to be followed from stage to stage.
h) Common Areas. When the proposed PUD includes
provisions for public or common open space or service
facilities, a statement describing the provision that is to be
made for the care and maintenance of such open space or
service facilities. If it is proposed that such open space be
owned and/or maintained by any entity other than a
governmental authority, copies of the proposed articles of
incorporation and by-laws of such entity shall be submitted
during the development stage.
i) Covenants. General intent of any restrictive covenants that
are to be recorded with respect to property included in the
proposed PUD.
j) Market Feasibility. Where deemed necessary, a market
feasibility study including an analysis of the proposals
economic impact on the City.
k) Exclusion of Information. The Planning Commission may
excuse an applicant from submitting any specific item of
information or document required in this stage, which it finds
to be unnecessary to the consideration of the specific
proposal for PUD approval.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-50
l) Inclusion of Information. The Planning Commission may
require the submission of any additional information or
documentation which it may find necessary or appropriate to
full consideration of the proposed PUD or any aspect or
stage thereof.
3) Schedule.
a) Developer meets with the Zoning Administrator to discuss
the proposed development.
b) Developer submits the necessary data as required in Section
51.02, Subd. J.4.h.2) of this Ordinance at least twenty-eight
(28) days prior to Planning Commission meeting.
c) A technical staff report shall be prepared on the proposed
development, and distributed to the Planning Commission
and the applicant prior to the meeting.
d) The applicant or a representative thereof shall appear before
the Planning Commission in order to answer questions
concerning the proposed development.
e) Planning Commission makes a recommendation to the City
Council on the General Concept Plan.
f) City Council reviews all recommendations and approves/
denies application(s).
4) Optional Submission of Development Stage Plan. In cases of
single stage PUDs or where the applicant wishes to begin the first
stage of a multiple stage PUD, immediately the applicant may, at
their option, submit Development Stage Plans for the proposed
PUD simultaneously with the submission of the General Concept
Plan. In such case, the applicant shall comply with all provisions of
the Ordinance applicable to submission of the Development Stage
Plan. The Planning Commission and City Council shall consider
such plans simultaneously and shall grant or deny Development
Stage Plan approval in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
5) Effect of Concept Approval. PUD concept approval only provides
direction for the applicant to proceed to PUD Development Stage
submission. The concept plan approval does not convey any
development rights or privileges to the applicants.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-51
i. Development Stage. Development stage submissions shall depict and
outline the proposed implementation of the PUD General Concept Stage.
Information from the General Concept Stage may be included for
background and to provide a basis for the submitted plan.
1) Application. Requests for PUD Development Stage as provided
within this Ordinance, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on
an official application form. Such application shall be accompanied
by a fee as provided for by the City Council Resolution. This fee
shall not be refunded. Such application shall also be accompanied
by ten (10) copies of detailed written and graphic materials fully
explaining the proposed change, development, or use and a list of
affected property owners within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the
subject property obtained from the current tax rolls provided in the
City Hall or Wright County Offices and have the list verified by the
City Administrator.
2) Submission Information. The PUD Development Stage submission
information shall include:
a) Zoning Required. Zoning classification required for
Development Stage submission and any other public
decisions necessary for implementation of the proposed
plan.
b) Site Plan/Preliminary Plat. Drawn to a scale of one (1) inch
equals one hundred (100) feet or less, containing the
following information:
(1) Project Name. Proposed name of the development
(which shall not duplicate nor be similar in
pronunciation to the name of any plat theretofore
recorded in the County where the subject property is
situated).
(2) Survey. Property boundary lines and dimensions of
the property and any significant topographical or
physical features of the property. An accurate legal
description of the entire area within the PUD for which
final Development Plan approval is sought, correlated
to the legal description defining use districts in this
Ordinance.
(3) Preliminary Plat. Preliminary plat, if applicable, shall
comply with all the performance standards of the
Delano Subdivision Ordinance and this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-52
(4) Buildings. The location, size, use and arrangement
including height in stories and feet and total square
feet of ground area coverage and floor area, or
proposed buildings, and existing buildings which will
remain, if any.
(5) Traffic Circulation. Location, dimensions and number
of all driveways, entrances, curb cuts, parking stalls,
loading spaces and access aisles, and all other
circulation elements including bike and pedestrian;
and the total site coverage of all circulation elements.
(6) Common Areas. Location, designation and total area
of all common open space.
(7) Public Open Space. Location, designation and total
area proposed to be conveyed or dedicated for public
open space, including parks, playgrounds, school
sites and recreational facilities.
(8) Locate Existing Structures. The location, use and
size of structures and other land uses on adjacent
properties within one hundred (100) feet of the
property boundaries.
c) Residential Tabulation. A tabulation indicating the number
of residential dwelling units by number of bedrooms and
expected population/housing profile.
d) Areas of Use. A tabulation indicating the approximate gross
square footage, if any, of commercial and industrial floor
space by type of activity (e.g. drug store, dry cleaning,
supermarket).
e) Architectural Plans. Preliminary architectural plans
indicating use, floor plan, elevations and exterior wall
finishes of proposed buildings and architectural guidelines
for future development phases.
f) Landscape Plan. A detailed landscaping plan including the
type, size and quantity of all existing and proposed plantings.
g) Grading and Drainage Plan. Preliminary grading and
drainage plan illustrating changes to existing topography and
natural site vegetation. The Plan should clearly reflect the
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-53
site treatment and its conformance with the approved
concept plan.
h) Erosion Control. A Soil Erosion Control Plan acceptable to
watershed management organization and any other agency
with review authority clearly illustrating erosion control
measures to be used during construction and as permanent
measures.
i) Document Changes. A statement summarizing all changes
which have been made in any document, plan data or
information previously submitted, together with revised
copies of any such document, plan or data.
j) Preliminary Plat. A preliminary plat conforming to the
Delano Subdivision Ordinance.
k) Lighting Plan. A plan illustrating site lighting along with a
photometric plan.
l) Additional Data. Such other and further information as the
Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission or City Council
shall find necessary to a full consideration of the entire
proposed PUD or any stage thereof.
m) The Zoning Administrator may excuse an applicant from
submitting any specific item of information or document
required in this Section which it finds to be unnecessary for
the consideration of the specific proposal for PUD approval.
3) Schedule/Review.
a) Developer meets with the Zoning Administrator and City staff
to discuss specific development plans.
b) The applicant shall file the development stage application
with six (6) months after concept plan review, together with
all supporting data and filing fee, as established by City
Council ordinance.
c) Staff Review/Technical Assistance Reports. Upon receipt of
an application for a PUD development stage, the Zoning
Administrator shall, when deemed necessary, refer the
request to appropriate staff to ensure that informational
requirements are complied with. When all informational
requirements have been complied with, the request shall be
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-54
considered officially submitted. Also, when deemed
necessary, the Zoning Administrator shall instruct the
appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports and/or
provide general assistance in preparing a recommendation
on the request to the Planning Commission and city Council.
d) Other Agency Review. When appropriate, the Zoning
Administrator shall forward the PUD development stage
application to other special review agencies such as the
Department of Natural Resources, soil conservation
services, highway departments, or other affected agencies.
e) The Zoning Administrator, upon verification of a complete
application, shall instruct the City Clerk to set a public
hearing for the next regular meeting of the Planning
Commission. The Planning Commission shall conduct the
hearing, and reports its findings and make recommendations
to the City Council. Notice of said hearing shall consist of a
legal property description, description of request and map
detailing property location, and be published in the official
newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing and
written notification of said hearing shall be mailed at least ten
(10) days prior to all owners of land within three hundred fifty
(350) feet of the boundary of the property in question.
f) Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not
invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this
Ordinance.
g) The Planning Commission and City staff shall have the
authority to request additional information from the applicant
concerning operational factors or to retain expert testimony
with the consent and at the expense of the applicant
concerning operational factors, said information to be
declared necessary to established performance conditions in
relation to all pertinent sections of this Ordinance.
h) The applicant or a representative thereof shall appear before
the Planning Commission in order to answer questions
concerning the proposed development.
i) The Planning Commission shall review said reports and
plans and submit recommendations to the Council. Such
recommendations shall contain the findings of the Planning
Commission with respect to the conformity of the
Development Stage Plan to the approved General Concept
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-55
Plan. Should any changes be found to exist, the Planning
Commission shall comment with respect to the merit or lack
of merit of any departure of the Development Stage Plan
from substantial conformity with the Concept Plan and with
respect to the compliance of the Development Stage Plan
with the provisions of this Ordinance and all other applicable
federal, state and local codes and ordinances. If the
Planning Commission shall find conformity or any changes
merit approval and the Planning Commission shall further
find the Development Stage Plan to be in all other respects
completed and in compliance with this Ordinance and other
applicable federal, state, and local codes and ordinances, it
shall recommend approval. If the Planning Commission fails
to act within the time specified herein, it shall be deemed to
have recommended the plan for approval.
j) Upon receipt of the Planning Commission report and
recommendation, the Zoning Administrator shall place the
request and any report and recommendation on the agenda
of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council.
The Planning Commission must act and report its
recommendations in a timely manner so that the City Council
can act on the application within sixty (60) days of receipt of
a complete application, unless the review period for the
application has been extended pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes 15.99.
k) The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the City Attorney to
draw up a PUD agreement which stipulates the specific
terms and conditions approved by the City Council and
accepted by the applicant. This agreement shall be signed
by the Mayor of the City of Delano, City Clerk and the
applicant within thirty (30) days of City Council approval of
the Development Stage Plan. Where the Development
Stage Plan is to be resubmitted or denied approval, the City
Council action shall be by written report setting forth the
reasons for its action. In all cases, a certified copy of the
document evidencing City Council action shall be promptly
delivered to the applicant by the Zoning Administrator.
4) Limitation on Development Plan Approval. Unless a Final Plan
covering the area designated in the Development Stage Plan as the
first stage of the PUD has been filed within six (6) months from the
date the City Council grants Development Stage Plan approval, or
in any case where the applicant fails to file Final Plans and to
proceed with development in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance and/or an approved Development Stage Plan, the
approval shall expire. Upon application by the applicant, the City
Council may at its discretion may extend for not more than six
months, the filing deadline for any Final Plan when, for good cause
shown, such extension is necessary. In any case where
Development Plan approval expires, the City Council shall forthwith
adopt a resolution repealing the General Concept Plan approval
and the Development Stage Plan approval for that portion of the
PUD that has received Final Plan approval and re-establishing the
zoning and other ordinance provisions that would otherwise be
applicable.
j. Final Plan.
1) Purpose. The Final Plan is to serve as a complete, thorough and
permanent public record of the PUD and the manner in which it is
to be developed. It shall incorporate all prior approved plans and
all approved modifications thereof resulting from the PUD process.
It shall serve in conjunction with other City ordinances as the land
use regulation applicable to the PUD. The Final Plan is intended
only to add detail to, and to put in final form, the information
contained in the General Concept Plan and the Development Stage
Plan and shall conform to the Development Stage Plan in all
respects.
2) Final Plan Submission Information. After review of a General
Concept Plan for the PUD and approval of a Development Stage
Plan for a section or sections of the proposed PUD, the applicant
will submit the following material for review by the City staff prior to
issuance of a building permit:
a) Recording Proof. Documents establishing the recording of
any easement or other documents required by the City prior
to the sale of any land or dwelling unit included in the PUD
and of the establishment and activation of any entity that is
to be responsible for the management and maintenance of
any public or common open space or service facility.
b) Final Plans, Structures. Final architectural working drawings
at all structures.
c) Final Engineering Plans. Final engineering plans and
specifications for streets, drainage, utilities and other public
improvements, together with a development contract
providing for the installation of such improvements and
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-56
financial guarantees for the completion of such
improvements.
d) Other Plans. Any other plans, agreements, or specifications
necessary for the City staff to review the proposed
construction. All work shall be in conformance with the
Building Code of the City.
e) Recording of Final Plan. Within sixty (60) days of its
approval, the applicant, or at its election, the City, shall
cause the Final Plan, or such portions thereof as are
appropriate, to be recorded with the County Recorder or
Registrar of Titles, at the expense of the applicant. Certified
copies of all relevant recorded documents shall be furnished
to the City.
f) Building and Other Permits. Except as otherwise expressly
provided herein, upon receiving notice from the Zoning
Administrator that the approved Final Plan and development
agreement have been recorded, all appropriate officials of
the City may issue building and other permits to the
applicant for development, construction and other work in
the area encompassed by the approved Final Plan or
intermediate Development Stage Plan provided, however,
that no such permit shall be issued unless the appropriate
official is first satisfied that all requirements which are
applicable to the permit sought, have been satisfied.
g) Limitation on Final Plan Approval. Within one (1) year after
the approval of a Final Plan for PUD, or such shorter time as
may be established by the approved development schedule,
construction shall commence in accordance with such
approved plan. Failure to commence construction within
such period shall, unless an extension shall have been
granted and hereinafter provided, automatically render void
the PUD permit and all approvals of the PUD plan and the
area encompassed within the PUD shall thereafter be
subject to those provisions of the Zoning Code, and other
Code provisions, applicable in the district in which it is
located. In such case, the Council shall adopt a resolution
repealing the PUD permit and PUD approvals and reestablishing
the zoning and other provisions that would
otherwise be applicable.
3) Schedule.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-57
a) Upon approval of the Development Stage Plan and within
the time established by Section 51.02, Subd. J.4.i.4) of this
Ordinance, the applicant shall file with the Zoning
Administrator a Final Plan consisting of the information and
submissions required by Section 51.02, Subd. J.4.j.2) of this
Ordinance for the entire PUD or for one (1) or more stages.
This application will be considered at the next possible
regular Planning Commission meeting.
b) The findings and recommendations of the Planning
Commission shall be forwarded to the City Council for
consideration. If the Planning Commission fails to act within
the time specified herein, it shall be deemed to have
recommended the plan for approval.
c) Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete PUD final plan
application, unless the review period is extended in
accordance with Minnesota Statutes 15.99, and receipt of
the findings and recommendations of the Planning
Commission, the City Council shall grant approval or denial
of said request.
d) The applicant shall cause the Final Plan, or such portions
thereof as are appropriate, to be recorded with the Wright
County Registrar of Deeds of Register of Titles. The
applicant shall provide the City with a signed copy verifying
County recording within forty (40) days of the date of
approval.
4) Building and Other Permits. Except as otherwise expressly
provided herein, upon receiving notice from the Zoning
Administrator that the approved Final Plan has been recorded and
upon application of the applicant pursuant to the applicant
ordinances of the City, all appropriate officials of the City may
issue building and other permits to the applicant for development,
construction and other work in the area encompassed by the
approved Final Plan provided, however, that no such permit shall
be issued unless the appropriate official is first satisfied that the
requirements of all codes and ordinances in which are applicable to
the permit sought, have been satisfied.
5) Limitation on Final Plan Approval. Within one (1) year after the
approval of a Final Plan for PUD, or such shorter time as may be
established by the approved development schedule, construction
shall commence in accordance with such approved plan. Failure to
commence construction within such period shall, unless an
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-58
extension shall have been granted and hereinafter provided,
automatically render void the PUD permit and all approvals of the
PUD plan and the area encompassed within the PUD shall
thereafter be subject to those provisions of the Zoning Ordinance,
and other ordinances, applicable in the district in which it is located.
In such case, the City Council shall forthwith adopt an ordinance
repealing the PUD permit and all PUD approvals and reestablishing
the zoning and other ordinance provisions that would
otherwise be applicable. The time limit established by this section
may, at the discretion of the City Council, be extended for not more
than one (1) year by ordnance or resolution duly adopted.
6) Inspections During Development.
a) Compliance with Overall Plan. Following Final Plan approval
of a PUD, or a stage thereof, the Zoning Administrator shall,
at least annually until the completion of development, review
all permits issued and construction undertaken and compare
actual development and within the approved development
schedule.
b) If the Zoning Administrator finds that development is not
proceeding in accordance with the approved schedule, or
that it fails in any other respect to comply with the PUD plans
as finally approved, he shall immediately notify the City
Council. Within thirty (30) days of such notice, the City
Council shall either by ordinance revoke the PUD permit,
and the land shall thereafter be governed by the regulations
applicable in the district in which it is located; or shall take
such steps as it deems necessary to compel compliance
with the Final Plans as approved; or shall require the
landowner or applicant to seek an amendment of the Final
Plan.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Administration
2-59
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-1
SECTION 51.03. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Subd. A Non-Conforming Building, Structures, and Uses.
1. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the regulation of nonconforming
buildings, structures and uses and to specify those requirements,
circumstances, and conditions under which non-conforming buildings, structures
and uses will be operated and maintained. The Zoning Ordinance establishes
separate districts, each of which is an appropriate area for the location of uses
which are permitted in that district. It is necessary and consistent with the
establishment of these districts that non-conforming buildings, structures and
uses not be permitted to continue without restriction. Furthermore, it is the intent
of this section that all non-conforming uses shall be eventually brought into
conformity.
2. Grandfather Clause. Any structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective
date of this Ordinance shall not be enlarged, but may be continued at the size
and in the manner of operation existing upon such date except as hereinafter
specified or, subsequently amended.
3. Repair Work. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the placing of a structure
in safe condition when said structure is declared unsafe by the Building Official
providing the necessary repairs do not result in the expansion of the structure.
4. Moving of Non-Conforming Structures. No non-conforming building,
structure, or use shall be moved to another lot or to any other part of the parcel of
land upon which the same was constructed or was conducted at the time of this
Ordinance adoption unless such movement shall bring the non-conformance into
compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
5. Reversal of Non-Conformity. When any lawful non-conforming use of any
structure or land in any district has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not
thereafter be changed to any non-conforming use.
6. Reduction of Non-Conformity. A lawful non-conforming use of a structure or
parcel of land may be changed to lessen the non-conformity of use. Once a nonconforming
structure or parcel of land has been changed, it shall not thereafter
be so altered as to increase the non-conformity.
7. Destroyed Non-Conforming Use. If at any time, a non-conforming building,
structure or use shall be destroyed to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of
its fair market value, said value to be determined by the City, then without further
action by the City Council, the building and the land on which such building was
located or maintained shall, from and after the said of said destruction, be subject
to reasonable conditions imposed on a building permit in order to mitigate any
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-2
newly created impact on adjoining properties. Any building which is damaged to
an extent of less than fifty (50) percent of its value may be restored to its former
extent provided reconstruction is completed within twelve (12) months of said
damage. Estimate of the extent of damage or destruction shall be made by the
Building Official.
8. Discontinuance. Whenever a lawful non-conforming use of a structure or land
is discontinued for a period of one (1) year, any future use of said structure or
land shall be made to conform with the provisions of this Ordinance.
9. Alterations. Alteration and normal maintenance to a lawful non-conforming
building or structure may be made provided:
a. The alterations do not expand the building size.
b. The alterations do not change the building occupancy capacity or parking
demand.
c. The alteration does not increase the non-conformity of the building or the
use.
10. Expansion of Non-Conforming Buildings or Structures.
a. Administrative Approvals. The expansions of lawful non-conforming
single family or two family residential buildings and related accessory
structures may be approved through the administrative permit process by
the Zoning Administrator subject to provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. E of
this Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator shall make a determination that
the building expansion will have no external negative impacts upon
adjacent properties or public rights-of-way.
1) Expansion of buildings found to be non-conforming only by reason
of height, yard setback, lot area or off-street parking may be
permitted provided the structural non-conformity is not increased
and the expansion complies with the performance standards of this
Ordinance.
2) Lawful non-conforming single family and two family units may be
expanded to improve the livability provided the non-conformity of
the structure is not increased.
b. Conditional Use Permit. Lawful non-conforming commercial, industrial,
public, semi-public, and multiple family structures may be expanded on
the same lot by conditional use permit in accordance with Section 51.02,
Subd. B of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-3
1) Expansion of buildings found to be non-conforming only be reason
of height and setback.
2) Except for the above, the expansion will not increase the nonconformity
of the building or site.
3) The new building expansion will conform with all applicable
performance standards of this Ordinance. A conditional use permit
shall not be issued under this section for a deviation from other
requirements of this Ordinance unless variances are also approved.
4) The request for conditional use permit shall be evaluated based on
standards and criteria set forth in Section 51.02, Subd. B.4.a of this
Ordinance.
11. Non-Conforming Lots. A lot of record, existing upon the effective date of this
Ordinance in a residential district, which does not meet the requirements of this
Ordinance as to area or width may be utilized for single family detached dwelling
purposes provided:
a. The lot measurements for lot area and width are within seventy (70)
percent of the applicable zoning district standards.
b. The building setbacks of the applicable zoning district of this Ordinance
are met.
c. Single family home is a permitted use within the zoning district.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-4
Subd. B. Lot and Yard Provisions.
1. Purpose. This section identifies minimum yard spaces, exceptions, and areas
to be provided for in each zoning district.
2. Detailed Data Required. All applications for building permit in which new
structures or building foot print expansion of existing structures are proposed,
with the exception of Section 51.03, Subd. B.2.a below, shall be accompanied
with a registered certificate of survey including all the information contained in
Section 51.03, Subd. B.2.b below.
a. Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from Section 51.03, Subd.
B.2, above:
1) Structures that are constructed to allow for the passage of storm
water, and does not change site topography or drainage patterns,
including but not limited to decks, gazebos, and driveways,
provided all required setbacks are met.
2) Building additions provided the following:
a) The project does not change site topography.
b) The project does not change drainage patterns.
c) The project does not increase drainage onto adjoining
properties.
d) The site is not located within the 100 year floodplain.
e) The building addition complies with all zoning district
setbacks, and easements of record. In the case of a nonconforming
structure, the building addition does not increase
the non-conformity of the structure, or obstruct access to or
from adjacent property.
f) In place of a registered survey, a detailed site plan must be
submitted to include the following items:
(1) Scale of drawing, north arrow, and a legal description
of the property.
(2) Dimensions of all lot lines, and all easements of
record.
(3) Names of all abutting streets.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-5
(4) Location of all existing and proposed buildings,
accessory additions, and future garage and deck
locations on the lot.
(5) Outside dimensions of proposed structure, including
decks, porches, stairways, fireplaces, bay and bow
windows.
(6) If necessary, should the proposed structure or
addition be set close to an apparent lot line, and the
Building Official and/or Zoning Administrator is not
able to determine the setback, the applicant is
responsible (via a registered surveyor) to locate the
lot line stakes to provide the exact location of the
existing lot line, and that the structure will not
encroach within the required setback area.
b. Survey Requirements.
1) All surveys must be certified by a Minnesota Registered Land
Surveyor. Civic engineers may certify topographic surveys.
2) Scale of drawing, north arrow, and a legal description of the
property.
3) Dimensions of all lot lines and all easements of record.
4) Location of all utilities as shown on recorded plats.
5) Names of all abutting streets.
6) Location of all existing and proposed buildings, accessory
additions, and future garage and deck locations on the lot.
7) Outside dimensions of proposed structure, including decks,
porches, stairways, fireplaces, bay and bow windows.
8) Location of stakes established by the surveyor along each side lot
line. The maintenance of these stakes, once established by the
surveyor, shall be the responsibility of the building permit applicant.
9) Grade elevations of the following points:
a) Each lot corner (both existing and proposed).
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-6
b) Center of existing or proposed street at each lot line
extended and at the driveway.
c) Proposed grades around buildings, driveway, and walkout if
included.
d) Proposed floor elevations, basement, top of foundation, and
garage.
Such elevations may be based on assumed data but shall be tied
by the surveyor to a specified benchmark, if there is a known
N.G.V.D. within a one-half (1/2) mile distance. In either case,
benchmark description shall be given on the drawing.
10) The proposed disposal of drainage and surface water, indicating
direction of surface water drainage by arrows. This must concur
with any existing subdivision drainage plan.
11) The garage must be noted along with the driveway position.
12) Any existing wetlands, ponds, streams and lakes. For ponds and
lakes, the normal water level and the 100 year flood elevation must
be indicated on the survey.
13) Location of sewer and water connections.
a) In the case of private septic systems and wells, location of
each shall be shown as appropriate and septic system
drainfield laid out on the plan with proposed elevations.
b) If stubs for City water and sewer are available from City
records, the location, size, and elevations shall be shown on
the survey.
c) If stubs are not available, survey to determine elevation of
inverts to nearest manholes up and down stream of the
proposed building and show proposed location.
3. Minimum Lot Area Requirements.
a. The minimum lot area shall conform to the standards of the applicable
zoning district. No lot, yard, or other open space shall be reduced in area
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-7
or dimensions so as to make such lot, yard, or open space less than the
minimum required by this Ordinance, and if an existing yard or other open
space is less than the minimum required, it shall not be further reduced.
No required open space provided about any building or structure shall be
included as a part of any open space required for another structure.
b. Buildable Area. The required minimum lot area shall be buildable land,
as defined in Section 51.02 of this Ordinance and exclusive of utility
transmission easements.
c. Open Space. Each multiple family dwelling site of more than four (4)
units shall contain at least five hundred (500) square feet of usable open
space, as defined in Section 51.02 of this Ordinance, for each dwelling
unit contained thereon.
4. Building Placement and Multiple Structures.
a. Street Obstructions. All buildings shall be so placed so that they will not
obstruct future streets which may be constructed by the City in conformity
with existing streets and according to the system and standards employed
by the City.
b. Principal Buildings. Except in an approved planned unit development that
specifically allows it, as provided for in Section 2, Subd. 10 of this
Ordinance, not more than one (1) principal building shall be located on a
lot.
5. Yards and Setbacks.
a. Setbacks.
1) Reductions. No setback, yard or other open space shall be
reduced in area or dimension so as to make such setback, yard or
other open space less than the minimum required by this
Ordinance, and if the existing setback, yard or other open space as
existing is less than the minimum required, it shall not be further
reduced.
2) Front Setback Exception. Where adjacent structures within the
same block have front yard setbacks different from those required,
the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the
adjacent structures. If there is only one (1) adjacent structure, the
front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the required
setback and the setback of the adjacent structure. In no case shall
the required front yard setback exceed that required minimum
established within the districts of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-8
3) Traffic Visibility Setback. On corner lots in all districts, no structure
or planting in excess of thirty (30) inches above the street center
line grade shall be permitted within a triangular area defined as
follows: beginning at the intersection of the projected property lines
of two (2) intersecting streets, thence twenty (20) feet along the
property line, thence diagonally to a point twenty (20) feet from the
point of beginning.
b. Permitted Yard Encroachments. The following structural elements or
equipment shall not be considered as encroachments on setback
requirements subject to other conditions provided herein:
1) All Yards.
a) Flag poles, sidewalks, wheelchair ramps, name plate signs,
trees, shrubs, plants, yard lights, mailboxes, floodlights, or
other sources of light illuminating authorized illuminated
signs, or light standards for illuminating yards for safety and
security reasons, provided the direct source of light complies
with Section 51.03, Subd. D.2 of this Ordinance. These
uses may be permitted in any yard provided they are not
located in any easement.
b) Flues, belt course, bay windows, leaders, sills, pilaster,
eaves, gutters, awnings, open terraces, open canopies,
chimneys, ornamental features, open fire escapes extending
from the principal structure, provided they do not project
more than two (2) feet into a required setback.
c) In rear yards, laundry drying equipment, recreational
equipment (non-vehicular), trellises, open arbors, detached
outdoor living rooms not to exceed five hundred (500)
square feet provided they maintain a five (5) foot setback
from the side and rear lot lines. No encroachment shall be
permitted within existing drainage or utility easements.
d) Terraces, steps, uncovered porches, deck stoops, landings,
or other similar features that do not extend above the
entrance floor of the building may extend into the required
front yard setback no more than five (5) feet.
e) Uncovered porches, decks, balconies, and/or similar
features may extend into a required side yard abutting a
street setback or required rear yard setback provided the
structure does not extend more than ten (10) feet into the
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-9
required setback and maintains not less than twenty (20)
foot setback from the side lot line abutting the street or rear
lot line.
f) In the case of a residential lot in an R-E, R-1, R-2, or R-3
District backing onto a railroad, a public park, trail, wetland
or other such similar permanently reserved open space, the
required rear yard setback for terraces, elevated decks,
ground level uncovered porches, stoops, landings or similar
features may extend into a required rear yard setback, to a
distance not less than ten (10) feet from a rear lot line. No
encroachment shall be permitted in existing or required
drainage and utility easements.
g) Accessory buildings or equipment including: detached
accessory buildings, air conditioners, accessory antennas,
sport courts, swimming pools, and trash enclosures as
regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. C.7 of this Ordinance.
h) Fencing and landscaping as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
c. B-4 Zoning District Right-of-Way Permitted Encroachments.
1) Awnings and marquees provided that:
a) No encroachment over the public right-of-way shall project
more than six (6) feet from the building or closer than two (2)
feet from the curb line or street surface, whichever is least.
b) No encroachment may interfere with existing street lighting,
or overhead power lines.
c) All portions of the marquee or awning framing extending
over a public right-of-way shall be at least seven (7) feet
above the ground or pavement.
d) Maximum thickness of a marquee measured from its lowest
to highest point shall not exceed four (4) feet.
e) The marquee or awning shall be constructed with a design
and materials consistent with the general character of the
principal structure and the Central Business District.
2) Projection signs as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. N of this
Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-10
d. Zero Lot Line Subdivisions.
1) Townhomes and Apartments. If existing townhouses or apartment
units not on separate unit lots are to be subdivided on an individual
unit or condominium basis for owner occupancy, it shall require a
planned unit development according to the provisions of Section 2,
Subd. 10 of this Ordinance.
2) Subdivision of Two Family or Quadraminium Lots. The subdivision
of base lots containing two family dwellings or quadraminiums to
permit individual private ownership of a single dwelling within such
a structure is acceptable subject to City Council approval. Approval
is further contingent upon the following requirements:
a) Prior to a two family dwelling or a quadraminium subdivision,
the base lot shall meet all the requirements of the zoning
district.
b) There shall be no more than one (1) principal structure on a
base lot in all residential districts. The principal structure on
a unit lot created in a two family or quadraminium
subdivision will be the portion of the attached dwelling
existing or constructed on the platted base lots.
c) Permitted accessory uses as defined by the zoning districts
are acceptable provided they meet all the zoning
requirements.
d) A property maintenance agreement shall be arranged by the
applicant and submitted to the City Attorney for review and
subject to approval. The agreement shall ensure the
maintenance and upkeep of the structure including but not
limited to siding, roofing (type and color), fencing, driveways,
maintenance, etc. and the lots to meet minimum City
standards. The agreement is to be filed with the Wright
County Recorder’s office as a deed restriction against the
title of each unit lot.
e) Separate public utility service shall be provided to each
subdivided unit and shall be subject to the review and
approval of the City Engineer.
f) The subdivision is to be platted and recorded in
conformance to requirements of the Delano Subdivision
Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-11
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-12
Subd. C. General Building and Use Provisions.
1. Purpose. This section identifies general building design size requirements and
exceptions to general height requirements applicable within each zoning district.
2. Dwelling Unit Restriction. No cellar, garage, tent, travel trailer, motor home,
basement with unfinished structure above, or accessory building shall at any time
be used as a dwelling unit.
3. Building Type and Construction.
a. Single Family Dwellings. All single family detached dwellings in the R-A,
R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 Districts shall meet the following design
criteria:
1) All structures shall have permanent concrete or treated wood
foundations which will anchor the structure, which comply with the
State Building Code as adopted in the State of Minnesota and
which are solid for the complete circumference of the house.
2) Sixty (60) percent of a residential structure shall have a minimum
width or depth of twenty (20) feet. Width measurement shall not
take into account overhangs or other projections. Such width
requirement shall be in addition to the minimum area per dwelling
requirements established within this Ordinance.
3) Single family dwellings shall have at least a four/twelve (4/12) roof
pitch and shall be covered with shingles or tiles or a standing seam
metal roof.
4) All single family structures shall be built in conformance with
Minnesota Statute 327.31 to 327.35 of the State Building Code as
adopted in the State of Minnesota.
5) The exterior walls of all single family residences shall be similar in
appearance to normal wood or masonry residential construction.
Any metal siding upon single family residence structures shall have
a vertical dimension no greater than twelve (12) inches. Sheet
metal siding shall not be permitted in such districts.
6) Single family homes constructed after the effective date of this
Ordinance shall have a minimum finished habitable floor area of
one thousand (1,000) square feet.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-13
b. Two Family and Townhome Design and Construction Standards.
1) Unit Width. The minimum width of a two family or townhome
dwelling unit shall be twenty-four (24) feet. Minimum floor area per
unit shall be established within the zoning district.
2) Unit Size. Two family and townhome dwelling units shall have a
minimum finished habitable floor area of one thousand (1,000)
square feet.
3) Unit Construction.
a) Building elevations and floor plans shall be furnished
illustrating exterior building materials and colors to
demonstrate compliance with Section 51.03, Subd.
C.3.b.3).d)) of this Ordinance. Building floor plans shall
identify the interior storage space within each unit.
b) Decks or Porches. Provision shall be made for possible
decks, porches, or additions as part of the initial dwelling unit
building plans.
c) Minimum Overhang: In case of gable roof, a minimum
eighteen (18) inch roof overhang, soffit shall be required for
all dwelling unit building plans.
d) Exterior Building Finish: The exterior of townhome dwelling
units shall include a variation in building materials which are
to be distributed throughout the building facades and
coordinated into the architectural design of the structure to
create an architecturally balanced appearance. In addition,
townhome dwelling structures shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the
combined area of all building facades of a structure
shall have an exterior finish of brick, stucco and/or
natural or artificial stone.
(2) Except for brick and/or natural or artificial stone, no
single building facade shall have more than seventyfive
(75) percent of one type of exterior finish.
(3) For the purpose of this section, the area of the
building facade shall not include area devoted to
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-14
windows, entrance doors, garage doors, or roof
areas.
4) Storm Shelter. In cases where dwelling units are constructed slab
on-grade, provisions shall be made to provide for storm protection
either internally to the unit or in a separate storm shelter structure.
Compliance with this requirement shall be based upon Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) guidelines and standards
which are on file with the City Building Official.
5) Garages.
a) Each dwelling unit shall include, at a minimum, a two stall
garage.
b) Garages shall comply with the following minimum size
standards:
(1) Dwellings With Basements. Four hundred forty (440)
square feet (twenty (20) feet by twenty-two (22) feet).
(2) Dwellings Without Basements. Five hundred (500)
square feet (twenty (20) feet by twenty-five (25) feet).
(3) Garages shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in
width.
6) Utilities.
a) Public Utility Service. Separate public utility services shall
be provided to each unit unless exempted by the City
Engineer.
b) Sewer Connection. Where more than one (1) unit is served
by a sanitary sewer service, all maintenance and cleaning
shall be the responsibility of the property owners’ association
or owners.
7) Homeowners’ Association. A homeowners’ association shall be
established for all quadraminium, three and four plex multiple family
and townhome developments subject to review and approval of the
City Attorney. The homeowners’ association shall be responsible
for all exterior building maintenance, approval of any exterior
architectural modifications, landscaping, snow clearing and regular
maintenance of private driveways and other areas owned in
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-15
common when there is more than one (1) individual property owner
having interest within the development.
c. Multiple Family Apartments Design Construction Standards:
1) Unit Size.
a) Multiple family dwelling units, except for elderly housing
dwelling units defined as multiple family, shall have the
following minimum floor area per unit:
Efficiency Units 500 square feet
One Bedroom Units 700 square feet
Two Bedroom Units 800 square feet
More than Two Bedroom Units An additional 100 square
Feet per bedroom
b) Elderly (Senior Citizen) and/or Physical Disabled Housing.
Dwelling units defined as elderly housing or physically
disabled housing shall have the following minimum floor
areas per unit:
Efficiency Units 440 square feet
One Bedroom Units 520 square feet
Two Bedroom Units 700 square feet
2) Exterior Treatment. The exterior of multiple family dwelling
structures shall include a variation in building materials which are to
be distributed throughout the building facades and coordinated into
the architectural design of the structure to create an architecturally
balanced appearance. In addition, multiple family dwelling
structures shall comply with the following requirements:
a) A minimum of thirty-three (33) percent of the combined area
of all building exterior walls of a structure shall have an
exterior finish of brick, stucco, and/or natural or artificial
stone.
b) For the purposes of this section, the area of the building
facade shall not include area devoted to windows, entrance
doors, garage doors, or roof areas.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-16
d. Commercial Design Construction Standards. All buildings erected on land
within commercial zoning districts shall conform with the following:
1) Minimum Floor Area. Commercial buildings (principal structure)
having less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area
may only be allowed upon approval of a conditional use permit, as
provided for in Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.
2) Exterior Building Elevations.
a) Within the B-1 and B-2 Zoning Districts, all exterior wall
surfaces may be a combination of materials including brick,
dimensioned stone, rock faced block, decorative concrete
panel, architectural concrete block, cast-in-place concrete,
stone, stucco, wood, or glass. An average of said materials
shall constitute no less than ninety (90) percent of the
exterior wall façade less windows, doorways, roof, and/or
garage doors (except as allowed in Section 51.03, Subd.
C.3.f or Subd. C.3.g of this Ordinance.
b) Within the B-3 and B-W Zoning Districts, all exterior wall
surfaces may be a combination of materials including brick,
dimensioned stone, rock face block, decorative concrete
panels, stone stucco, wood, glass, or metal panels. Metal
panels shall not encompass more than fifty (50) percent of
the building elevation abutting a public right-of-way or
residentially zoned property. Metal panels shall not exceed
seventy-five (75) percent of all other exterior wall surfaces,
except as allowed in Sections 51.03, Subd. C.3.f of this
Ordinance.
c) Within the B-4 Zoning District, all exterior wall surfaces may
be a combination of materials including brick, dimensioned
stone, rock faced brick, decorative concrete panels,
architectural concrete block, cast in place concrete, stone,
wood, or glass. Exterior wall surfaces shall be compatible
with the Delano Central Business District Architectural
Guidelines.
d) In all zoning districts, mechanical equipment such as
heating, ventilation, or air conditioning units located
anywhere on the property shall be screened and painted to
match the building exterior.
e. Industrial Design Construction Standards. All buildings erected on land
within industrial zoning districts shall conform with the following:
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-17
1) Minimum Floor Area. Industrial buildings (principal structure)
having less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area
may only be allowed upon approval of a conditional use permit, as
provided for in Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.
2) Exterior Building Elevations.
a) Within the I-1 Zoning District, all exterior wall surfaces may
be a combination of materials including brick, dimensioned
stone, rock faced block, decorative concrete panels,
architectural concrete block, cast-in-place concrete, stone,
wood, glass, or metal panels. Metal panels shall not
encompass more than an average of twenty-five (25)
percent of all building elevations combined except as may be
allowed by Section 51.03, Subd. C.3.f or Subd. C.3.g of this
Ordinance.
b) Within the I-2 Zoning District, all exterior walls may be a
combination of materials including brick, dimensioned stone,
rock faced block, decorative concrete panels, architectural
concrete block, cast in place concrete, stone, wood, glass or
metal panels. Metal panels shall not encompass more than
an average of seventy-five (75) percent of all building
elevations combined except as may be allowed by Section
51.03, Subd. C.3.f or Subd. C.3.g of this Ordinance.
f. Exterior Building Elevation Deferment. The City may grant by conditional
use permit a deferment to a developer of commercial and industrial metal
buildings or building additions from the exterior wall design requirements
when the building or building addition will be constructed in more than one
phase.
1) The deferment shall be until the second construction phase is
completed or two (2) years, whichever is less.
2) The developer shall provide the City with an irrevocable letter of
credit for an amount one and one-half (1-1/2) the estimated cost of
the required exterior wall treatment. The bank and letter of credit
shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney. The letter of
credit shall secure compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. C.3.d.2) of
this Ordinance.
g. Exterior Building Elevation Exception. Exceptions to exterior building
elevation provisions of this Ordinance may be granted as a conditional use
permit by the City Council, provided that:
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-18
1) The proposed building maintains the quality and value intended by
this Ordinance.
2) The proposed building is compatible and in harmony with other
structures within the district.
3) The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance are
considered and the request is found to comply with these criteria.
h. All mechanical equipment, such as air conditioning units located anywhere
on the property, etc. shall be screened and/or painted to match the
building exterior.
i. Quasi-Public Structures.
1) No quasi-public structure shall be located within the public right-ofway
except as approved by the City Council. Such structure shall
include but not be limited to trash containers, bicycle racks,
benches, planting boxes, awnings, flag poles, light standards,
stairs, stoops, light wells, signs and others.
2) Public and quasi-public utility poles and underground services may
be permitted within public right-of-way provided that:
a) A permanent identification tag or marking is affixed to each
structure.
b) The City is notified as to the location and date of placement
of the structure.
c) The City is notified of any change of structure ownership,
removal or modification.
d) Lease or joint use agreements or arrangements applicable to
each utility structure are disclosed.
4. Height.
a. Exceptions. The building height limits established herein for districts shall
not apply to the following:
1) Farm structures.
2) Church spires.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-19
3) Belfries.
4) Cupolas.
5) Windmills.
6) Solar energy devices.
7) Chimneys and smokestacks.
8) Flag poles mounted on a building.
9) Non-commercial television and radio antennae, and satellite dishes
not exceeding twenty (20) feet above the roof.
10) Parapet walls extending not more than three (3) feet above the
limiting height of the building.
11) Elevator penthouses.
12) Cooling towers/water towers.
13) Lighting structures for public outdoor recreational fields not
exceeding eighty (80) feet in height.
14) Lighting structures for public hockey rinks not exceeding sixty (60)
feet in height.
15) Telecommunication antenna and antenna towers as regulated by
Section 51.03, Subd. M of this Ordinance.
16) Poles, towers and other structures for essential services.
b. No roof equipment exceeding beyond the limited height of a building may
occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the area of such roof nor
exceed ten (10) feet unless otherwise noted.
c. Conditional Use Permit. Building heights in excess of those standards
contained in the district provisions and any other sections of this Chapter
may be allowed through a conditional use permit, provided that:
1) Demonstrated need is established for the increase in height and
said increase will not violate the intent and character of the zoning
district in which the structure is located.
2) The site is capable of accommodating the increased structure size.
3) The potential increased intensity and size of use does not cause an
increase in traffic volumes beyond the capacity of the surrounding
streets.
4) Public utilities and services are adequate.
5) For each additional story over the district limitation or for each
additional ten (10) feet above the maximum allowed per district,
front and side yard setback requirements shall be increased by ten
(10) percent.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-20
6) The construction does not limit solar access to abutting and/or
neighboring properties. A shadow study shall be required
illustrating shadow encroachment on adjoining properties.
7) The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
5. High Water Elevation. All buildings shall comply with building elevation
regulations of the Floodplain and Shoreland Overlay Districts of this Ordinance.
In areas beyond the Floodplain and Shoreland Overlay Districts, all buildings
shall be placed at an elevation such that the lowest building opening meets the
following standards:
a. A minimum of two (2) feet above 100 year flood elevation of areas with a
separate emergency overflow.
b. A minimum of three (3) feet above the 100 year flood elevation of areas
with no separate emergency overflow.
c. The 100 year flood elevation or high water level shall be determined by a
registered engineer.
6. Ground Water Elevation. The lowest floor, including basement floor, of all
structures shall be at a level at least three (3) feet above the highest known
ground water table elevation. If requested by the Building Official, the ground
water table elevation shall be determined by a licensed soils engineer using soil
borings, piezometers, or the observation of mottled soils.
7. Accessory Building, Uses, and Equipment.
a. Agricultural Farm Buildings. Agricultural farm buildings, accessory to an
active farm operation on a lot twenty (20) acres or larger, designed,
constructed, and used to house farm implements, agricultural activities, or
agricultural products shall be exempt from the requirements of this
subdivision.
b. Residential Accessory Buildings and Uses.
1) An accessory building or attached garage shall be considered an
integral part of the principal building if it is connected to the
principal building by a covered passageway. Attached accessory
buildings shall meet the principal building setbacks of the respective
zoning district.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-21
2) No accessory building or use shall be constructed or developed on
a lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to
which it is accessory.
3) Accessory Building Floor Area, Height and Number. The
combination of accessory buildings and garages (attached and
detached) shall not exceed the following standards:
a) Area.
Maximum Allowable
Zoning District Floor Area____
R-A 4,000 square feet
R-E 2,000 square feet
R-1 1,500 square feet
R-2 1,500 square feet
R-3 1,200 square feet
R-4 1,200 square feet
R-5 1,200 square feet
R-6 1,200 square feet
R-7, R-8, R-B 30% of the gross floor area
of the multiple family structure
(1) An attached garage shall not exceed the maximum
allowable floor area as mentioned above, or eighty
(80) percent of the size of the single family or two
family house foundation not including garage,
whichever is less.
b) Number of Buildings. Total number of accessory buildings
and garages shall be limited to the following:
(1) One (1) attached garage and one (1) detached
accessory building; or
(2) Two (2) detached accessory structures.
c) Height. Accessory buildings shall not exceed the height of
the principal building or twenty (20) feet, whichever is less.
4) Setbacks. Detached accessory buildings shall comply with the
following setbacks:
a) Front Setback. No detached accessory building shall be
located in any front yard.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-22
b) On lots platted prior to 1 July 1987:
(1) Side Yard Setback. Not less than five (5) feet on any
side yard abutting adjoining lots, nor less than twenty
(20) feet on a side yard abutting a street.
(2) Rear Yard Alley Setback.
(a) Garages with direct alley access not less than
fifteen (15) feet from a rear lot line to garage
door.
(b) Garages that are oriented on a lot so that the
direction of the vehicle access to the garage
parallels the rear lot line may be located not
less than five (5) feet from the lot line. This
design is intended to prohibit direct backing
from the garage onto an alley.
(3) Rear yard setback (non-alley) is five (5) feet.
(4) Detached accessory buildings that have one hundred
twenty (120) square feet or less floor area and which
do not require a building permit may be set back not
less than five (5) feet from the rear lot line.
c) On all lots platted subsequent to 1 July 1987:
(1) Accessory buildings and structures shall be
constructed within the buildable area of the lot as
defined in Section 51.03, Subd. C.8 of this Ordinance,
except as provided in Section 51.03, Subd. C.3 of this
Ordinance.
(2) Accessory buildings that have one hundred twenty
(120) square feet or less of floor area and which do
not require a building permit may be allowed in the
required rear yard not less than five (5) feet from the
rear lot line.
5) Air Conditioners. Accessory uses or equipment such as air
conditioning cooling structures or condensers (ground mounted)
which generate noise shall be located in rear yards. Air
conditioning cooling structures or condensers may be located within
a required side yard provided the following conditions are met:
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-23
a) The cooling structure or condenser shall not produce noise
levels contrary to Section 51.03, Subd. D.5 of this
Ordinance.
b) The cooling structure or condenser shall be screened by
landscaping, fencing, or other means rendering it concealed
from view from adjacent property.
c) The cooling structure or condenser shall not lie within a
required drainage and/or utility easement.
6) Accessory Antennas. Accessory antennas shall be limited to
radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs,
short wave dispatching antennas, and amateur short wave
transmitting and receiving antennas. Accessory antennas that are
accessory to the principal use of property are permitted accessory
uses in all zoning districts provided they meet the following
conditions:
a) Height. A ground mounted accessory antenna shall not
exceed twenty (20) feet in height from ground level. The
height of an accessory antenna attached to an antenna
support structure may not exceed five (5) feet above the
peak of the roof of the principal building. An accessory
antenna in excess of the aforementioned height standards
may be allowed by conditional use permit.
b) Yards. Accessory antennas shall not be located within the
required front yard setback or side yard setback abutting a
street, except for wall mounted antennas less than twenty
four (24) inches in dimension, wall mounted to a principal
building and the setback encroachment does not exceed two
(2) feet.
c) Roofs. If vegetation or obstructions interfere with satellite
signals at a location in any allowable placement area, the
accessory antenna may be placed on the roof of any
authorized structure on the premises.
d) Setbacks. Accessory antennas shall not be located within
five (5) feet of any lot lines of adjoining lots or within a
drainage or utility easement.
e) Building Permits. A building permit shall be required for the
installation of any accessory antenna requiring a conditional
use permit. Building permit applications shall be
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-24
accompanied by a site plan and structural components data
for the accessory antenna, including details of anchoring.
The Building Official must approve the plans before
installation.
f) Lightning Protection. Each accessory antenna shall be
grounded to protect against natural lightning strikes in
conformance with the National Electrical Code as adopted by
the City of Delano.
g) Electrical Code. Accessory antenna electrical equipment
and connections shall be designed and installed in
conformance with the National Electrical Code as adopted by
the City of Delano.
h) Color/Content. Accessory antennas shall be of a neutral
color.
i) Effective Date. The provisions of this section shall be
applicable to all accessory antennas erected after the
effective date of this Ordinance. All such structures existing
prior to this date shall be addressed as legal non-conforming
uses.
c. Commercial or Industrial Accessory Buildings.
1) Commercial or industrial buildings shall not exceed thirty (30)
percent of the gross floor space of the principal building.
2) Accessory buildings shall meet all the required setbacks of the
principal building.
3) Accessory buildings shall be constructed of building materials to
match the principal structure and comply with the building material
requirements of Section 51.03, Subd. C.3.d.2).a) of this Ordinance.
d. Sport Courts. In all districts, the following standards shall apply to sport
courts:
1) A building permit shall be required for all private residential and
commercial sport courts.
2) A conditional use permit shall be required for all commercial sport
courts.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-25
3) An application for a building permit or an administrative permit shall
include a site plan showing the following along with all required
information:
a) The size, shape, pavement and sub-pavement materials.
b) The location of the court.
c) The location of the house, garage, fencing, utilities and any
other structural improvements on the lot.
d) The location of structures on all adjacent lots.
e) A grading plan showing all revised drainage patterns and
finished elevations at the four corners of the court.
f) Landscaping and turf protection around the court.
g) Location of existing and proposed wiring and lighting
facilities.
h) Details on light fixtures and light standards.
4) Sport courts shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to any
side and rear lot line. Sport courts shall not be located within any
required front yard or side yard abutting a street.
5) Sport courts shall not be located over under-ground utility lines of
any type, nor shall any court be located within any private or public
utility, drainage or other easement.
6) Solid sport court practice walls shall not exceed ten (10) feet in
height. A building permit shall be required for said walls. Said
walls shall meet the principal building setbacks of the district.
7) Chain link fencing surrounding the sport court may extend up to
twelve (12) feet in height above the sport court surface elevation.
Any fence in excess of six (6) feet shall require a building permit.
8) Lighting for the sport court shall be designed with a ninety (90)
degree cutoff and shall be hooded to direct lighting downward and
not toward adjacent properties.
e. Swimming Pools.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-26
1) Single Family and Two Family Dwellings. The following shall apply
to all swimming pools which are intended for use accessory to
single-family and two-family dwellings:
a) A building permit shall be required for any swimming pool
that is over twenty four (24) inches in height or depth,
measured from ground level, and exceeds five thousand
(5,000) gallons capacity. This includes in ground swimming
pools, above ground pools, on ground swimming pools and
fixed in place wading pools.
b) An application for the construction of swimming pools shall
be on a City application form and accompanied by a fee
established by City Council ordinance. The permit
application shall include:
(1) Site plan illustrating:
(a) Type and size of pool.
(b) Location of the pool on the lot.
(c) Location of other buildings and structures on
the lot.
(d) Location of structures on adjoining lots.
(e) Location of filter and heating units.
(f) Location of pumps and wiring.
(g) Location of back flush and drain outlets.
(h) Location of any overhead or underground
utilities or utility easements.
(i) Fence locations.
(2) Building Plans.
(a) Swimming pool design.
(b) Fencing and gate details.
(c) Deck or surfacing details.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-27
(3) Setbacks and Location Standards.
(a) Pools shall not be located in front of the
principal building.
(b) Pools shall not be located in the required side
yard of any zoning district.
(c) Pools shall not be located closer than ten (10)
feet from the rear property line.
(d) The filter unit, pump, heating unit, and any
noise generating mechanical equipment shall
be located not closer than twenty (20) feet to
any lot line.
(e) Pools shall not be located beneath overhead
utility lines nor over underground utility lines of
any type.
(f) Pools shall not be located within any private or
public utility, walkway, drainage, or other
easement.
(g) Pools shall be set back at least six (6) feet from
the principal building or frost footing.
(4) Lighting for the pool shall be designed with a ninety
(90) degree cut off and shall be hooded to direct
lighting toward the pool and not toward adjacent
property.
(5) All swimming pools for which a building permit is
required shall be provided with safeguards to prevent
children from gaining uncontrolled access. This can
be accomplished with fencing, or other enclosure, or
any combination thereof, of sufficient density as to be
impenetrable.
(a) Fences shall be at least five (5) feet in height.
The bottoms of the fences shall not be more
than four (4) inches from the ground. Fences
shall be of a non-corrosive material and shall
be constructed as to be not easily climbable
(chain link fences must be vinyl coated with
slats for screening). All fence openings or
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-28
points of entry into the pool enclosure shall be
equipped with gates or doors. All gates or
doors to swimming pools shall be equipped
with self-closing and self-latching devices
placed at a height not lower than forty-eight
(48) inches so as to be inaccessible to all small
children. Prior to filling the pool, the approved
fence or enclosure must be completely in place
and inspected and approved by the City
Building Inspector.
(b) Swimming pool fences shall comply with fence
setback standards of Section 51.03, Subd.
D.11 of this Ordinance.
(c) Required structure or safety fencing shall be
completely installed within three (3) weeks
following the installation of the pool, before any
water is allowed in the pool, and prior to final
inspection.
(6) Water Quality/Drainage.
(a) Water in the pool shall be maintained in a
suitable manner to avoid health hazard of any
type.
(b) Back flush or pool drainage water shall be
directed onto the property on which the
swimming pool is located and ultimately to
public storm water, if available.
(c) Drainage of pools directly into public streets or
other public drainageways shall require written
permission of the Zoning Administrator and/or
Public Works Director. Draining the pool into
the sanitary sewer is prohibited.
2) Multiple Family/Commercial Pools. For private swimming pools
which are intended for and used by the occupants of a multiple
family dwelling or commercial structure and the guests of the
occupants, or for private and public clubs and organizations, the
following regulations shall be met in addition to those listed for
single and two family dwellings provided in Section 51.03, Subd.
C.8.e above.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-29
a) No part of the water surface of the swimming pool shall be
less than fifty (50) feet from any lot line.
b) No pumps, filter or other apparatus used in connection with
or to service a swimming pool shall be located less than fifty
(50) feet from any lot line and must be contained within an
insulated building.
c) The pool area shall be adequately fenced to prevent
uncontrolled access from the street or adjacent property.
Fences shall be at least five (5) feet in height. The bottoms
of the fences shall not be more than four (4) inches from the
ground. Fences shall be of a non-corrosive material and
shall be constructed as to be not easily climbable (chain link
fences must be vinyl coated with slats for screening). All
fence openings or points of entry into the pool enclosure
shall be equipped with gates or doors. All gates or doors to
swimming pools shall be equipped with self closing and self
latching devices placed at a height not lower than forty-eight
(48) inches so as to be inaccessible to small children. Prior
to filling the pool, the approved fence or enclosure must be
completely in place and inspected and approved by the City
Building Inspector. Adequate screening including, but not
limited to, landscaping shall be placed between the pool area
and adjacent lot lines.
d) All deck areas, adjacent patios, or other similar areas used
in conjunction with the swimming pool shall be located at
least thirty (30) feet from any lot line.
e) To the extent possible, back flush water or water from pool
drainage shall be directed onto the owner’s property and to
the nearest public storm sewer or drainage easement.
Draining pools into the sanitary sewer is prohibited.
f. Refuse and Recycling Material and Equipment.
1) Refuse Removal. Passenger automobiles and trucks not currently
licensed by the state, or which are because of mechanical
deficiency incapable of movement under their own power, parked
or stored outside for a period in excess of thirty (30) days, and all
materials stored outside in violation of City Code provisions are
considered refuse or junk and shall be disposed of within ten (10)
days of notification by the City.
2) Refuse Receptacles Location and Screening.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-30
a) Residential Structures With Four (4) or Less Units. Garbage
cans, waste containers and recycling bins shall be kept in
rear or side yards or indoors.
b) Commercial, Industrial, and Institutional Uses, Residential
Structures With More Than Four (4) Units.
(1) All refuse, recyclable materials, and necessary
handling equipment including but not limited to
garbage cans, recycling bins, and dumpsters shall be
stored within the principal structure, within an
accessory building, or totally screened from eye level
view from all neighboring uses and the public right-ofway.
(2) Trash Enclosures. Exterior storage of refuse and
recyclable material shall require the following:
(a) Exterior wall or fence treatment shall be
masonry construction or material similar to
complement the principal building.
(b) The enclosed trash and/or recycling receptacle
area shall be located in the rear or side yard
and shall observe all applicable setback
requirements and easements.
(c) The trash and/or recycling enclosure must be
in an accessible location for pick up hauling
vehicles.
(d) The trash and/or recycling receptacles must be
fully screened from view of adjacent properties
and the public right-of-way by a fence or wall of
at least six (6) feet in height and a minimum
opaqueness of eighty (80) percent.
(e) All dumpsters, recycling bins, handling
equipment, and enclosures shall be approved
by the Zoning Administrator and be kept in a
good state of repair with lids designed to
prevent spilling and spread of debris and
access by animals. The construction of trash
and recycling enclosures shall be per
standards established by the City. All designs
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-31
and construction of trash enclosures shall be
subject to the Building Official’s approval.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-32
Subd. D. General Performance Standards.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this subdivision is to establish general performance
standards to ensure compatibility of uses and to prevent nuisance problems that
may detract from the health, safety, and welfare of the residents.
2. Outdoor Lighting.
a. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to encourage the use of lighting
systems that will reduce light pollution and promote energy conservation
while increasing night time safety, utility, security and productivity.
b. Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
following:
1) The use of temporary outdoor lighting used during customary
holiday seasons.
2) The use of temporary outdoor lighting used for civic celebrations
and promotions.
3) Lighting required by a government agency for the safe operation of
airplanes, or security lighting required on government buildings or
structures.
4) Emergency lighting used by police, fire, and rescue authorities.
c. Non-Conforming Uses.
1) Existing Fixtures. All outdoor lighting fixtures existing and legally
installed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance are exempt
from regulations of this section but shall comply with the Ordinance
requirements for glare as follows:
a) Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area,
sign or other structure, shall be arranged as to deflect light
away from any adjoining residential zone or from the public
streets. Direct or sky-reflected glare, where from flood lights
or from high temperature processes such as combustion or
welding shall not be directed into any adjoining property.
The source of lights shall be hooded or controlled in some
manner so as not to light adjacent property. Bare
incandescent light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of
adjacent property or public right-of-way. Any light or
combination of lights which cast light on a public street shall
not exceed one (1) foot candle (meter reading) as measured
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-33
from the right-of-way line of said street. Any light or
combination of lights which cast light on residential property
shall not exceed four-tenths (0.4) foot candles (meter
reading) as measured from said property.
2) New Fixtures. Whenever a light fixture that was existing on the
effective date of this Ordinance is replaced by a new outdoor light
fixture, the provisions of this section shall be satisfied.
d. Intensity.
1) Maximum Foot Candles. No light source or combination thereof
which cast light on a public street shall exceed one (1) foot candle
(meter reading) as measured from the right-of-way line of said
street nor shall any light source or combination thereof which cast
light on adjacent residential property exceed four-tenths (0.4) foot
candles (meter reading) as measured at the property line per the
method outlined in Section 51.03, Subd. D.2.c.1).a) of this
Ordinance.
2) The foot candle level of a light source shall be taken after dark with
the light meter held six (6) inches above the ground with the meter
facing the light source. A reading shall be taken with the light
source on, then with the light source off. The different between the
two readings will be identified as the light intensity.
e. Performance Standards.
1) Residential District Standards. In all residential districts, any
lighting used to illuminate a structure, an off-street parking area, or
other area shall be arranged as to deflect light away from any
adjoining residential property or from any public right-of-way. All
lighting shall be installed in accordance with the following
provisions:
a) The light source shall be hooded or controlled so as not to
light adjacent property in excess of the maximum intensity
defined by this Ordinance.
b) Bare light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent
property or public right-of-way, unless part of a permanent or
decorative fixture.
2) Business/Industrial District Standards. In all business and
industrial districts, any lighting used to illuminate a structure, an offstreet
parking area, or other area shall be arranged so as to deflect
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-34
light away from any adjoining residential property or from any public
right-of-way. All lighting shall be installed in accordance with the
following provisions:
a) The luminaire shall contain a cutoff which directs and cuts off
the light at an angle of ninety (90) degrees or less.
b) Light sources shall not be permitted so as to light adjacent
property in excess of the maximum intensity defined in
Section 51.03, Subd. D.2.c.1).d) of this Ordinance.
c) Architectural/historical light fixtures that feature globes that
are not shielded, or lighting of entire facades or architectural
features of a building may be approved by the City Council.
In no case shall the light affect adjacent property in excess
of the maximum intensity defined in Section 51.03, Subd.
D.2.c.1).d) of this Ordinance.
d) The maximum height of the fixture and pole above the
ground grade permitted for light sources is thirty (30) feet. A
light source mounted on a building shall not exceed the
height of the building. In no case shall the height of a light
source mounted on a pole or on a building exceed the height
limits of the zoning district in which the use is located, unless
allowed by conditional use permit.
e) Location.
(1) The light source of an outdoor light fixture shall be set
back a minimum of ten (10) feet from a street right-ofway
or where the lot line abuts a residential property
and five (5) feet from an interior side or rear lot line.
(2) No light source shall be located on the roof unless
said light enhances the architectural features of the
building and is approved by administrative permit.
f) Direct or reflected glare from high temperature processes
such as combustion or welding shall not be visible from any
adjoining property.
3) Outdoor Recreation. Outdoor commercial or public recreational
uses such as, but not limited to, baseball fields, football fields,
hockey rinks, and tennis courts have special requirements for night
time lighting. Due to these unique circumstances, an administrative
permit shall be required for commercial and public outdoor
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-35
recreational use lighting systems which do not comply with the
regulations of this section.
a) No outdoor recreation facility whether public or private shall
be illuminated after 12:00 AM, except for required security
lighting.
b) Off-street parking areas for outdoor recreation uses which
are illuminated shall meet the requirements stated for
business or industrial applications as found in Section 51.03,
Subd. D.2.e.2) of this Ordinance.
c) The provisions for an administrative use permit, Section
51.02, Subd. C of this Ordinance, are considered and
satisfactorily met.
f. Submission of Plans. All applications, except single family residential, that
include outdoor lighting shall include evidence the proposed outdoor
lighting will comply with this section. The application shall contain the
following information, in addition to other required information:
1) Site plans indicating the location on the premises of all illuminating
devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other lighting
devices.
2) Description of the type of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps,
supports, reflectors, and other lighting devices (angle of cutoff).
The description shall include, but is not limited to, catalog cuts by
manufacturers and drawings (including sections where required).
3) Photometric plans illustrating the light emissions, and illumination
field of the proposed site lighting.
3. Smoke. The emission of smoke by any use shall be in compliance with and
regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota
Rules, MPCA Chapter 7009, as amended.
4. Dust and Other Particulated Matter. The emission of dust, fly ash or other
particulated matter by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the
State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota Rules MPCA Chapter
7009, as amended.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-36
5. Noise. Noises emanating from any use shall be in compliance with and
regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota
Rules MPCA 7030, as amended and City Code.
6. Waste Material. Waste material resulting from or used in industrial or
commercial manufacturing, fabricating, servicing, processing or trimming shall
not be washed into the public storm sewer system, the sanitary sewer system or
any public water body, but shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the
Minnesota State Fire Marshal, the Pollution Control Agency, the Department of
Natural Resources and the Zoning Administrator.
7. Bulk Storage (Liquid). All uses associated with the bulk storage of all gasoline,
liquid fertilizer, chemical, flammable and similar liquids shall comply with
requirements of the Minnesota State Fire Marshal, Minnesota Department of
Agricultural Offices, and have documents from those offices stating the use is in
compliance.
8. Electrical Emission. All activities which create electrical emissions shall
comply with the minimum requirements of the Federal Communications
Commission.
9. Exterior Storage.
a. Residential Zoning Districts.
1) Exceptions. All personal property in a residential zoning district
shall be stored within a building or fully screened so as not to be
visible from adjoining properties and public streets, except for the
following items which may be stored in a rear yard or an interior
side yard and provided they maintain a five (5) foot setback from
the rear and interior side lot line:
a) Laundry drying equipment.
b) Non-vehicular recreational equipment.
c) Home heating fuel tanks.
d) Stacked firewood.
e) Construction and landscaping materials or equipment
currently (within a period of twelve (12) months) being used
on the premises.
f) Agricultural equipment and materials, if these are used or
intended for use on the premises.
g) Off-street parking of licensed passenger automobiles and
pick up trucks in designated driveway or parking area,
surfaced in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. E of this
Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-37
h) Licensed motor vehicles per Section 51.03 Subd. E.3.f of
this Ordinance.
2) Recreational and Utility Vehicle and Trailer Storage. Recreational
vehicles, as defined by Section 51.01, Subd. B.2 of this Ordinance
may be parked or stored on a residential site provided that:
a) The vehicles are registered to or rented by a resident of the
dwelling on such site, provided that:
(1) The vehicles have affixed thereto current registration
or license plates as required by law and are operable.
(2) The vehicles are stored no closer than five (5) feet
from side and rear lot lines.
(3) The vehicles located within front or side yard areas
are confined to designated driveways or parking
areas surfaced in compliance with Section 51.03,
Subd. E.5.d of this Ordinance.
b) All front yard storage shall be set back fifteen (15) feet from
street curb and/or pavement lines.
c) No vehicle shall be parked in a manner that blocks a city or
county trail or sidewalk.
d) The vehicles are not connected to any electrical, water or
sewage disposal system on the residential property where
the same is so parked or stored.
e) The vehicle shall not be stored or parked on a public street
for a period longer than twenty-four (24) hours
b. Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts.
1) Exterior Storage. Exterior storage shall be governed by the
respective zoning district in which such use is located.
2) Screening. All exterior storage shall be screened so as not to be
visible from adjoining properties and public streets except for the
following:
a) Merchandise being displayed for sale in accordance with
zoning district requirements.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-38
b) Materials and equipment currently being used for
construction on the premises.
3) Within an industrial zoning district, the exterior storage of semitrailers
accessory to the principal use may be allowed by
conditional use permit according to Section 51.02, Subd. B. Semitrailers
connected to semi-tractors queuing for loading or unloading
shall be considered truck parking and be exempt from the outdoor
storage conditional use permit.
c. All Zoning Districts.
1) No recreational vehicles may be used as a residence, office,
business, industrial manufacturing, testing, or storage of items in
conjunction with a residential, business, commercial, or industrial
enterprise.
2) Temporary trailers and facilities generated by public service
agencies (i.e., bookmobiles, bloodmobile, highway construction
trailers, etc.) are a permitted use allowed by administrative permit
provided:
a) The facilities are located in a manner that does not interfere
with traffic on a public street.
b) The facility has a specific term for placement and removal
approved by the City.
3) Temporary real estate sale/rental trailers or offices may be allowed
by interim use permit, regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. 3 of this
Ordinance provided:
a) The temporary sales trailer/office is located on a site of a
City approved project or subdivision.
b) The temporary trailer/office meets all the required setbacks
of the underlying zoning district.
c) The temporary trailer/office provides adequate parking in
accordance with Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance.
d) The site is landscaped in a manner that enhances the
temporary trailer and allows for reuse of the site after trailer
removal.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-39
e) The applicant provide a schedule for the removal of the
trailer and reclamation of the site consistent with the
approved site plan or subdivision.
4) The City Council may order the owner of any property to cease or
modify open storage uses including existing uses, provided it is
found that such uses constitute a threat to the public health, safety,
convenience or general welfare.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-40
10. Required Screening, Landscaping, and Buffer Yards.
a. Screening. Where any business or industrial use (i.e., structure, parking
or storage) abuts property zoned for residential use, that business or
industry shall provide screening along the boundary of the residential
property. Screening shall also be provided where a business or industry is
across the street from a residential zone, but not on that side of a
business or industry considered to be the front (as determined by the
Zoning Administrator). All the fencing and screening specifically required
by this Ordinance shall be subject to Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 and shall
consist of either a fence or a green belt planting strip as provided for
below:
1) A green belt planting strip shall consist of vegetation and plants and
shall be of sufficient width and density to provide an effective visual
screen. This planting strip shall be designed to provide eighty (80)
percent opacity to a minimum height of six (6) feet at time of
planting. Earth mounding or berms may be used but shall not be
used to achieve more than three (3) feet of the required screen. In
such cases when planting strips are used in conjunction with berms
designed to support plant growth, plant height may be reduced
accordingly such that an eighty (80) percent visual screen of not
less than six (6) feet in height is maintained. The planting plan and
type of plantings shall require the approval of the City Council.
2) A required screening fence shall be constructed of masonry, brick,
wood or metal. Such fence shall provide a screening effect to
eighty (80) percent opacity to a height of six (6) feet. The design
and materials used in constructing a required screening fence shall
be subject to the approval of the City Council. Fences in excess of
six (6) feet in height shall require approval of the Zoning
Administrator. Plantings shall be included in the design of any
screening fence except as otherwise approved by the City Council
due to grade constraints.
b. Landscaping - General Residential. The lot area remaining after providing
for off-street parking, off-street loading, sidewalks, driveways, building site
and/or other requirements shall be landscaped using ornamental grass,
shrubs, trees or other acceptable vegetation or treatment generally used
in landscaping prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Prior to
issuance of certificate of occupancy, the front yard extending from the
back of street curb to the front of the home shall be sodded except for
areas landscaped with shrubs, trees, or other acceptable vegetation. At
least one (1) shade tree of two (2) inches diameter shall be provided in the
front yard. Occupancy may be taken in the Winter with a temporary
certificate of occupancy provided a security is posted equal to one
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-41
hundred fifty (150) percent of the cost of any remaining landscaping to be
accomplished and all such remaining landscaping shall be installed by the
first of June the following Spring. Fences, trees, or other plantings placed
upon utility easements require City approval and are subject to removal at
the owner’s expense if required for the maintenance or improvement of
the utility. The City assumes no liability for replacement. Branches of
trees on utility easements containing overhead wires shall not extend
within ten (10) feet of such wires at mature plant height.
c. Landscaping - New Residential Subdivisions, Semi-Public and All Income
Producing Property Uses. (Excluding residential structures containing less
than four (4) dwelling units). Prior to approval of a building permit, all
above referenced uses shall be subject to mandatory landscape plan and
specification requirements.
1) The landscape plan shall address the following:
a) The boundary or perimeter of the proposed subdivision or
site at points adjoining other properties.
b) The immediate perimeter of the structure.
c) The perimeter and landscaped islands within parking and
loading areas, and light standards.
d) Preservation of existing trees in conformance with Section
51.03, Subd. D.10.d of this Ordinance.
e) Required screening and/or buffer yards.
f) Wetland, ponding, wetland filter strips, landscaping, buffering
and restoration.
2) All landscaping incorporated in said plan shall conform to the
following standards:
a) All plants shall be at least equal to the following minimum
size:
Potted/Bare Balled &
Root or Burlapped
Shade Trees* 2 in. dia 2 in. dia
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-42
Half Trees (Flowering
Crabapple,
Hawthorn, Etc.) 6 - 7 ft. 1-1/2 in. dia
Evergreen Trees ----- 3 - 4 ft.
Tall Shrubs & Hedge
Material (Evergreen
or Deciduous) 3 - 4 ft. 3 - 4 ft.
Low Shrubs - Deciduous 18-24 in. 24-30 in.
- Evergreen 18-24 in. 24-30 in.
potted
- Spreading Evergreen 18-24 in. 18-24 in.
potted
* Type and mode are dependent upon time of planting season,
availability, and site conditions (soils, climate, ground water,
manmade irrigation, grading, etc.).
b) Types of New Plantings. Plantings and suitable trees
include but are not limited to:
(1) Deciduous Trees:
Common Name: Scientific Name:
Oak Quercus (all climatic Zone 4 varieties)
Maple Acer (all climatic Zone 4 varieties)
Hackberry (Thornless) Celtis occidentalis
Birch Betula (all climatic Zone 4 varieties)
Honeylocust Gleditsia tricanthos
Linden/Basswood (American Tilia (cordata and americana)
and Little Leaf)
Ash (Green and White) Fraxinus (pennsylvania & americana)
Ginkgo (male tree only) Ginkgo biloba
Kentucky Coffee Tree Gymnocladus dioicus
Ohio Buckeye Aesculus glabra
Amur Chokecherry Prunus maackii
Delaware American Elm Ulmus americana “Delaware”
Amur Cork Phellodendron amurense
Robusta Poplar Populus X robusta
Niobe Weeping Willow Salix X blanda
Crabapple Malus spp.
(2) Evergreen Trees:
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-43
Common Name: Scientific Name:
Fir Abies (all climatic Zone 4 varieties/
Pseudotsuga)
Spruce Picea (all climatic Zone 4 varieties)
Pine Pinus (all climatic Zone 4 varieties)
Canadian Hemlock Tsuga canadensis
European Larch Larix decidua
Cedar Cedrus (all climatic Zone 4 varieties)
(3) Shrubs:
Common Name: Scientific Name:
Dwarf-winged euonymus Euonymus alatus “compactus”
Winged euonymus Euonymus alatus
Privet Ligustrum spp.
Mock orange Philadelphus spp.
Sumac Rhus spp.
Common lilac Syringa vulgaris
Japanese yew Taxus cuspidata
American arborvitae Thuja occidentalis
(4) Ground Covers:
Common Name: Scientific Name:
Ground juniper Juniperus spp.
Periwinkle, myrtle Vinca minor
(5) Wetland and Pond Plantings: All wetland and pond
plantings shall require City review and approval.
c) Prohibited Trees:
(1) Deciduous Trees:
Norway Maple
Silver Maple
Siberian Elm
Cottonwood
(2) Coniferous Trees:
None
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-44
d) Design.
(1) The landscape plan shall show some form of
designed site amenities (i.e., composition of plant
materials, and/or creative grading, decorative lighting,
exterior sculpture, etc., which are largely intended for
aesthetic purposes).
(2) All areas within the property lines (or beyond, if site
grading extends beyond) shall be treated. All exterior
areas not paved or designated as roads, parking, or
storage shall be planted into ornamental vegetation
(lawns, ground covers, or shrubs) unless otherwise
approved by the City.
(3) Turf slopes in excess of three to one (3:1) are
prohibited.
(4) Four (4) inches of black dirt shall be applied to all
disturbed landscape situations and be thoroughly
tilled into the sub-grade to a minimum depth of seven
(7) inches. Existing top soil shall be preserved in
place or stockpiled and redistributed on the site as top
soil in final grading.
(5) All ground areas under the building roof overhang
must be treated with a decorative mulch and/or
foundation planting.
(6) All sites shall have irrigation or an exterior water
spigot to insure that landscape maintenance can be
accomplished.
(7) Trees and shrubs shall not be planted in the right-ofway
except for designated parkways and boulevard
reforestation as determined by City.
(8) Plant material centers shall not be located closer than
three (3) feet from the fence line or property line and
shall not be planted to conflict with public plantings
based on the judgment of the City.
(9) Where planting materials are planted in two (2) or
more rows, plantings shall be staggered in rows
unless otherwise approved by the City staff.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-45
(10) Large deciduous shrubs shall be planted so that
mature widths shall overlap so as to provide an
effective visual screen.
(11) All landscaped areas, except those consisting entirely
of prairie plantings, shall be mulched to a minimum of
two (2) inches with a mulch material deemed
acceptable by the City.
(12) In areas with naturalistic plantings, plant mix and
spacing should approximate native plant communities
and/or readily succeed to a naturalistic stand. In
addition, naturalist plantings should be bordered with
a strip of mowed grass or other more “manicured”
edge.
e) Landscape Guarantee. All new plants shall be guaranteed
for twelve (12) months from the time construction has been
completed. All plants shall be alive, of good quality, and
disease free at the end of the warranty period or be
replaced. Any replacements shall be warranted for twelve
(12) months from the time of planting or a letter of credit
and/or cash escrow in lieu of a warranty.
f) Landscaping Maintenance.
(1) General. The property owner, or if applicable, the
homeowners association, shall be responsible for
maintenance of landscape elements (plants,
structures, pavement, etc.) so as to present a neat
and aesthetically pleasing appearance free of any
unhealthy or potentially unsafe conditions.
(2) Disease Control. Plants shall be maintained in a
healthful, disease-free condition. Plants that have
died or become diseased shall be promptly replaced.
(3) Watering. Automatic irrigation systems should be
operated between the hours of midnight and 6:00 AM
or as otherwise approved by the City. Irrigating
during these hours reduces fungus growth and loss of
water due to evaporation. Irrigation systems shall be
maintained to minimize water waste due to loss of
heads, broken pipes, or misadjusted nozzles.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-46
(4) Pruning. All pruning should be accomplished
according to good horticultural practices. Trees shall
be pruned only as necessary to promote healthy
growth.
(5) Removal or Replacement. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner, or if applicable,
the homeowners association, to remove any trees or
shrubs, or parts thereof, that are dead, diseased, or
that overhang or interfere with traffic control devices,
public sidewalks, rights-of-way, or property owned by
someone else.
(6) Non-Compliance. If the City finds that the property is
not in compliance with the approved landscaping/
screening plan, it shall inform the applicant regarding
the non-compliance and describe, in writing, the steps
needed to bring the property into compliance within a
reasonable timeframe, not to exceed sixty (60)
calendar days.
d. Tree Preservation.
1) Tree Preservation for Single Family (Custom Graded Lots in a Tree
Preservation Subdivision), Commercial, Industrial, Multiple Family
Residential, and Institutional Lots.
a) Builders shall furnish the following items for tree preservation
at the time the building permit application is submitted for all
lots with at least one (1) significant tree:
(1) A tree preservation plan with the elements described
below. The individual lot tree preservation plan shall
be certified by a forester or landscape architect and
signed by the homeowner.
(2) Financial security in an amount determined by City
Council, and adopted by ordinance, shall be required
for tree protection requirements for each lot or outlot
with at least one (1) significant tree to be saved and
each lot that is a custom grading lot.
b) Builders shall be liable for their sub-contractors that destroy
or damage significant trees that were indicated to be saved
on the individual lot tree preservation plan.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-47
c) Tree protection measures shall remain in place until all
grading and construction activity is terminated.
d) Site grading for individual lots shall comply with the final
grading plan of the plat and shall not result in the flooding of
tree preservation areas.
e) No soil disturbance shall occur within the lot until the tree
preservation plan is approved and tree protection measures
are in place.
f) Pruning of oak trees shall not take place from April 15
through July 1. If wounding of oak trees occurs, a non-toxic
tree wound dressing must be applied immediately. A nontoxic
tree wound dressing shall be available on the
development site at all times.
g) Builders, contractors, or others working on site shall not fill,
stockpile materials, or store equipment or vehicles against
the trunk of the tree, in the critical root zone, or under the
drip line of a tree to be saved.
h) On mass graded lots with at least one (1) significant tree to
be saved, home builders are required to follow the tree
preservation plan for the plat.
i) For each custom graded lot with at least one (1) significant
tree, the builder shall submit an individual lot tree
preservation plan. The plan shall be consistent with the
original tree preservation plan for the plat. The property
owner and/or builder, applicant’s forester, or landscape
architect shall meet with City staff prior to the development
of the individual lot tree preservation plan to determine the
placement of the building where the fewest significant trees
would be destroyed or damaged. The builder shall be
responsible for ensuring the tree preservation plan is
followed during building construction.
j) The tree preservation plan shall be prepared and
incorporated on the certificate of survey required for a
building permit and shall include the following:
(1) Size, species, and location of all significant trees,
specimen trees, and significant tree stands including
significant trees with drip lines or critical root zones
extending over the lot line of an adjoining lot.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-48
(2) Identification of all significant trees proposed to be
saved and significant trees proposed to be removed,
including significant trees with drip lines or critical root
zones extending over the lot line of an adjoining lot.
(3) Location of snow fencing or polyethylene laminar
safety netting placed at the drip line or critical root
zones.
(4) Installation of signage at all tree protection areas that
instructs workers to stay out.
(5) Erosion control methods.
(6) Measures proposed to protect significant trees
including but not limited to:
(a) Tree removal procedures including directional
felling away from existing trees to be saved
and trenching to separate root systems prior to
bulldozing trees or stumps.
(b) Coordination of utility planning with tree
preservation plan to strategically extend utility
connections from the street to the building in a
manner that protects trees intended to be
saved.
(c) Measures for preventing changes in soil
chemistry due to concrete wash out and
leakage or spillage of toxic materials such as
fuels or paints.
k) The Building Official shall monitor the tree protection
measures at the time of routine inspections.
l) If tree replacement is required on the individual lot because
a tree which was to be saved was destroyed or damaged,
the applicant’s forester or landscape architect, in conjunction
with the property owner, shall determine where the
replacement trees shall be installed. Replacement trees
shall not be placed on easements or street rights-of-way.
m) Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and
release of tree preservation security, the applicant’s forester
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-49
or landscape architect shall certify to the City in writing the
final disposition of saved trees on the lot and that all the tree
protection measures identified on the tree preservation plan
were installed from the start of construction to the end of
construction and tree replacement is completed, if
necessary.
e. Buffer Yards.
1) Establishment. Space for buffering/screening plantings shall be
established along major highways, arterials, and collector streets in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the City’s subdivision
regulations.
2) Screening Plan Required. For applicable subdivisions, a
comprehensive screening plan shall be submitted. The plan shall
identify all proposed buffer screening in both plan and sectional
view.
3) Timing/Responsibility of Installation. Weather permitting, all buffer
yards, berms, and/or plantings shall be constructed or planted prior
to the issuance of an occupancy permit.
4) Maintenance.
a) Maintenance (including mowing) of the buffer yard planting
and/or fence shall be the responsibility of the individual
property owners or if applicable, the homeowners
association.
b) Color of the screening wall or fence shall be uniform along
its entire length and shall not be modified without City
approval.
c) All repairs to the screening wall or fence shall be consistent
with the original screening wall fence design in regard to
location and appearance.
d) Replacement of landscape materials or plantings in a screen
area shall be consistent with the original screen design.
e) All repair or plant replacement shall be done within forty-five
(45) days of written notification from the City or if applicable,
the homeowners association.
5) Design Standards.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-50
a) Plantings. All plantings within designated buffer yards shall
comply with the following:
(1) Plant material centers shall not be located closer than
three (3) feet from the fence line or property line.
(2) Landscape screen plant material shall be planted in
two (2) or more rows. Plantings shall be staggered in
rows unless otherwise approved by the City.
(3) Landscape material sizes shall be consistent with
Section 51.03, Subd. D.10.c.2) of this Ordinance.
(4) Plantings suitable for buffering/screening purposes
include, but are not limited to, types listed in Section
51.03, Subd. D.10.c.2) of this Ordinance:
(5) In areas with naturalistic plantings, plant mix and
spacing should approximate native plant communities
and/or readily succeed to a naturalistic stand. In
addition, naturalist plantings should be bordered with
a strip of mowed grass or other more “manicured”
edge.
b) Walls and Fences. All walls and fences erected within
designated buffer yards shall comply with the following:
(1) At least fifty (50) percent of the street side of a
screening fence shall be landscaped with plant
materials. Plant materials shall be at least equal to
the fence height.
(2) Exposed fences shall run a maximum length of fifty
(50) feet between landscaping areas or clusters.
(3) Walls, fences and landscaping shall not be located
within the traffic visibility triangle as defined in Section
51.03, Subd. D.5.a.3) of this Ordinance.
c) Earth Berms. Earth berms designed to support landscape
plantings existing within designated buffer yards shall:
(1) Be designed to support plantings.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-51
(2) Not exceed a three to one (3:1) slope unless
approved by the City Engineer.
(3) Contain no less than four (4) inches of topsoil.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-52
11. Fences. Fences shall be permitted in all required yards subject to the following:
a. Permit Required. It is unlawful for any person hereafter to construct or
cause to be constructed or erected within the platted areas of the City, any
fence without first making an application for and securing a fence permit.
b. Certificate of Survey. An application for a fence permit shall be
accompanied by a current certificate of survey providing exact lot
dimensions, the location of existing buildings, structures, and easements
on the lot, and the location of the proposed fence. At the discretion of the
City, a final plat detail of the lot with the required information shown may
suffice if no certificate of survey is available. Applicant shall be required to
physically identify the property corners for City inspection.
c. Location. All fences or walls shall be located entirely within the private
property of the person, firm, or corporation constructing or causing the
construction of such fence.
1) No fence or wall shall be permitted on public rights-of-way.
2) Traffic visibility requirements set forth in Section 51.03, Subd.
B.5.a.3) of this Ordinance shall be satisfactorily met.
3) No fence or wall shall obstruct natural drainage or extend within a
wetland, land, drainage ditch, or river.
4) Fences may be constructed within public and private utility and
drainage easements provided that:
a) No fence or wall shall be located within a drainage or utility
easement without written permission of the Zoning
Administrator and/or the private utility provider and the filing
of an encroachment agreement.
b) Removal of a fence or wall or a portion thereof for the
purpose of utilizing the easement shall be at the property
owner’s expense.
5) Shoreland Height. No fence shall exceed three (3) feet in height
which abuts any navigable lake, river, or stream within a shoreland
impact area.
d. Construction and Maintenance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-53
1) Every fence shall be constructed in a professional and substantial
manner and of substantial material reasonably suitable for the
purpose for which the fence is proposed to be used. The materials
and design shall also be compatible with other structures in the
area in which the fence is located and shall not cause blight or a
negative impact. Fences shall be at least five (5) percent open to
provide space for the passage of air. No used material shall be
used in conjunction of fences.
2) Every fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair
and shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition of
disrepair or danger, or constitute a nuisance, public or private. Any
such fence which is or has become dangerous to the public safety,
health or welfare is a public nuisance, and the City shall commence
proper proceedings for the abatement thereof.
3) All posts or similar supporting instruments used in the construction
of fences shall be faced inward toward the property being fenced.
That side of the fence considered to be the face shall be oriented
toward abutting property or rights-of-way.
4) Fences which are ninety (90) percent open (barb wire, chain link,
woven wire, and other similar type fences) which are for the sole
purpose of containing non-domestic animals within a rural zoning
district are not subject to the provisions of this Ordinance and do
not require a building permit. Chain link fences shall have round
steel parts and braces. Electric fences and barb wire are prohibited
in all residential districts, except farming activities within the R-A
Zoning District.
5) Solid walls and retaining walls (such as masonry construction) in
excess of forty-eight (48) inches in height shall require a building
permit. When utilized, tiered retaining walls shall be separated by a
horizontal landing not less than three (3) feet in width.
e. Access. All fences shall be provided with a gate which affords
reasonable and convenient access for public safety.
f. Residential District Fences.
1) All residential district fences shall be placed within the property
being fenced.
2) Fences may be located in any yard up to a height of four (4) feet.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-54
3) Except as prohibited by Section 51.03, Subd. D.11.f.5) below, a
fence up to six (6) feet high may be erected from a line extended
from the front facade of the principal building to the side lot lines,
and then along the side lot lines and the rear lot line (see Diagram
A).
4) Should the rear lot line of a lot be common with the side lot line of
an abutting lot, that portion of the rear or side lot equal to the
required front yard setback of the abutting lot shall not be fenced to
a height of more than four (4) feet. For the purpose of this section,
the front and side yards of the abutting lot shall be as defined in this
Ordinance rather than as related to the orientation of the house
(see Diagram B).
5) Fences in excess of four (4) feet in height shall be located a
minimum of ten (10) feet from the right-of-way of any alley.
6) Residential Fences Height Exceptions.
a) Fences for sport courts may be up to twelve (12) feet in
height with ten (10) foot setback.
b) Residential boundary line fences may be erected to a height
of eight (8) feet along a property line abutting a commercial,
industrial, or semi-public use or zoning district.
7) Wire fence other than chain link shall not be permitted as boundary
line fences within five (5) feet of the property in residential zoning
districts.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-55
g. Commercial and Industrial District Fences.
1) Fences in all commercial and industrial districts shall not exceed
eight (8) feet in height, except that:
a) Fences erected within the required front yard shall not be
over eight (8) feet in height, shall conform to Section 51.03,
Subd. B.5.a.3) of this Ordinance, and shall be of a chain link
construction permitting maximum visibility.
b) Fences erected within side or rear yards which abut any
navigable lake channel or stream shall not exceed four (4)
feet in height.
4’ fence
allowed
6’ fence
allowed
6’ fence
allowed
4’ fence
allowed
street right of way
street right of way
s
t
r
ee
t
r
i
gh
t
o
f
wa
y
s
t
r
ee
t
r
i
gh
t
o
f
wa
y
Diagram A.
Diagram B.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-56
2) Within commercial and industrial and public/semi-public zoning
districts, barbed wire may be attached to the tops of fences with the
following conditions:
a) Fences shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in height
exclusive of the security arm.
b) The security arm shall be angled in such a manner that it
extends only over the property of the permit holder.
c) Wire security fencing shall not be permitted within the
required front yard or along a property line abutting a
residential use.
3) Setback from Alleys. Commercial and industrial fences shall be a
minimum of ten (10) feet from any alley right-of-way.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-57
Subd. E. Off-Street Parking.
1. Purpose. The regulation of off-street parking spaces in these zoning
regulations is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way and to
promote the safety and general welfare of the public, by establishing minimum
requirements for off-street parking of motor vehicles upon various parcels of land
or structures.
2. Application of Off-Street Parking Regulations. The regulations and
requirements set forth herein shall apply to all off-street parking facilities in all of
the zoning districts of the City.
a. Site Plan Drawing Necessary. All applications for a building or an
occupancy permit in all zoning districts shall be accompanied by a site
plan drawn to scale and dimensioned and indicating the location of offstreet
parking, loading spaces, driveways, and curb cuts in compliance
with the requirements set forth in this subdivision and Section 51.03,
Subd. C.8 of this Ordinance. Every detached single family dwelling unit
erected after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be so located on the
lot so that at least a two (2) car garage, either attached or detached in
conformance with this Ordinance, can be located on said lot.
b. Exemptions From Parking Requirements. All business uses located
within the B-4, Central Business District shall be exempt from the following
off-street parking requirements of this Ordinance.
3. General Provisions.
a. Space Reduction. Existing off-street parking spaces upon the effective
date of this Ordinance shall not be reduced in number unless said number
exceeds the requirements set forth herein for a similar new use.
b. Existing Uses. Should a legal, non-conforming building, structure, or use
in existence upon the effective date of this Ordinance be damaged or
destroyed by fire or other cause, it may be re-established in accordance
with Section 51.03, Subd. A of this Ordinance, except that in so doing, any
off-street parking or loading which existed shall be retained.
c. Change of Use or Occupancy of Buildings. Any change of use or
occupancy of any building or buildings including additions thereto requiring
more parking area shall not be permitted until there is furnished such
additional parking spaces as required by these zoning regulations.
d. Use of Parking Area. Required off-street parking space in any district
shall not be utilized for open storage of goods or for the storage of
vehicles which are inoperable or for sale or for rent.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-58
e. Accessible Parking. All parking associated with any building, structure or
use shall be required to conform to the disability accessible parking
standards pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 168.021, as may be amended .
f. Use of Parking Facilities in Residential Districts. Off-street parking
facilities accessory to a residential use shall be utilized solely for the
parking of passenger automobiles, recreational vehicles, and/or one truck
not to exceed eleven thousand seventy-five (11,075) pounds gross weight
rating for each dwelling.
g. Use of Required Parking Facilities in Commercial and Industrial Districts.
Required accessory off-street parking spaces in commercial and industrial
districts shall not be utilized for open storage, sale or rental of goods,
storage of inoperable vehicles and/or storage of snow.
h. Calculating Space.
1) The term “floor area” for the purpose of calculating the number of
off-street parking spaces required shall be determined on the basis
of the exterior floor area dimensions of the buildings, structure or
use times the number of floors, minus ten (10) percent, except
when floor plans are submitted that identify net usable floor area of
the building exclusive of ancillary floor areas that do not generate
parking demand (e.g., stair wells, hallways, restrooms, closets,
utility rooms).
2) When determining the number of off-street parking spaces results
in a fraction, each fraction of one-half (1/2) or more shall constitute
another space.
3) In gymnasiums, churches and other places of public assembly in
which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar
seating facilities, each twenty-two (22) inches of such seating
facilities shall be counted as one (1) seat for the purpose of
determining requirements.
4) Except as provided for under joint parking and shopping centers,
should a structure contain two (2) or more types of use, each use
shall be calculated separately for determining the total off-street
parking spaces required.
4. Access and Driveway Design.
a. Collector/Minor Arterial Street Access. Access to any street shown as a
collector or arterial roadway on the City’s Comprehensive Plan shall
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-59
require review and comment by the affected agency (Wright County
Highway Engineer or MnDOT) and City. This review shall be required
prior to the issuance of any building permits. The County or City Engineer
shall determine the appropriate location, size and design of each access
drive and may limit the number of access drives in the interest of public
safety and efficient traffic flow.
b. Street/Alley Access. Except in the case of single, two family, townhouse
and quadraminium dwellings, parking areas shall be designed so that
circulation between parking bays or aisles occurs within the designated
parking lot and does not depend upon a public street or alley. Except in
the case of single, two family, townhouse, and quadraminium dwellings,
parking area design which requires backing into the public street is
prohibited. New residential subdivisions shall be designed to limit direct
lot access onto any street shown as a collector or arterial roadway on the
City’s Comprehensive Plan.
c. Curb Cut/Driveway Access Location.
1) No residential curb cut/driveway access shall be located less than
thirty (30) feet from the intersection of two (2) or more local or minor
street rights-of-way. Minimum distance from an intersection for
commercial uses shall be sixty (60) feet. This distance shall be
measured from the intersection of lot lines. Curb cut/driveway
access setbacks from the intersection of streets with higher
functional classifications shall be consistent with the
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan and require approval
by the City Engineer.
a) Street functional classification shall be defined by the Delano
Comprehensive Plan.
b) The setback measurement shall be measured from the edge
of the street right-of-way to the nearest edge of the curb cut.
c) Driveways onto arterials and major collectors shall be
prohibited where alternative street access is available. For
existing lots of record, where alternative access is not
available, direct access onto arterial and major collectors
may be permitted, provided a site plan is submitted for
review and approval of the City Engineer. Approval is also
subject to the conditions of this Ordinance.
2) Curb cut/driveway access on a public street except for single, two
family, and townhouse dwellings shall not be located less than forty
(40) feet from one another.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-60
3) In all zoning districts except the R-4 and R-5 Zoning Districts, all
driveways and parking stalls shall be set back a minimum of five (5)
feet from all property lines. Within an R-4 or R-5 Zoning District,
driveways and parking stalls shall be set back a minimum of two (2)
feet from all property lines. The City may allow an exception to the
required setback to accommodate a shared driveway along a
common property line, provided the following conditions are met:
a) Access easements are established and recorded over the
shared driveway in favor of each affected property owner.
b) A maintenance agreement between the property owners is
established and recorded for the shared driveway.
c) The shared driveway shall not encroach upon a public utility
or interfere with drainage.
4) Each property shall be allowed one (1) curb cut access for each
one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of street frontage. All property
shall be entitled to at least one (1) curb cut. Detached single family
dwelling uses shall be limited to one (1) curb cut access per
property.
d. Curb Cut/Driveway Width. No curb cut shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet
in width within a residential zoning district, or thirty-two (32) feet in width if
the property is in a commercial, industrial, or public/semi-public zoning
district, as measured at the street right-of-way line unless approved by the
City Engineer. The driveway associated with such curb cut may increase
in width at an angle not greater than forty-five (45) degrees into the
property.
Curb Cut Width at ROW line:
25 feet maximum or 36 feet
Driveway may increase at an angle
of not greater than 45 degrees
45°
25’ ROW line
curb
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-61
e. Driveway Installation – Non-Curb and Gutter. Driveways may be installed
within public road rights-of-way in non-curb and gutter areas subject to the
following:
1) No work under this application is to be started until application is
approved and permit issued by the City Council of the City of
Delano.
2) Number of accesses allowed per lot shall conform to regulations
outlined within this Ordinance.
3) Where work on a traveled roadway is necessary, traffic must be
protected, therefore flags, flares and proper barricades must be
placed in accordance with the standards of the Minnesota
Department of Transportation.
4) No foreign material such as dirt, gravel or bituminous material shall
be left or deposited on the road during construction of the driveway
or installation of drainage facilities.
5) Driveway shall be so constructed as to slope down and away from
the shoulder line of the highway for a distance of at least fifteen
(15) feet with a full of at least six (6) inches (see attached).
6) Side slopes shall not be constructed steeper than four (4) feet
horizontally to one (1) foot vertically (4:1), unless approved by the
City Engineer. These slopes shall be constructed flatter than 4:1
along certain roadways when so indicated. The slopes shall be
hand finished and seeded or sodded.
7) Property and adequate drainage facilities shall be provided as
required by the City. The owner shall pay all construction costs
including such cost of the drainage structures as determined by the
City of Delano.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-62
8) The area on the roadway right-of-way other than that of the
driveway itself will normally be in the form of a ditch. Modifications
may be permitted provided proper drainage is furnished and curbs,
or other approved safeguards are installed to prevent misuse. Any
modifications must receive City approval prior to any work being
started.
9) Roadside must be cleaned up after work is completed.
10) After driveway construction is completed, the permittee shall notify
City Hall that work has been completed and is ready for final
inspection and approval by the City Street Superintendent.
11) No changes or alterations in entrances may be made at any time
without an additional permit issued by the City Council.
12) An excavator shall contact the State of Minnesota Underground
Facility Operators and provide notice at least forty-eight (48) hours
prior to any digging.
13) Any driveway construction onto a County road shall first obtain
permit approval from the Wright County Department of Highways.
14) Any driveway construction onto a State highway shall first obtain
permit approval from the Minnesota Department of Transportation.
15) Owner of said property shall maintain the driveway to meet all
performance standards contained herein.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-63
5. Parking Lot Design Standards.
a. Parking Area Standards. Parking areas and the aisles shall be developed
in compliance with the following standards:
Angle of
Parking
Stall
Width
(B)
Curb
Length
Per Car
(C)
Stall
Length
(D)
Stall Depth
Wall to
Aisle
(E)
Stall Depth
Interlock to
Aisle
Aisle
One Way
(F)
Aisle
Width
Two Way
(F)
90° 9' 0" 9' 0" 18' 0" 18' 0" 18' 0" 24' 0" 24' 0"
75° 9' 0" 9' 6" 18' 0" 20' 8" 19' 10" 21' 6" 23' 0"
60° 9' 0" 10' 5" 18' 0" 21' 0" 19' 10" 18' 0" 22' 0"
45° 9' 0" 12' 9" 18' 0" 19' 10" 17' 10" 15' 0" 22' 0"
0° 9' 0" 22' 0" 22' 0" 9' 0" 9' 0" 12' 0" 24' 0"
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-64
b. Within Structures. The off-street parking requirements may be furnished
by providing a space so designed within the principal building or one (1)
structure attached thereto. No building permit shall be issued to convert
said parking structure into a dwelling unit or living area or other activity
until other adequate provisions are made to comply with the required offstreet
parking provisions of this Ordinance.
c. Grade Elevation. Excepting driveways for single family and two family
dwellings, the grade elevation of a parking area shall not exceed five (5)
percent.
d. Surfacing.
1) Except in the case of farm dwellings, farm operations in any zoning
district, and rural residential properties in the R-A Zoning District, all
areas intended to be utilized for parking space and driveways shall
be surfaced with asphalt, cobblestone, paving block, or other forms
of concrete. Plans for surfacing and drainage of driveways and
stalls for five (5) or more vehicles shall be submitted to the City
Engineer for review and the final plans shall be subject to the City
Engineer’s written approval.
2) Plans for surfacing and drainage of driveways shall be submitted
prior to issuance of a building permit. Said surfacing shall be
completed within one (1) year following the date of building
occupancy permit.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-65
e. Striping. Except for single, two family, townhouse, quadraminiums, and
green parking lots, all parking stalls shall be marked with white or yellow
painted lines not less than four (4) inches wide.
f. Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall
be arranged as to reflect the light away from the adjoining property. All
exterior lighting shall comply with Section 51.03, Subd. D.2 of this
Ordinance.
g. Curbing and Landscaping. Except for single, two family, townhouse and
quadraminiums, all open off-street parking shall have a continuous
concrete perimeter curb barrier around the entire parking lot. Said curb
barrier shall not be closer than five (5) feet from any lot line unless a
greater parking setback is required within the respective zoning district.
Grass, plantings or screening shall be provided in all areas bordering the
parking area.
h. Parking Lot Landscaping.
1) All exposed parking areas of six (6) or more required spaces shall
be landscaped on all sides in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd.
D.10 of this Ordinance.
2) When a parking area of six (6) spaces or more is adjacent to a
street or residential area, a berm, wall, or fence not less than four
(4) feet in height shall be erected along the parking area to screen
headlights. Grass or plantings shall occupy the space between the
parking lot curb or fence and the street surface. (The City Council
may recommend screening in lieu of fencing.)
3) Within off-street parking facilities for commercial uses of fifty (50) or
more stalls, irrigated landscaped islands or peninsulas or rain
gardens shall be provided at a rate of one hundred eighty (180)
square feet per twenty-five (25) surface stalls or fraction thereof.
Such islands or peninsulas shall be contained within raised, curbed
beds consistent with other applicable parking lot construction
requirements of this Ordinance. It is not the intent of this section to
relieve a project of the installation of islands or peninsulas that are
necessary to promote the safe and efficient flow of traffic,
regardless of parking lot size.
4) No landscaping or screening shall interfere with drive or pedestrian
visibility for vehicle entering, circulating or exiting the premises.
i. Cart Storage. Retail commercial uses that have customer service carts
shall be required to provide ample space for the storage of carts within offDelano
Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-66
street parking areas, subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator.
The need and specific amount of required cart storage space shall be
determined as part of site plan review. When required, cart storage areas
shall not occupy required off-street parking space, shall be clearly
delineated, and shall include facilities for cart confinement.
6. Maintenance. It shall be the joint responsibility of the operator and owner of the
principal use, uses and/or buildings to maintain, in a neat and adequate manner,
the parking space, access ways, landscaping and required screening.
7. Location. All accessory off-street parking facilities required by this Ordinance
shall be located and restricted as follows:
a. Required accessory off-street parking shall be on the same lot under the
same ownership as the principal use being served, except under the
provisions of Section 51.03, Subd. E.10 and Subd. E.11.
b. No off-street parking space located in a business, industrial or public and
semi-public district shall be permitted within a public right-of-way or within
fifteen (15) feet of any public street surface.
c. Off-street parking and driveways shall be set back five (5) feet from all lot
lines or meet the parking setback of the respective zoning district.
d. In the case of single family, two family, townhouse and quadraminium
dwellings, parking shall be prohibited in any portion of the front yard,
except designated driveways leading directly into a garage or one (1)
open, surfaced space located on the side of a driveway, away from the
principal use. Said extra space shall be surfaced with concrete,
bituminous or crushed rock material.
8. Number of Spaces Required. The following minimum number of off-street
parking spaces shall be provided and maintained by ownership, easement and/or
lease for and during the life of the respective uses hereinafter set forth:
a. Auto, Boat, Trailer, Farm Equipment Sales Lots. One (1) space per four
hundred (400) square feet gross sales and office floor area and of the
building plus one (1) space per each two thousand (2,000) square feet of
gross outdoor sales lot area.
b. Auto Repair. Two (2) spaces per serving bay; the service bay is not a
parking space, plus one (1) for each employee on the maximum shift.
c. Boarding House/Accessory Apartment. At least one (1) parking space
for each person for whom accommodations are provided for sleeping.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-67
d. Bowling Alleys. Five (5) spaces for each alley plus additional spaces for
related uses.
e. Car Washes (Drive Through and Self Service). One space per employee
plus: Drive through: Six (6) stacking spaces. Self-service: One (1)
stacking space per wash bay.
f. Churches, Theaters, Auditoriums. At least one (1) parking space for each
four (4) seats based on the design capacity of the main assembly hall.
Facilities as may be provided in conjunction with such buildings or uses
shall be subject to additional requirements which are imposed by this
Ordinance.
g. Community Centers, Libraries, Private Clubs, Lodges, Museums, Art
Galleries. One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor
area in the principal structure.
h. Contractors’ Offices, Shops and Yards. One (1) per one thousand
(1,000) square feet of shop area or warehousing, plus one (1) per three
hundred (300) square feet of office space.
i. Day Care Facilities.
1) Day care facilities serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons: In
addition to residential parking requirements, one (1) space per
seven (7) children capacity.
2) All other day care facilities: One (1) space per teacher on the
largest shift, plus one (1) space per ten (10) students/children
based on maximum capacity of the facility.
j. Elderly (Senior Citizen) Housing. Reservation of area equal to one (1)
parking space per unit. Initial development is, however, required of only
one-half (1/2) space per unit and said number of spaces can continue until
such time as the City Council considers a need for additional parking
spaces has been demonstrated.
k. Financial Institutions, Banks, Savings and Loan. Four (4) spaces for
every one thousand (1,000) square feet.
l. Funeral Undertaking Establishments. At least twenty (20) parking spaces
for each chapel or parlor, plus one (1) parking space for each funeral
home vehicle. Aisle space shall also be provided off the street for making
up a funeral procession.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-68
m. Furniture Store/Household Appliances. One (1) space per four hundred
(400) square feet of gross sales floor area. One (1) space per one
thousand (1,000) square feet of warehousing.
n. Garden Supply Stores, Building Material Sales in Structures. Eight (8)
off-street parking spaces, plus one (1) additional space for eight hundred
(800) square feet of floor area over one thousand (1,000) square feet.
o. Golf Courses. Four (4) spaces per hole, plus fifty (50) percent of the
requirements for any other associated use.
p. Golf Driving Ranges, Miniature Golf Courses, Archery Ranges. Ten (10)
off-street parking spaces plus one (1) for each one hundred (100) square
feet of floor space of building.
q. Health Clubs. One (1) space per two (2)exercise stations (e.g., strength
machine or cardio vascular) plus one (1) space per employee on the
largest shift plus additional parking for ancillary uses (e.g., gymnasiums,
auditoriums, offices, restaurants).
r. Manufacturing Facilities. One (1) space for each four hundred (400)
square feet of gross floor area, plus one (1) space for every company
owned vehicle.
s. Motels, Motor Hotels, Hotels. One (1) space per each rental unit plus one
(1) space for each eight (8) units, and one (1) space for each employee on
any shift.
t. Motor Fuel Stations. At least four (4) off-street parking spaces plus one
(1) space for each employee on duty. Those facilities designed for sale of
other items than strictly automotive products, parts or service shall be
required to provide additional parking in compliance with other applicable
sections of this Ordinance.
u. Office Buildings, Animal Hospitals and Clinics, Professional Offices and
Medical Clinics. Three (3) spaces plus at least one (1) space for each two
hundred (200) square feet of floor area.
v. Open Sales Lots. Ten (10) spaces or one (1) per two thousand (2,000)
square feet gross land area devoted to sales lot, whichever is larger.
w. Racquetball, Handball and Tennis Courts, Commercial. Not less than six
(6) spaces per each court.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-69
x. Rest Home, Nursing Home, Convalescent Center, or Institution. One (1)
space for each six (6) beds based upon maximum design capacity, plus
one (1) space for each two (2) employees.
y. Restaurants, Cafes, Private Clubs Serving Food and/or Drinks, Bars, On-
Sale Nightclubs. One (1) space for each forty (40) square feet of dining
or bar area and one (1) space for each eighty (80) square feet of kitchen
area.
z. Restaurants, Fast Food. Fifteen (15) spaces per one thousand (1,000)
square feet of gross floor area.
aa. Retail Sales and Service Business with Fifty (50) Percent or More of
Gross Floor area Devoted to Storage, Warehouses and/or Industry. At
least eight (8) spaces or one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square
feet devoted to public sales or service, plus one (1) space for each five
hundred (500) square feet of storage area.
bb. Retail Stores and Service Establishments. At least one (1) off-street
parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area.
cc. Schools, Elementary and Junior High. One (1) space for each classroom
plus one (1) additional space for each three hundred (300) student
capacity, plus one (1) space for each employee, plus one (1) space for
each four (4) seats in auditorium.
dd. Schools, High Schools and Colleges. One (1) space for each classroom
plus one (1) additional space for each seven (7) students based upon
maximum design capacity.
ee. Shopping Centers. Five (5) spaces per each one thousand (1,000)
square feet of gross leasable floor area (exclusive of common areas).
ff. Single Family and Two Family Dwellings. Two (2) spaces per unit.
gg. Townhome, Quadraminium, Manor Home, Multiple Family Dwellings, and
Manufactured Homes within Manufactured Home Parks. At least two
and one-fourth (2-1/4) rent-free spaces per unit. In projects involving eight
(8) or more units, the City may require additional clustered guest parking
spaces based upon calculation of required demand.
hh. Warehousing, Storage of Handling of Bulk Goods. That space which is
solely used as office shall comply with the office use requirements and
one (1) space for each one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of
floor area, and one (1) space for each company owned truck (if not stored
inside principal building).
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-70
ii. Other Uses. Other uses not specifically mentioned herein shall be
determined on an individual basis by the City Council. Factors to be
considered in such determination shall include (without limitation) the
national parking standards for size of building, type of use, number of
employees, expected volume and turnover of customer traffic and
expected frequency and number of delivery or service vehicles.
9. Parking Deferment. The City may allow a reduction in the number of required
parking stalls for commercial, industrial, and institutional uses by administrative
permit provided that:
a. The applicant demonstrate that the proposed use will have a peak parking
demand less than the required parking under Section 51.03, Subd. E.8 of
this Ordinance. Factors to be considered when reviewing the proposed
parking demand shall include, but not be limited to:
1) Size of building.
2) Type and use.
3) Number of employees.
4) Projected volume and turnover of customer traffic.
5) Projected frequency and volume of delivery or service vehicles.
6) Number of company-owned vehicles.
7) Storage of vehicles on site.
b. In no case shall the amount of parking provided be less than one-half (1/2)
of the amount of parking required by ordinance.
c. The site has sufficient property under the same ownership to
accommodate the expansion of the parking facilities to meet the minimum
requirements of this Ordinance if the parking demand exceeds on site
supply. A proof of parking plan is submitted for City approval that meets
the following conditions:
1) A parking plan drawn to scale for the property is submitted with the
site plan and indicates that the site complies with the total parking
requirements stated above and with the parking lot design to the
standards required by this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-71
2) The proof of parking area is defined as that portion of the site which
is not paved, but is suitably landscaped and is capable of
containing the amount of parking equal to the difference between
the total amount of required parking and the amount of parking
required to be paved to meet the requirements of this Ordinance. A
concrete curb shall be provided between the proof of parking area
and the initially constructed parking lot. For purposes of calculating
impervious surface, such area will be considered impervious.
3) The proof of parking area shall be clearly delineated on the parking
plan for the site.
4) The paved portion of the parking area shall comply with the
pertinent sections of this Ordinance.
5) The proof of parking area is not used to satisfy any other
landscaping, setback, or other requirement of this Ordinance and is
not located in an area occupied by a building.
d. The property owner is responsible for informing any subsequent owner of
the proof of parking area and parking status of the property and shall
record said provision with the County Recorder.
e. On-site parking shall only occur in areas designed and constructed for
parking in accordance with this Ordinance.
f. The applicant and City enter into a development agreement, to be
recorded against the subject property, which includes a clause requiring
the owner to install the additional parking stalls, upon a finding of the
Zoning Administrator that such additional parking stalls are necessary to
accommodate the use.
g. A change of use will necessitate compliance with the applicable Zoning
Ordinance standard for parking.
10. Joint Facilities.
a. The City Council may approve a conditional use permit for one (1) or more
businesses to provide the required off-street parking facilities by joint use
of one (1) or more sites where the total number of spaces provided are
less than the sum of the total required for each business should they
provide them separately. When considering a request for such a permit,
the Council shall not approve such a permit except when the following
conditions are found to exist:
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-72
1) Up to fifty (50) percent of the parking facilities required for a theatre,
bowling alley, dance hall, bar or restaurant may be supplied by the
off-street parking facilities provided by types of uses specified as
primarily daytime uses in Section 51.03, Subd. E.10.a.4) below.
2) Up to fifty (50) percent of the off-street parking facilities required for
any use specified under Section 51.03, Subd. E.10.a.4) below, as
primarily daytime uses may be supplied by the parking facilities
provided by the following night time or Sunday uses; churches,
bowling alleys, dance halls, theatres, bars, or restaurants.
3) Up to eighty (80) percent of the parking facilities required by this
Ordinance for a church may be supplied by the off-street parking
facilities provided by uses specified under Section 51.03, Subd.
E.10.a.4) below, as primarily daytime uses.
4) For the purposes of this section, the following uses are considered
a primarily daytime use: banks, business offices, retail stores,
personnel service shops, and similar uses.
5) Conditions Required For Joint Use:
a) The building or use for which application is being made to
utilize the off-street parking facilities provided by another
building or use shall be located within three hundred (300)
feet of such parking facilities.
b) The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict
in the principal operating hours of the two (2) buildings or
uses for which joint use of off-street parking facilities is
proposed.
c) A properly drawn legal instrument, executed by the parties
concerned for joint use of off-street parking facilities, duly
approved as to form and manner of execution by the City
Attorney shall be filed with the City Clerk and recorded with
the Wright County Recorders Office.
11. Off-Site Parking.
a. Any off-site parking which is used to meet the requirements of this
Ordinance shall be a conditional use as regulated by Section 51.02, Subd.
B of this Ordinance and shall be subject to the conditions listed below.
b. Off-site parking shall be developed and maintained in compliance with all
requirements and standards of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-73
c. Reasonable public access from off-site parking facilities to the use being
served shall be provided.
d. The site used for meeting the off-site parking requirements of this
Ordinance shall be under the same ownership as to the principal use
being served or under public ownership.
e. Off-site parking for multiple family dwellings shall not be located more than
one hundred (100) feet from any normally used entrance of the principal
use served.
f. Off-site parking for non-residential uses shall not be located more than
three hundred (300) feet from the main entrance of the principal use being
served. No more than one (1) main entrance shall be recognized for each
principal building.
g. Any use which depends upon off-site parking to meet the requirements of
this Ordinance shall maintain ownership and parking utilization of the offsite
location until such time as on-site parking is provided or a site in
closer proximity to the principal use is acquired and developed for parking.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-74
Subd. F. Off-Street Loading.
1. Purpose. The purpose of regulating loading areas or berths is to alleviate or
prevent congestion of the public right-of-way and to promote the safety and
general welfare of the public, by establishing minimum requirements for off-street
loading and unloading from motor vehicles in accordance with the utilization of
various parcels of land or structures.
2. Location.
a. All required loading areas/berths shall be off-street and shall be located on
the same lot as the building or use to be served.
b. All loading areas/berths shall be located at minimum fifty (50) feet from the
intersection of two (2) or more street rights-of-way. This distance shall be
measured from the property line.
c. Except for loading areas/berths required for multiple family, no loading
berth shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet from a residential district
unless within a structure.
d. Loading areas/berths located at the front or at the side of buildings on a
corner shall meet the following conditions:
1) Loading areas/berths shall not conflict with pedestrian movement.
2) Loading areas/berths shall not obstruct the view of the public rightof-
way from off-street parking access.
3) Loading areas/berths shall comply with all other requirements of
this section.
4) Loading areas/berths shall maintain a setback of thirty (30) feet
from any public street right-of-way.
e. Each loading area/berth shall be located with appropriate means of
vehicular access to street or public alley in a manner which will cause the
least interference with traffic.
3. Loading Berth Number and Size Required. In connection with any structure
which is to be erected or substantially altered, any which requires the receipt or
distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, there shall
be provided off-street loading space. The number of required off-street loading
berths shall be as follows:
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-75
a. Commercial or Industrial Uses.
1) One (1) loading berth and one (1) additional berth for each
additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or fraction
thereof. The first loading berth shall be not less than seventy (70)
feet in length and additional berths required shall be not less than
thirty (30) feet in length, and all loading berths shall be not less than
ten (10) feet in width and fourteen (14) feet in height, exclusive of
aisle and maneuvering space.
2) Reduction in Size of Space. For commercial or industrial buildings
seven thousand (7,000) square feet or less or buildings within the
B-4 Zoning District, the size of the loading area may be reduced or
the requirement may be waived upon administrative approval. To
qualify for such exception, the following provisions must be met:
a) It must be demonstrated that the site cannot physically
accommodate a loading berth to the size required.
b) It must be demonstrated that semi-trailer truck deliveries will
not occur at the site or all deliveries will occur at such time
as to not conflict with customer or employee access to the
building and parking demand.
b. Multiple Residential Type Uses. One (1) loading area shall be provided
for each multiple family structure containing five (5) or more units and shall
be exclusively reserved for loading and unloading. The space shall be at
minimum thirty (30) feet in length and ten (10) feet in width. Said area
may be parallel to a driveway aisle, but shall not serve to block the flow of
traffic or parking spaces.
c. Reuse of the building shall be held to the aforementioned condition if site
is approved for loading area waiver.
4. Size. Loading areas/berths shall be of a size determined by the City as
necessary to accommodate anticipated truck and service vehicles. Truck
maneuvering radius shall be demonstrated on the site plan.
5. Surfacing. All loading berths and access ways shall be surfaced with a
bituminous or concrete or other material approved by the City Engineer.
6. Accessory Use. Any space allocated as a loading berth or maneuvering areas
so as to comply with the terms of this Ordinance shall not be used for the storage
of goods, inoperable vehicles or to be included as a part of the space
requirements necessary to meet the off-street parking requirements.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-76
7. Screening. Except in the case of multiple dwellings, all loading areas shall be
screened and landscaped from abutting and surrounding residential uses in
compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-77
Subd. G. Relocated Structures.
1. Review Process. Before any house or other structure is moved into or out of
the City, a conditional use permit must be obtained in accordance with Section
51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance. The City shall conduct a site plan review and
determine whether the structure will be compatible with other development in the
area, and conform to all City codes and ordinances.
2. Conditional Use Permit Exceptions. The following uses do not need a
conditional use permit:
a. Relocated sheds, farm buildings, cribs and other farm structures within
one property.
b. Relocation of construction sheds to be located on a lot for less than
eighteen (18) months.
c. Residential sheds less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area.
3. Submission Requirements. In addition to the submission requirements of
Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance, the following information shall be
required for a building relocation conditional use permit:
a. Photographs showing all sides of the structure to be moved and a
proposed site plan of the lot on which the structure is to be located.
b. A map and photographs indicating location of surrounding lots and
structures where the building is proposed to be relocated.
c. A map showing the route of travel of the structure to be relocated.
d. State license of the building mover.
e. Insurance information from the building mover.
f. Dates and time of building moving.
4. Performance Standards.
a. The use is allowed within the respective zoning district that overlays the lot
to which the structure is being relocated.
b. The structure can be located on the lot in full compliance with the
performance standards of this Ordinance without variance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-78
c. The proposed structure shall comply with the applicable requirements of
the State Building Code.
d. The proposed structure shall maintain the aesthetic and architectural
compatibility with surrounding neighborhoods based upon but not limited
to the following factors:
1) Building massing, height, and floor area.
2) The type, grade, and quality of the exterior building finishes.
3) The building’s relationship to surrounding properties related to
building orientation, setbacks, and floor elevations compared to
adjacent properties and the public street.
e. The relocated structure shall be similar to the market valuation of adjacent
principal structures as determined by the City or County Assessor.
f. The relocated structure shall be ready for occupancy within six (6) months
from the date of location on the site.
g. The travel route of the building move must reflect proper capacity of the
street with regard to load bearing capacity, will not interfere with utilities,
will not create congestion or traffic safety issues on the public street.
5. Performance Security. A performance security shall be provided to the City as
specified in Section 51.02, Subd. B.8 of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-79
Subd. H. Home Occupations.
1. Purpose. The Delano Zoning Ordinance establishes a variety of zoning districts
that attempt to segregate incompatible land use patterns and established
homogenous land uses within neighborhoods. In establishing residential districts,
the intent is to provide attractive living environments that allow property owners
and tenants the quiet enjoyment of their property and neighborhood. The
purpose of this subdivision is to provide a means through the establishment of
specific standards and procedures by which home occupations can be conducted
in residential neighborhoods without jeopardizing the health, safety and general
welfare of the surrounding neighborhood.
2. Application. Subject to the non-conforming use provision of this section, all
occupations conducted in the home shall comply with the provisions of this
subdivision. This subdivision shall not be construed, however, to apply to home
occupations accessory to farming.
3. Procedures and Permits.
a. Permitted Home Occupation. Home offices, as defined in section 51.02,
are permitted accessory uses in each residential district of this Zoning
Ordinance and are exempt from home occupation regulations. Any other
home occupation, as defined in this Ordinance, shall require a “home
occupation permit.” Such permits shall be issued subject to the conditions
of this subdivision, other applicable City ordinances and State law.
Application for the home occupation permit shall be accompanied by a fee
as established by City ordinance. Upon review of the home occupation
permit application, the Planning Commission shall make a
recommendation to the City Council, which shall make the final decision.
No public hearing shall be required for home occupation permit
applications. Any permit issued shall remain in force and effect until such
time as there has been a change in conditions or until the permit expires,
as established in subdivision d. Applicants may seek renewal of permits as
provided in subdivision h of this section. The City Council shall make a
final decision on whether or not the permit holder is entitled to an initial
permit and subsequent renewals of the home occupation permit.
c. Declaration of Conditions. The Planning Commission and City Council
may impose such conditions on the granting of a home occupation permit
as may be necessary of this subdivision.
d. Effect of Permit. A home occupation permit may be issued for a period
of one (1) year after which the permit may be reissued for periods of up to
three (3) years each. Each application for permit renewal shall, however,
be processed in accordance with the procedural requirements of the initial
home occupation permit.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-80
e. Transferability. Permits shall not run with the land and shall not be
transferable.
f. Lapse of Home Occupation Permit by Non-Use. Whenever within one
(1) year after granting a permit the use as permitted by the permit shall not
have been initiated, then such permit shall become null and void unless a
petition for extension of time in which to complete the work has been
granted by the City Council. Such extension shall be required in writing
and filed with the Zoning Administrator at least thirty (30) days before the
expiration of the original permit. There shall be no charge for the filing of
such petition. The request for extension shall state facts showing a good
faith attempt to initiate the use. Such petition shall be presented to the
Planning Commission for a recommendation and to the City Council for a
decision.
g. Reconsideration. Whenever an application for a permit has been
considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application for a
permit affecting substantially the same property shall not be considered
again by the Planning Commission and City Council for at least six (6)
months from the date of its denial unless a decision to reconsider such
matter is made by not less than a majority vote of the full City Council.
h. Renewal of Permits. An applicant shall not have a vested right to a
permit renewal by reason of having obtained a previous permit. In
applying for and accepting a permit, the permit holder agrees that his
monetary investment in the home occupation will be fully amortized over
the life of the permit and that a permit renewal will not be needed to
amortize the investment. Each application for the renewal of a permit will
be considered as a new permit without taking into consideration that a
previous permit has been granted. The previous granting or renewal of a
permit shall not constitute a precedent or basis for the renewal of a permit.
4. Requirements-General Provisions. All home occupations shall comply with
the following general provisions and according to definition, the applicable
requirement provisions.
a. General Provisions.
1) All permitted home occupations shall be conducted entirely within
the principal dwelling and may not be conducted in detached
accessory buildings or attached garages.
2) The floor area utilized in a home occupation shall not exceed 20
percent of the gross floor area of a principal dwelling or 400 square
feet, whichever is less.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-81
3) Any home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to
the residential use of the premises, should not change the
residential character thereof, and shall result in no incompatibility or
disturbance to the surrounding residential uses.
4) No home occupation shall require internal or external alterations or
involve construction features not customarily found in dwellings or
that alter the use of the home for residential purposes, except
where required to comply with local and state fire and police
recommendations.
5) The home occupation shall meet all applicable fire and building
codes.
6) No home occupation shall produce light, glare, noise, odor or
vibration that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon
adjacent or nearby property.
7) No equipment shall be used in the home occupation which will
create electrical interference to surrounding properties.
8) There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials used
in the home occupation, nor production assembly nor outdoor sales
and service, except personal automobiles used in the home
occupation may be parked on the site.
9) There shall be no exterior display or exterior signs or interior display
or interior signs which are visible from outside the dwelling.
10) No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of
10:00 PM and 7:00 AM unless said occupation is contained entirely
within the principal building and will not require any on-street
parking facilities.
11) Home occupation businesses are limited to no more than one full
time or regular employee on premises other than those who
constantly reside on the premises.
12) Customer service conducted on the premises of the home
occupation must be arranged by appointment only. No drive-up
business is allowed. No sale of products or merchandise shall occur
on the lot or within any structures or buildings on the lot, except as
may be conducted through the use of the U.S. mail, commercial
delivery services by a vehicle no larger than a step van, or by
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-82
taking and ordering delivery of orders by telephone or Internet
sales.
13) Permitted home occupations shall not create a parking demand in
excess of that which can be accommodated in an existing driveway,
where no vehicle is parked closer than fifteen (15) feet from the
curb line or edge of paved surface.
14) Delivery services may serve a home occupation provided any
delivery vehicle is no larger than a step van. Shipping and delivery
by semi truck or similar vehicle is prohibited.
b. Permitted home occupations include, but are not limited to, art studio,
dressmaking, secretarial services, photographic studio, professional
offices, teaching with musical, dancing and other instruction, and similar
uses.
c. Prohibited Home Occupations shall include:
1) Auto repair, except of vehicles which are registered to a resident of
the dwelling, or to a son, daughter, parent, sibling, grandparent, or
grandchild of a property resident.
2) Pet care facilities, except for pet grooming.
5. Non-Conforming Use. Existing home occupations lawfully existing on the date
of this Ordinance may continue as non-conforming uses. They shall, however,
be required to obtain permits for their continued operation. Any existing home
occupation that is discontinued for a period of more than thirty (30) days, or is in
violation of the Ordinance provisions under which it was initially established, shall
be brought into conformity with the provisions of this subdivision.
6. Inspection. The City of Delano hereby reserves the right upon issuing any
home occupation permit to inspect the premises in which the occupation is being
conducted to insure compliance with the provisions of this subdivision or any
conditions additionally imposed.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-83
Subd. I. Specialized Housing.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this subdivision is to establish performance
standards for residential uses that operate beyond the scope of traditional
residential uses by providing accommodations on an ongoing basis within certain
residential areas.
2. Bed and Breakfast Establishments.
a. District Application. Bed and breakfast establishments are subject to the
approval of a conditional use permit within the respective zoning district
where bed and breakfasts shall be allowed.
b. Conditions of Approval. In addition to general standards and criteria
provided in this Ordinance, a bed and breakfast establishment may be
allowed provided that:
1) A maximum of four (4) bed and breakfast units may be established
in a structure.
2) The facility shall have a State license (hotel and food), and comply
with building and fire codes as may be required or applicable.
3) The facility shall be owner or manager occupied.
4) The principal structure shall have a minimum size of one thousand
five hundred (1,500) gross square feet and shall be located on a lot
which meets the minimum lot size of the district in which it is
located.
5) All bed and breakfast units shall be established within the principal
structure.
6) Not more than the equivalent of one (1) full time person shall be
employed by the bed and breakfast facility who is not a resident of
the structure.
7) Dining and other facilities shall not be open to the general public but
shall be used exclusively by the registered guests and residents.
8) Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for the home
plus one (1) off-street parking space for each bed and breakfast
unit. Parking areas shall be screened and landscaped pursuant to
Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-84
9) Not more than one (1) identification sign not exceeding four (4)
square feet in area may be attached to each wall which faces a
street. The sign shall be reflective of the architectural features of
the structure and may not be internally illuminated or lighted
between ten o’clock (10:00) PM and six o’clock (6:00) AM.
10) Adequate lighting shall be provided between the principal structure
and the parking area for safety purposes. Any additional external
lighting is prohibited.
3. Accessory Apartments. The purpose of this section is to provide standards for
the establishment and use of home accessory apartments in owner occupied
single family homes.
a. Application. Subject to the non-conforming use provisions of this
Ordinance, all home accessory apartments as defined in Section 51.01,
Subd. B.2, Definitions established after the effective date of this Ordinance
shall comply with the provisions of this section.
b. Procedures and Permits. All home accessory apartments shall require an
accessory apartment conditional use permit. Applicants for such a permit
shall be made on forms provided by the City which shall include the
following:
1) Legal description of the property location and proof of ownership.
2) Plans, drawn to scale, indicating existing and proposed floor plans
and access to both the principal unit and the accessory unit.
3) Site plan depicting parking availability.
c. Requirements. All home accessory apartments shall comply with the
following requirements:
1) The accessory apartment shall be clearly a subordinate part of the
single family dwelling. In no case shall the accessory apartment be
more than forty (40) percent of the building’s total floor area, not to
exceed eight hundred (800) square feet nor have more than one (1)
bedroom. Common area shared by the principal dwelling and
accessory apartment shall be considered part of the principal
dwelling and shall not be included in the calculation of accessory
apartment floor area.
2) The principal unit shall have at least nine hundred sixty (960)
square feet of living space remaining after creation of the accessory
apartment exclusive of garage area. Accessory apartments shall
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-85
have at least five hundred (500) square feet of living space. Living
space for the accessory apartment shall include a kitchen or
cooking facilities, a bathroom and a living room.
3) A separate exterior entrance may be permitted. Any exterior
alterations or expansion shall be constructed of similar size, color,
and type of materials as the principal single family unit. Only one
(1) exterior stairway may be located on the side or rear of the
dwelling.
4) The principal unit and accessory apartment shall share an internal
doorway connection between the units.
5) Both the principal unit and accessory apartment shall share a single
utility hookup.
6) All parking standards of Section 51.03, Subd. E shall be met.
7) The accessory apartment and principal unit shall meet the
applicable standards and requirements of the Delano Zoning
Ordinance, Building Code, Wright County Health Codes and Fire
Codes.
8) The house shall be owner-occupied at the time of application and
the building and property shall remain in single ownership and title
and shall only have one mailing address.
9) A maximum of one (1) accessory apartment permit shall be issued
per detached single family home.
10) No separate driveway or curb cut shall be permitted for the
accessory apartment unit.
4. Revocation. The City Council may revoke an accessory apartment permit if
the permittee fails to comply with the conditions attached to the issuance of the
permit or otherwise fails to comply with the provisions of this section. Prior to
revocation, the City Council shall conduct a hearing preceded by ten (10) days
mail notice to the permittee.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-86
Subd. J. Grading, Drainage, Land Filling, Excavation.
1. Grading and Drainage.
a. In the case of all new residential subdivisions, multiple family, business,
and industrial developments, a grading and drainage plan shall be
submitted to the City for its review and approval. The final grading and
drainage plan shall be consistent with the City’s Stormwater Management
Plan, as may be amended. Where grading involves wetlands, a wetland
management plan, consistent with the Minnesota Wetland Conservation
Act, shall be submitted and approved by the City. Lots subdivided and
recorded after March 2003 shall also be subject to the performance
standards of Section 10 of the Delano Subdivision Ordinance.
b. As part of a building permit application in which new structures or building
footprint expansion of existing structures are proposed, excluding permit
applications listed in Section 51.03, Subd. B.2.a, a site survey showing
proposed grading, drainage and building pad elevations(s) shall be
submitted to the City along with a certificate by the permit applicant that it
is consistent with the approved final plat grading and drainage plan, if any.
c. Prior to issuance of an occupancy permit, the person or entity who
developed, graded and constructed improvements upon the property for
which the occupancy permit is requested, shall submit an as-built survey
that the grading, drainage and building pad elevations are consistent with
the approved final grading and drainage plan for the subdivision, or if no
such City approved drainage and grading plan for the entire subdivision
exists, that such person or entity represents that the grading, drainage and
building pad elevations are consistent with the site survey referred to in
Section 51.03, Subd. D.12.b above.
d. Prior to issuance of an occupancy permit, the person or entity who
developed, graded and constructed improvements upon the property for
which the occupancy permit is requested shall execute an indemnification
and release of the City of Delano, its elected officials, and other
representatives from and against claims relating to grading, drainage, and
building pad elevation errors and variances between the grading, drainage
and building pad elevation work and approved plans.
e. For all construction, erosion control measures must be in place prior to
beginning of site work (i.e., grading, striping, or construction).
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-87
1) The City may withhold inspections or suspend work on a site that
does not have an approved grading plan or in place erosion control
measures.
2) The City may require a financial security to ensure placement and
maintenance of erosion control measures.
2. Land Filling.
a. Permit Required.
1) Land filling on any property within the City limits in the following
manner shall require an administrative land fill permit:
a) Any deposit of fill within a drainage or utility easement.
b) Any deposit of fill within a natural drainage way.
c) Any deposit of fill within ten (10) feet of a property line.
d) Adding land fill in excess of twenty (20) cubic yards.
2) Land filling in excess of four hundred (400) cubic yards shall require
a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 51.02, Subd. B
of this Ordinance.
b. Exclusions. This article shall not apply to projects outlined in Section
51.03, Subd. J.1 that have an approved grading or drainage plan.
c. Application and Required Information.
1) Any person desiring a permit hereunder shall present an application
on such forms as shall be provided by the Zoning Administrator
requiring the following information:
a) The name and address of the applicant.
b) The name and address of the owner of the land.
c) The address and legal description of the land involved.
d) The purpose of the land fill.
e) A description of the source, type, and amount of fill material
to be placed upon the premises.
f) The highway, street or streets, or other public ways in the
City upon and along which any material is to be hauled or
carried.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-88
g) An estimate of the time required to complete the land fill.
h) A site plan showing present topography and also including
boundary lines for all properties, water courses, wetlands
and other significant features within three hundred fifty (350)
feet.
i) A site plan showing the proposed finished grade and
landscape plan. Erosion control measures shall be provided
on such plan. Final grade shall not adversely affect the
surrounding land or the development of the site on which the
land fill is being conducted. Top soil shall be of a quality
capable of establishing normal vegetative growth.
j) A dust control plan.
k) A plan and/or statement demonstrating the proposed activity
will in no way jeopardize the public health, safety and welfare
or is appropriately fenced to provide adequate protection.
l) A statement that the applicant will comply with all conditions
prescribed by the City or its officers or agents.
m) The application shall be considered as being officially
submitted when all the information requirements are
complied with. A fee for such application is submitted based
upon the schedule as established by City Council ordinance.
n) A schedule for completion of the land filing.
o) Wetland management plan consistent with the Minnesota
Wetland Conservation Act, where applicable.
p) In addition to the aforementioned submission requirements,
the submission of information of Section 51.03, Subd. B shall
also be required when a conditional use permit is required.
d. Technical Reports.
1) The Zoning Administrator shall process all land fill permit
applications. Such applications, when determined to be necessary
by the Zoning Administrator and all those for more than fifty (50)
cubic yards shall be forwarded to the City Engineer and Building
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-89
Official. Where watersheds, floodplains and/or wetlands are in
question, the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources shall
also be contacted. These technical advisors shall be instructed by
the Zoning Administrator to prepare reports for the Council.
2) Filing fees in excess of the actual incurred expenses shall be
refunded to the applicant. When the expenses incurred in the
review of the application exceed the fee, such excess expenses
shall be billed to the applicant.
e. Issuance of Permit.
1) The City Engineer and/or the Building Official shall determine as to
whether, and when, and under what conditions a land fill permit for
less than fifty (50) cubic yards shall be issued.
2) Upon receiving information and reports from the Zoning
Administrator and the City Engineer, the Council shall make its
determination as to whether, and when, and under what conditions
such permit for a land fill greater than fifty (50) cubic yards is to be
issued to the applicant by the Zoning Administrator.
3) Conditional use permits shall be processed and issued in
accordance with Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.
f. Conditions of Operation.
1) Under no circumstances shall any such land fill operation be
conducted or permitted if the contents of the land fill or any part
thereof shall consist of garbage, animal or vegetable refuse,
poisons, contaminants, chemicals, decayed material, filth, sewage
or similar septic or biologically dangerous material, or any other
material deemed to be unsuitable by the City.
2) Unless expressly extended by permit, the hours of operation shall
be limited to 7:00 AM to 6:00 PM, Monday through Saturday.
g. Security. The Council may require either the applicant or the owner or
user of the property on which the land fill is occurring to post a security in
such form and sum as the Building Official and/or City Engineer shall
determine, with sufficient surety provided to the City, conditioned to pay to
the City the extraordinary cost and expense of repairing, from time to time,
any highways, streets or other public ways where such repair work is
made necessary by the special burden resulting from hauling and travel in
transporting fill material, the amount of such cost and expense to be
determined by the City Engineer; and conditioned further to comply with all
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-90
requirements of this Chapter, and the particular permit, and to pay any
expense the City may incur by reason of doing anything required to be
done by any applicant to whom a permit is issued.
h. Failure to Comply. The Council may, for failure of any person to comply
with any requirement made of such person in writing under the provisions
of such permit, as promptly as same can reasonably be done, proceed to
cause said requirement to be complied with. The cost of such work shall
be assessed against the property whereon the land fill is located, or the
City may at its option proceed to collect such costs by an action against
the person to whom such permit has been issued, and such person's
superiors if a bond exists. In the event that land filling operations requiring
a permit are commenced prior to City review and approval, the City may
require work stopped and all necessary applications filed and processed.
Application fees shall be double the normal charge.
3. Excavation/Mining.
a. Permit Required.
1) The excavation of sand, gravel, black dirt, or other natural material
from the land or the grading of land by a person in the following
manner shall require an administrative permit:
a) Removing sand, gravel, black dirt or other natural materials
or grading land within a drainage or utility easement.
b) Removing sand, gravel, black dirt or other natural materials
or grading land within a natural drainage way.
c) Removing sand, gravel, black dirt or other natural materials
or grading land within ten (10) feet of a property line.
d) Removing sand, gravel, black dirt or other natural materials
or grading land in excess of twenty (20) cubic yards.
2) The excavation of sand, gravel, black dirt, or other natural material
or grading of land by a person in the amount of four hundred (400)
cubic yards or more shall require a conditional use permit in
accordance with Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.
b. Exclusions. This article shall not apply to:
1) The excavation, removal, storage, or placement of rock, sand, dirt,
gravel, clay, or other like material for any construction for which a
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-91
building permit has been issued, site plan approval or a
development contract signed.
2) Such excavation, removal, storage, or placement of rock, sand, dirt,
gravel, clay, or other like material as may be required by the state,
county, or city authorities within their acquired rights-of-way and
easements in connection with the construction or maintenance of
roads and highways and utilities. “Rights-of-way” as used herein
shall not include isolated parcels used exclusively for borrow pits.
c. Application for Permit.
1) Any person desiring a permit hereunder shall present an application
on such form as shall be provided by the Zoning Administrator
requiring the following information:
a) The name and address of the applicant.
b) The name and address of the owner of the land.
c) The address and legal description of the land involved.
d) The purpose of the excavation or grading.
e) A description of the type and amount of material to be
excavated from or graded on the premises.
f) The highway, street or streets, or other public ways in the
City upon and along which any material is to be hauled or
carried.
g) An estimate of the time required to complete the excavation
or grading.
h) A site plan showing present topography and also including
boundary lines for all properties, water courses, wetlands
and other significant features within three hundred fifty (350)
feet.
i) A site plan showing the proposed finished grade and
landscape plan. Erosion control measures shall be provided
on such plan. Final grade shall not adversely affect the
surrounding land or the development of the site on which the
excavation is being conducted. Top soil shall be of a quality
capable of establishing normal vegetative growth.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-92
j) A security statement demonstrating the proposed activity will
in no way jeopardize the public health, safety and welfare or
is appropriately fenced to provide adequate protection.
k) A statement that the applicant will comply with all conditions
prescribed by the City or its officers or agents.
l) A schedule for the completion of the excavation or mining.
m) A wetland management plan consistent with the Minnesota
Wetlands Conservation Act, where applicable.
d. Technical Reports. The Zoning Administrator shall immediately upon
receipt of such applications forward a copy thereof to the City Engineer
and Building Official. Where watersheds and/or wetlands are in question,
the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources shall also be contacted.
These technical advisors shall be instructed by the Zoning Administrator to
prepare reports for the Council.
e. Conditions. The City, as a prerequisite to the granting of a permit, may
require the applicant or the owner of the premises to incorporate and
attach any conditions or restrictions that it deems necessary for the
preservation of health, welfare, and safety of the citizens:
1) Properly fence any pit or excavation, and barricade entrances to
prevent the general public from depositing garbage or refuse.
2) Slope the banks, and otherwise guard and keep any pit or
excavation in such condition as not to be dangerous because of
sliding or caving banks.
3) Properly drain, fill, or level off any pit or excavation so as to make
the same safe and healthful as the permitting authority may
determine.
4) Limit the depth of such excavation to an elevation no lower than the
minimum floor elevation for building construction as established by
the City Engineer, so as not to diminish development potential of
the parcel.
5) Limit any fill material to clean fill, defined as rock, sand, gravel,
clay, or other like and similar non-decomposable material.
Concrete, asphalt, metal, wood, and other debris shall be
prohibited.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-93
6) Require that all decomposable material, or other unsuitable
foundation material, be removed from an area before deposition of
fill begins.
7) Prepare a site plan showing existing and proposed grade elevations
and effect of storm water drainage on adjacent areas.
8) Specify a time when the excavation or land reclamation project
shall be completed.
9) Place a minimum of four (4) inches of top soil over the completed
project and establish appropriate ground cover within sixty (60)
days of completion, or in a time period consistent with the City’s
storm water management and pollution prevention plan.
10) Reimburse the City for the cost of periodic inspections by the City
for the purpose of determining that the terms under which the
permit has been issued are being complied with.
11) Implement the tree preservation plan.
12) Rodent control plan.
13) Dust control plan/street clean up.
14) Transport route plan for mining operation.
15) Site restoration plan including final grading plan/utility plan and
master land use concept.
16) Post a form of security and sum as the permitted authority may
require, running to the City, conditioned to pay the City the cost and
expense of repairing or cleaning any highways, streets, or other
public ways within the City made necessary by the special burden
resulting from transporting thereon by the applicant material to or
from the site, the amount of such cost to be determined by the
Council; and conditioned further to comply with all the requirements
of this Ordinance and the particular permit, and to save the City
free and harmless from all suits or claims for damages resulting
from the negligent excavation, removal, storage, or filling of rock,
sand, dirt, gravel, clay or other like material within the City.
17) Other conditions deemed appropriate to the application by the
permitted authority.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-94
f. Security. The City may require either the applicant or the owner or user of
the property on which the excavation or grading is occurring to post a
security in such form and sum as the Council shall determine, with
sufficient surety provided to the City, conditioned to pay to the City the
extraordinary cost and expense of repairing, from time to time, and
highways, streets or other public ways where such repair work is made
necessary by the special burden resulting from hauling and travel in
transporting excavated material, the amount of such cost and expense to
be determined by the City Engineer; and conditioned further to comply
with all requirements of this Chapter, and the particular permit, and to pay
any expense the City may incur by reason of doing anything required to be
done by any applicant to whom a permit is based.
g. Failure to Comply. The City may, for failure of any person to comply with
any requirement made of such person in writing under the provisions of
such permit, as promptly as same can reasonably be done, proceed to
cause said requirement to be complied with, and the cost of such work
shall be taxed against the property whereon the land fill is located, or the
City may, at its option, proceed to collect such costs by an action against
the person to whom such permit has been issued, and his superiors if a
security exists.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-95
Subd. K. Essential Services.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this subdivision is to provide for the installation of
essential services such as telephone lines, pipelines, electric transmission lines
and substations in such a manner that the healthy, safety, and welfare of the city
will not be adversely affected. Essential services should also be installed in
cognizance of existing and projected demands for such services.
2. Administrative Permit. All underground telephone lines, pipelines for local
distribution, underground electric transmission lines, and overhead electric
transmission lines less than 33 KV, which are intended to serve more than one
(1) parcel and are proposed to be installed at locations other than in public rightof-
way, shall require an administrative permit issued by the City after approval by
the City Engineer. Approval by the City Engineer shall be based upon the
information furnished in the following procedural requirements:
a. Prior to the installation of any of the previous essential services, the owner
of such service shall file with the Zoning Administrator all maps and other
pertinent information as deemed necessary for the City Engineer to review
the proposed project.
b. The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the map and accompanying
information to the City Engineer for his review and approval regarding the
project’s relationship to the Comprehensive Plan and/or ordinances and
parts thereof.
c. The City Engineer shall report in writing to the Zoning Administrator its
findings as to the compliance of the proposed project with the
Comprehensive Plan and ordinances of the City.
d. In considering applications for the placement of essential services, as
regulated in this section, the aforesaid City staff shall consider the effect of
the proposed project upon the health, safety, and general welfare of the
City, as existing and as anticipated; and the effect of the proposed project
upon the Comprehensive Plan.
e. Upon receiving the approval of the City Engineer, the Zoning Administrator
shall issue a special permit for the installation and operation of the
applicant’s essential services. If the Engineer’s report recommends the
denial of said permit causing the Zoning Administrator to deny its
issuance, the applicant may appeal said decision to the Board of Appeals
and Adjustments under the rules and procedure set forth in Section 51.02,
Subd. D.2 of this Ordinance.
3. Conditional Use Permit. All transmission pipelines (i.e., pipelines not required
for local distributing network) and overhead transmission and substation lines in
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-96
excess of 33 KV shall be a conditional use in all districts subject to the following
procedure requirements:
a. Prior to the installation of any of the previous essential services, the owner
of such services shall file with the Zoning Administrator all maps and other
pertinent information as deemed necessary for the City Council to review
the proposed project.
b. The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the map and accompanying
information to the City Council for its review regarding the project’s
relationship to the Comprehensive Plan and parts thereof. A part of this
review shall be a written report from the City Engineer.
c. The City shall hold the necessary public hearings as prescribed by this
Ordinance for conditional use.
d. In considering the applications for the placement of essential services, as
regulated by this subdivision, the City Council shall consider the advice
and recommendations of the City staff and the effect of the proposed
project upon the health, safety, and general welfare of the City, existing
and anticipated, and the effect of the proposed project upon the
Comprehensive Plan.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-97
Subd. L. Sexually Oriented Uses.
1. General. Sexually oriented uses as defined in this Ordinance shall be subject to
the following provisions:
a. Activities classified as obscene as defined by Minnesota Statute 617.241
are not permitted and are prohibited.
b. Sexually oriented uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited
from locating in any building which is also utilized for residential purposes.
c. Sexually oriented uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited
from locating in any building which is also used to dispense or consume
alcoholic beverages.
d. A sexually oriented use which does not qualify as an accessory use shall
be classified as a sexually oriented use-principal.
2. Sexually Oriented Uses - Principal.
a. Sexually oriented use-principal shall be located at least three hundred
(300) radial feet, as measured in a straight line from the closest point of
the property line of the building upon which the sexually oriented useprincipal
is located to the property line of:
1) Residentially zoned property
2) A licensed day care center
3) A public or private educational facility classified as a pre-school,
elementary, junior high or senior high
4) A public library
5) A public park
6) Another sexually oriented use-principal
7) An on-sale liquor establishment
8) Churches.
b. Sexually oriented use-principal activities, as defined by this Ordinance,
shall be classified as one use. No two sexually oriented uses-principal
shall be located in the same building or upon the same property and each
use shall be subject to Section 51.03, Subd. L.1.b and Subd. L.1.c.
c. Sexually oriented use-principal shall, in addition to other sign requirements
established by City Code, adhere to the following signing regulations:
1) Sign messages shall be generic in nature and shall only identify the
type of business which is being conduced.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-98
2) Shall not contain material classified as advertising.
3) Shall comply with the requirements of size and number for the
district in which they are located.
3. Sexually Oriented Uses - Accessory.
a. Sexually oriented use-accessory shall:
1) Comprise no more than five (5) percent of the floor area of the
establishment in which it is located.
2) Comprise no more than ten (10) percent of the gross receipts of the
entire business operation.
3) Not involve or include any activity except the sale or rental of
merchandise.
b. Sexually oriented use-accessory shall be restricted from and prohibit
access to minors by the physical separation of such items from areas of
general public access:
1) Movie Rentals. Display areas shall be restricted from general view
and shall be located within a separate room, the access of which is
in clear view and under the control of the persons responsible for
the operation or shall be in catalogs under the direct control and
distribution of the operator.
2) Magazines. Publications classified or qualifying as sexually
oriented uses shall not be physically accessible to minors and shall
be covered with a wrapper or other means to prevent display of any
material other than the publication title.
3) Other Use. Sexually oriented uses-accessory not specifically cited
shall comply with the intent of this section subject to the approval of
the Zoning Administrator.
c. Sexually oriented use-accessory shall be prohibited from both internal and
external advertising and signing of adult materials and products.
d. Sexually oriented use-accessory activities shall be prohibited at any public
show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical or other performance or
exhibition presented to the general public where minors are admitted.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-99
Subd. M. Antennas.
1. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to establish predictable and
balanced regulations for the siting and screening of wireless communications
equipment in order to accommodate the growth of wireless communication
systems within the City of Delano while protecting the public against any adverse
impacts on the City’s aesthetic resources and the public welfare. The provisions
of the section are intended to maximize the use of existing towers, structures,
and buildings to accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennas in
order to minimize the number of towers needed to serve the community.
2. General Standards. The following standards shall apply to all personal wireless
service telephone, public utility, microwave, radio and television broadcast
transmitting, radio and television receiving, satellite dish and short-wave radio
transmitting and receiving antenna.
a. All obsolete and unused antennas and towers shall be removed within
twelve (12) months of cessation of operation at the site by the antenna or
tower owner, unless an exemption is granted by the Zoning Administrator.
A copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease which requires the
applicant to remove the tower and associate facilities when they are
abandoned, unused or become hazardous shall be submitted to the City.
b. All antennas and towers shall be in compliance with all State Building and
Electrical Code requirements and as applicable shall require related
permits. Applications to erect new antennas and/or towers shall be
accompanied by any required federal, state, or local agency licenses.
c. Structural design, mounting and installation of the antenna shall be in
compliance with manufacturer’s specifications and as may be necessary,
as determined by the City Engineer, shall be verified and approved by a
professional engineer.
d. When applicable, written authorization for antenna and/or tower erection
shall be provided by the property owner.
e. No advertising message shall be affixed to the antenna and/or tower
structure.
f. Antennas and/or towers shall not be artificially illuminated unless required
by law or by a governmental agency to protect the public’s health and
safety.
g. If a new tower of seventy-five (75) feet or greater in height is to be
constructed, it shall be designed structurally, electrically, and in all
respects, to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and antennas for
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-100
at least one (1) additional use, including but not limited to other personal
wireless service communication companies, local police, fire and
ambulance companies. Towers shall be designed to allow for future
rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas
mounted at varying heights.
h. Towers shall be painted a non-contrasting color consistent with the
surrounding area such as blue, gray, brown, or silver or have a galvanized
finish to reduce visual impact, unless otherwise required by a
governmental agency.
i. All antennas and towers shall be reasonably posted and secured to
protect against trespass, including appropriate measures to prevent
unauthorized persons from climbing any tower.
j. Towers shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) regulations.
k. Amateur radio towers shall be installed in accordance with the instructions
furnished by the manufacturer of that tower model. Because of the
experimental nature of the amateur radio service, antennas mounted on
such a tower may be modified or changed at any time so long as the
published allowable load on the tower is not exceeded and the structure of
the tower remains in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications.
l. Except as may be applicable in case where a conditional use permit is
required, antennas and support structures for federally licensed amateur
radio stations and used in the amateur radio service shall be exempt from
the following: Section 51.03, Subd. M.2.h; Section 51.03, Subd. M.4; and
Section 51.03, Subd. M.5.
3. Certification, Inspection and Maintenance.
a. All towers, antenna support structures, and related equipment or
structures shall be kept and maintained in good condition, order, and
repair so as not to menace or endanger the life or property of any person.
b. All towers shall be certified by an engineer to be structurally sound and in
conformance with the requirements of the State Building Code and federal
and state law.
c. The City shall have authority to enter onto the property upon which a
tower is located to inspect the tower for the purpose of determining
whether it complies with the State Building Code and all other construction
standards provided by the City’s Code, federal and state law. The City
reserves the right to conduct such inspections at any time, upon
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-101
reasonable notice to the owner. All expenses related to such inspecting
by the City shall be borne by the owner.
4. Tower Design. Where allowed, wireless communication towers shall be of a
monopole design unless the City Council determines that an alternative design
requested by the applicant would better blend into the surrounding environment.
5. Co-Location Requirement. An application for a new tower shall not be
approved unless the applicant demonstrates that the antennas cannot be
accompanied on an existing or approved tower, building, or structure within a two
(2) mile search radius of the proposed tower due to one or more of the following
reasons:
a. The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing or approved tower, building, or structure as documented by a
qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved
tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate
planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost.
b. The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the
usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building as
documented by a qualified engineer and interference cannot be prevented
at a reasonable cost.
c. Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate the antennas
upon an existing or approved tower or structure.
d. Existing or approved towers, buildings, or other structures do not exist in
the search area, or do not meet the needs of the user. Documentation
shall be provided at the time of application clearly demonstrating why
existing structures do not meet the needs to the users.
e. The applicant shall demonstrate that a good faith effort to co-locate on
existing towers or structures was made, but an agreement could not be
reached.
6. Accessory Antennas. The following standards shall apply to all accessory
antennas including radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes,
TVROs three (3) meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching
antennas, or those necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including
radio receivers, ham radio transmitters and television receivers.
a. Accessory antennas shall not be erected in any required yard (except a
rear yard) or within public or private utility and drainage easements, and
shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from all lot lines.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-102
b. Guy wires or guy wire anchors shall not be erected within public or private
utility and drainage easements, and shall be set back a minimum of one
(1) foot from all lot lines.
c. Accessory antennas and necessary support structures, monopoles or
towers may extend a maximum of fifteen (15) feet above the normal height
restriction for the affected zoning district, except support structures and
antennas used in the amateur radio service may extend a maximum of
two (2) times the normal height restriction for the affected zoning district.
d. The installation of more than one (1) accessory structure and support
structure per property shall require the approval of a conditional use
permit.
7. Personal Wireless Service Antennas.
a. Residential and Business District Standards.
1) Antennas Located Upon an Existing Tower or Structure. Personal
wireless service antennas as a permitted secondary use may be
located upon existing towers or structures shall require the
processing of an administrative permit and shall comply with the
following standards:
a) Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be
housed within an existing structure whenever possible. If a
new equipment building or cabinet is necessary for
transmitting, receiving and switching equipment, it shall be
situated in the side or rear yard of the principal use, meet all
applicable accessory building setback requirements, and
shall be screened from view by landscaping where
appropriate.
b) An administrative permit is issued by the Zoning
Administrator, subject to the following conditions:
(1) Antennas mounted on buildings or structures shall not
extend more than fifteen (15) feet above the structural
height of the building or structure to which they are
attached.
(2) Wall or facade mounted antennas may not extend
more than five (5) feet above the cornice line and
shall be constructed of a material or color which
matches the exterior of the building.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-103
c) In no case shall a personal wireless service antenna be
located upon or affixed to a detached single family
residential dwelling.
2) New Towers. The erection of new personal wireless service
antenna towers within Residential and Business Zoning Districts of
the City is prohibited.
b. Industrial District Standards.
1) Antennas Located Upon an Existing Structure or Existing Tower.
Personal wireless service telephone antennas as a permitted
secondary use may be located upon an existing structure or colocated
on an existing tower shall require the processing of an
administrative permit and shall comply with the following standards:
a) An administrative permit is issued by the Zoning
Administrator.
b) Antennas mounted on buildings or structures shall not
extend more than fifteen (15) feet above the structural height
of the building or structure to which they are attached.
c) Wall or facade mounted antennas may not extend more than
five (5) feet above the cornice line and must be constructed
of a material or color which matches the exterior of the
building.
2) New Towers. New towers as a permitted secondary use shall
require approval of an administrative permit and shall comply with
the following standards:
a) The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
City that location of the antennas as proposed is necessary
to provide adequate portable personal wireless service
telephone coverage and capacity to areas which cannot be
adequately served by locating the antennas on an existing
tower or support structure.
b) If no existing structure which meets the height requirements
for the antennas is available for mounting purposes, the
antennas may be mounted on a monopole tower provided
that:
(1) Towers with a maximum capacity to support two (2)
antennas shall not exceed one hundred forty (140)
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-104
feet in height. Towers with a minimum capacity to
support three (3) antennas shall not exceed one
hundred sixty (160) feet in height.
(2) The setback of the tower from the nearest property
line is not less than the height of the antenna.
Exceptions to such setback may be granted in such
cases when a qualified structural engineer specifies in
writing that any failure of the pole will occur within a
lesser distance under all foreseeable circumstances.
The setback shall not be reduced in cases where the
subject site abuts a residential zoning district. The
setback requirements shall not be reduced below the
minimum accessory building setback requirements of
the base zoning district or the failure area of the
tower, whichever is greater.
c) Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be
housed within an existing structure whenever possible. If a
new equipment building or cabinet is necessary for
transmitting, receiving and switching equipment, it shall be
situated in the side or rear yard of the principal use, meet all
applicable necessary building setback requirements, and
shall be screened from view by landscaping where
appropriate.
d) At the discretion of the City, a security fence not greater than
eight (8) feet in height with a maximum opacity of fifty (50)
percent shall be provided around the support structure, as
well as no climb security measures shall be provided on the
tower or support structure.
3) Temporary Mobile Towers. Personal wireless service antennas
located upon a temporary mobile tower as a permitted secondary
use may be used on an interim basis until a permanent site is
constructed shall require the approval of an administrative permit
and shall comply with the following standards:
a) Temporary mobile towers are exempt from co-location and
permanent tower structure design standards provided for in
the following sections: Section 51.03, Subd. M.2.h; Section
51.03, Subd. M.2.i; Section 51.03, Subd. M.4; and Section
51.03, Subd. M.5.
b) The termination date of the permit shall not exceed one
hundred twenty (120) days. Temporary mobile towers
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-105
located on a site longer than one hundred twenty (120) days
shall require the processing of an interim use permit subject
to the standards contained in Section 51.02, Subd. C of this
Ordinance.
c) Guyed towers are prohibited.
d) Mobile units shall have a minimum tower design wind load of
eighty (80) miles per hour, or be set back from all structures
a distance equal to the height of the tower.
e) All towers shall be protected against unauthorized climbing.
f) The height of the tower shall not exceed one hundred (100)
feet.
8. Commercial and Public Radio and Television Transmitting Antennas, and
Public Utility Microwave Antennas. Commercial and public radio and
television transmitting and public utility microwave antennas shall comply with the
following standards:
a. Such antenna shall be considered an allowed conditional use within all
industrial districts of the City and shall be subject to the regulations and
requirements of Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.
b. The antennas, transmitting towers, or array of towers shall be located on a
continuous parcel having a dimension equal to the height of the antenna,
transmitting tower, or array of towers measured between the base of the
antenna or tower located nearest a property line and said property line,
unless a qualified structural engineer specifies in writing that the collapse
of any antenna or tower will occur within a lesser distance under all
foreseeable circumstances.
c. Unless the antenna is mounted on an existing structure, at the discretion
of the City, a fence not greater than eight (8) feet in height with a
maximum opacity of fifty (50) percent shall be provided around the support
structure and other equipment, as well as no climb security measures
shall be provided on the tower or structure.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-106
Subd. N. Signs.
1. Purpose and Intent.
a. Purpose. This section is established to protect and promote health,
safety, general welfare and order within the City of Delano through the
establishment of a comprehensive and impartial series of standards,
regulations and procedures governing the type, number, size, structure,
location, height, lighting, erection, use and/or display of devices, signs or
symbols serving as a visual communication media to persons situated
within or upon public rights-of-way or properties. The provisions of this
Section are intended to encourage opportunity for effective, orderly
communication by reducing annoyances, confusion and hazards resulting
from unnecessary and/or indiscriminate use of communication facilities.
b. Objectives.
1) To establish standards which permit businesses a reasonable and
equitable opportunity to advertise.
2) To preserve and promote civic beauty and prohibit signs which
would detract from this objective because of number, size, shape,
height, location, condition, cluttering or illumination.
3) To insure that signs do not create safety hazards.
4) To preserve and protect property values.
2. General Provisions.
a. A sign may not be constructed, erected, remodeled, relocated, expanded
or painted, except in cases of routine maintenance, without a sign permit.
A permit shall not be issued unless the sign and all other signs on the
premises of the applicant are in compliance with the regulations of Section
51.03, Subd. N of this Ordinance.
b. All signs shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with the
Minnesota State Building Code, as may be amended.
c. The installation of electrical signs shall be subject to the National Electrical
Code. Electrical service to such signs shall be underground.
d. All signs shall display, in a conspicuous manner, the owner’s name, permit
number, and date of erection.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-107
e. Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises or identifies
a bona fide business conducted, or a service rendered, or a product sold,
shall be removed by the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use
and/or control of the building or structure upon which the sign may be
found within ten (10) days after written notice from the City Official.
f. No sign shall be artificially illuminated in such a way that produces a
significant broadcast of glare or light beyond the sign. Artificially
illuminated signs shall also be shielded to prevent lights from being
directed at oncoming traffic or adjacent residential properties in such
brilliance that it impairs the vision of the driver. Nor shall such signs
interfere with or obscure an official traffic sign or signal. This includes
indoor signs which are visible from public streets.
g. Signs shall not create a hazard to the safe, efficient movement of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic. No private sign shall contain words or
colors which might be construed as traffic controls, such as “stop”,
“caution”, “warning”, unless the sign is intended to direct traffic on the
premises.
h. Signs and sign structures shall be properly maintained and kept in a safe
condition. Sign or sign structures which are rotted, unsafe, deteriorated or
defaced shall be repainted, repaired, replaced, or removed by the
licensee, owner or agent of the property and/or building upon which the
sign standards.
i. Sign Location/Setbacks.
1) No signs other than governmental signs shall be erected or placed
within a street right-of-way, upon public lands or rights-of-way.
2) No sign or sign structure shall protrude over public right-of-way,
except wall signs (maximum protrusion is eighteen (18) inches).
Projecting signs or marquees allowed in the B-4 District. All signs
located over public right-of-way or over any public or private access
route (sidewalks, etc.) shall be located a minimum of eight (8) feet
above surface grade.
3) No freestanding sign structure shall be closer than five (5) feet from
any property line. When the bottom of the sign face of a
freestanding sign is fifteen (15) feet or higher above grade, the sign
face may extend into the setback no closer than one (1) foot from
the property line. No sign shall be placed within any drainage or
public easement.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-108
4) Except for off-premise signs allowed in other sections of this
Ordinance, all signs must be located on the same lot as the person,
firm, business, product, or building being identified.
5) On all corner lots, signs shall not be permitted within twenty (20)
feet of any corner formed by the intersection of two (2) streets. The
twenty (20) feet shall be in the form of a triangle with two (2) sides
formed by the property lines and the third side formed by a straight
line connecting the two (2) twenty (20) foot points on each side of
the corner. A sign may be extended into the triangular area
provided that:
a) The clearance above the street grade is more than eight (8)
feet.
b) No part of the sign structure encroaches in the triangular
area at an elevation less than eight (8) feet above street
grade.
j. Sign Height.
1) All height restrictions on signs shall include height of sign structure
and be measured from the lot grade or in the case of inflatable
device from its mounting surface to its highest point.
2) The top edge of any wall or building mounted sign or object
intended as an attention attracting device shall not extend above
the roof line, parapet, mansard or façade of a building adjacent to
the sign or object.
k. A freestanding sign or sign structure constructed so that the faces are not
back to back shall not have an angle separating the faces exceeding
twenty (20) degrees unless the total area of both sides added together
does not exceed the maximum allowable sign area for that district.
3. Permitted and Prohibited Signs.
a. Permitted Signs. The following signs are allowed without a permit:
1) Government Signs. Signs of a public, non-commercial nature,
including safety signs, directional signs to public facilities,
trespassing signs, traffic signs, signs indicating scenic or historic
points of interest, memorial plaques and the like, when erected by
or on behalf of a public official or employee in the performance of
official duty.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-109
2) Address Identification Signs.
a) Residential Building. Every principal building shall be
identified with its legal street address in numerical form. The
numerals shall be at least three (3) inches in height, and
either contrasting in color from the principal building, made
of reflective material or illuminated. The numerals shall be
readable from the nearest adjacent roadway serving the
premises. Should the building numerals not be visible from
the roadway, an address post displaying the identification
numerals of the same minimum height shall be placed
adjacent to the driveway in such a manner as to be readable
from the roadway.
b) Commercial, Industrial, and Multiple Family Buildings.
Numerals identifying street addresses for commercial and
industrial buildings, including multiple family dwellings shall
be a minimum of six (6) inches in height and shall comply
with the other requirements of subsection a) above. All such
buildings having multiple street addresses shall be required
to identify rear door entrances in the same manner as main
entrances.
3) Political Campaign Signs. Signs, not exceeding thirty-two (32)
square feet in area, displayed on private property, containing matter
which is intended or tends to influence directly or indirectly any
voting at any primary, general, municipal, special or school
elevation, including pictures for announcements relative to
candidates or campaign advertising. One (1) sign per candidate
and issue per lot is permitted in addition to other signs on private
property in any zoning district. In State general elections, no
person shall permit or allow any such sign to be publicly displayed
or posted before August 1 or ten (10) days after the State general
election to which the sign relates. In special elections, the
durational limit shall be ninety (90) days before and ten (10) days
after the special election to which the sign relates. Any sign
permitted by this section may be used as a non-commercial opinion
sign.
4) Non-Commercial Opinion Signs. Signs, not exceeding thirty-two
(32) square feet in area, displayed on private property, containing
information which expresses an opinion or point of view, but does
not advertise products, goods, businesses or services. One (1)
sign per lot is permitted in any zoning district, however, an
illuminated or motion sign may not be used in residential zoning
districts as a non-commercial opinion sign.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-110
5) Holiday Signs. Signs or displays which contain or depict a
message pertaining to a religious, national, state or local holiday.
6) Construction Signs. Such signs shall be confined to the site of the
construction, alteration, or repair, and shall be removed within two
(2) years of the date of issuance of the first building permit or when
the particular project is completed, whichever is sooner as
determined by the City Building Official or his agent. One (1) sign
shall be permitted for each major street the project abuts. No sign
may exceed fifty (50) square feet.
7) Real Estate Sale or Rental Signs. Signs must be removed within
fourteen (14) days after sale or rental of property. Signs may not
measure more than four (4) square feet in residential districts, nor
more than twenty (20) square feet in all other districts. There shall
be only one (1) sign per premises. Corner properties, however,
may contain two (2) signs, one (1) per frontage.
8) Flags and Memorial Signs. Flags or emblems of a national, federal
or state government, or memorial signs thereof, displayed on
private property.
9) Directional Signs.
a) On-Premise Signs. Shall not be larger than ten (10) square
feet. The number of signs shall not exceed four (4) unless
approved by the Council.
b) Off-Premise Signs. Shall be limited to situations where
access is confusing and traffic safety could be jeopardized or
traffic could be inappropriately routed through residential
streets. The locations, sizes and number of such signs shall
be approved by the Council and shall contain no advertising.
10) Roof Signs. Roof signs may be permitted with City Council
approval, provided the following conditions are met:
a) The sign plans include plan and specifications certified by a
registered engineer that the sign structure can be supported
by the building and is designed for dead load and wind load
pressure from any direction.
b) The roof sign location will not obstruct the visibility of
surrounding properties.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-111
c) The roof is inspected by the City Building Official and
determined to be sufficiently sound to support the proposed
sign.
b. Prohibited Signs. The following signs are prohibited:
1) Any sign which obstructs the vision of vehicle drivers or
pedestrians, or detracts from the visibility of any official traffic
control device.
2) Any sign not erected by an official governmental agency which
contains or imitates an official traffic sign or signal, except for
private, on-premise directional signs.
3) Motion signs and flashing signs, except time and temperature
signs, computerized message boards and barber poles. All
displays shall be shielded to prevent any light from being directed
at oncoming traffic in such brilliance as to impair the vision of any
vehicle drive. No device shall be illuminated in such a manner as to
interfere with or obscure an official traffic sign or signal.
4) Portable signs except as permitted in Section 51.03, Subd. N.7.d.3
of this Ordinance.
5) Signs which are attached to trees, fences or utility poles, or other
permanent supports, except for those signs found on fences
(inside) of public parks, on-site directional signs, warning or public
safety signs, civic event signs or City holiday or special event signs.
6) Advertising signs with the following exceptions:
a) Signs advertising non-profit organizations are permitted
subject to the restrictions imposed within the zoning district
in which the sign is located.
b) Temporary window signs used for the purpose of advertising
goods and/or services may utilize up to one hundred (100)
percent of the internal window area.
7) Advertising or business signs on or attached to equipment such as
semi-truck trailers where signing is a principal use of the equipment
on either a temporary or permanent basis.
4. Non-Conforming Signs.
a. The following are non-conforming signs:
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-112
1) Prohibited signs.
2) All other signs not prohibited that do not conform to the provisions
of this Ordinance.
b. General Provisions Governing Non-Conforming Signs.
1) A non-conforming sign lawfully existing upon the effective date of
this Ordinance may be continued at the size and in the manner
existing upon such date.
2) A non-conforming sign may not be:
a) Structurally altered except to bring it into compliance with the
provisions of this Ordinance.
b) Enlarged.
c) Re-established after its removal or discontinuance.
d) Repaired or otherwise restored, unless the damage is to less
than fifty (50) percent of sign structure.
e) Replaced.
3) Non-Conforming Sign Maintenance and Repair. Nothing in this
Ordinance shall be construed as relieving the owner or user of a
legal non-conforming sign or other of the property on which the
legal non-conforming sign is located from the provisions of this
Ordinance regarding safety, maintenance, and repair of signs,
provided, however, that any repainting, cleaning, and other normal
maintenance or repair of the sign or sign structure shall not modify
the sign structure or copy in any way which makes it more nonconforming
or the sign shall lose its legal non-conforming status.
c. Non-Conforming Uses. When the principal use of land is legally nonconforming
under the Delano Zoning Ordinance, all existing or proposed
signs in conjunction with that land, shall be considered conforming if they
are in compliance with the sign provisions for the most restrictive zoning
district in which the principal use is allowed.
5. General District Regulations.
a. General District Regulations. The following sections concern signs which
require application and permit.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-113
1) R-A Through R-3 Residential Districts:
a) Institutional or area identification signs (monument type
only), provided that the gross square footage of sign area
does not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet and if the sign is
freestanding, the height does not exceed eight (8) feet.
2) R-4 and R-5 Residential Districts:
a) Institutional/Residential Area Identification. Except as
provided for in Section 51.03, Subd. N.7.d of this Ordinance,
only one (1) sign per principal use. Sign area may not
exceed fifty (50) square feet with a maximum height of ten
(10) feet for freestanding signs.
3) R-B, Residential Business District:
a) Institutional/Residential Area Identification. Except as
provided for in Section 51.03, Subd. N.7.d of this Ordinance,
only one (1) sign per principal use. Sign area may not
exceed fifty (50) square feet with a maximum height of ten
(10) feet for freestanding signs.
b) Business Sign. Except for home occupations, only one (1)
sign as accessory to a permitted or conditional use. Sign
area may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet with a
maximum height of six (6) feet for freestanding signs.
4) B-1, Business District:
a) Area Identification. Only one (1) sign. Sign area may not
exceed seventy-five (75) square feet with a maximum height
of twenty (20) feet for freestanding signs.
b) Single or Double Occupancy Business Signs. The total sign
area for the subject property may not exceed fifteen (15)
percent of the total front building façade except both front
and side facades may be counted on a corner lot. Signs
chosen to comprise the total sign area shall be consistent
with the following provisions:
(1) Each lot will be allowed one (1) pylon, freestanding or
monument sign and two (2) wall signs total.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-114
(2) Pylon/Freestanding. Sign area may not exceed fifty
(50) square feet with a maximum height of twenty (20)
feet.
(3) Wall, Canopy, or Marquee. Individual sign area may
not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the total front
building façade.
5) B-2 Through B-W Business Districts, I-1, and I-2 Industrial Districts:
a) Area Identification. Only one (1) sign. Sign area may not
exceed one hundred (100) square feet with a maximum
height of thirty (30) feet for freestanding signs.
b) Single or Double Occupancy Business Sign. The total sign
area may not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the total front
building façade. In calculating building façade, both front
and side facades may be counted on a corner lot. Signs
chosen to comprise the total sign area shall be consistent
with the following provisions:
(1) Each lot will be allowed one (1) freestanding sign and
two (2) wall signs total. An additional wall sign may
be approved by the City Council in the B-4 District if a
freestanding sign is not used.
(2) Freestanding. Sign structure may not exceed a
maximum height of thirty (30) feet and maximum area
of one hundred (100) square feet.
(3) Wall or Marquee. Individual sign area may not
exceed fifteen (15) percent of the total front building
façade.
c) Motor Fuel Station Canopy Sign. Lettering or logos shall
not exceed thirty (30) percent of each canopy face. Letters
or logos may be painted or otherwise affixed to any
permissible canopy as follows:
(1) Location. Lettering or logos shall not project above,
below, or beyond the physical dimensions of the
canopy.
(2) Use. Lettering or letters shall not denote other than
the name and address of the business conducted
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-115
therein and/or a product or products produced or sold
or service rendered therein.
d) B-4 District projecting sign may be permitted provided the
following standards are met:
(1) The projecting sign shall count as one of the
permitted wall signs.
(2) Only one (1) projecting sign is allowed per store front.
(3) The projecting sign is hung at a right angle from the
building face.
(4) The Building Inspector shall approve the sign frame
and supports.
(5) The sign shall not project from the building face more
than five (5) feet and must be setback a minimum of
two (2) feet from the face of curb or street surface.
(6) The bottom on the projecting sign shall provide a
minimum of eight (8) feet of clearance from the
sidewalk surface.
(7) The projecting sign shall not extend over the top of
the building roof line or highest parapet.
(8) The project sign shall comply with area standards of
the B-4 District.
6. Billboards.
a. Billboards. Billboards existing on the date this Ordinance is enacted may
not be enlarged or altered. Billboards constructed after the enactment of
this Ordinance are subject to the following regulations:
1) The sign area may not exceed three hundred (300) total square
feet.
2) The maximum sign height shall be thirty (30) feet.
3) They shall be located a minimum of a one thousand three hundred
twenty (1,320) feet from all existing or approved billboards on the
same side of the street or road.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-116
4) All back-to-back billboards shall be enclosed in a framed case and
shall be erected on a pylon.
5) They shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of any front or rear
property lines.
6) They shall not be located within three hundred (300) feet of any
residentially zoned or used property and shall be landscaped and
screened in accordance with minimum City standards. All permit
applications for billboards shall be accompanied by a landscaping
plan.
7) A billboard shall be the principal use on the lot on which it is
located. Such lot shall meet minimum lot, lot area and setback
requirements within the Zoning Ordinance for the district proposed
for the billboard location.
8) A billboard shall be located on only major arterial streets.
7. Special Sign Regulations.
a. Motor Fuel Stations. Signs for motor fuel stations shall be regulated by
the single occupancy business structure sign provisions for the zoning
district in which the station is located. In addition, motor fuel stations may
also display signs which identify current fuel prices and car wash facilities.
Such signs shall be limited to a maximum size of sixteen (16) square feet
and a minimum height of ten (10) feet each.
b. Automobile Dealerships and Automobile Sales Lots. Signs for automobile
sales lots shall be regulated by the zoning district standards. In addition,
four every two hundred (200) feet of street frontage, the business may
have one (1) additional pylon/freestanding sign not to exceed the zoning
district area and height standards.
c. Multiple Occupancy Business and Industrial Buildings. When a single
principal building is devoted to three (3) or more businesses, or industrial
uses, a comprehensive sign plan for the entire structure shall be submitted
and shall be of sufficient scope and detail to permit a determination as to
whether or not the plan is consistent with the following regulations. The
plan shall be subject to the approval of the Council. No permit shall be
issued for an individual use except upon a determination that it is
consistent with the approved comprehensive sign plan.
1) The maximum individual sign sizes for multiple occupancy
structures and individual uses which may display signs shall not
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-117
exceed the maximum provisions for single or double occupancy
structures in the same zoning district.
2) Multiple occupancy structures may display an area identification
sign consistent with the applicable district provisions of Section
51.03, Subd. N.4.a.4) or N.4.a.5) of this Ordinance. Individual
freestanding signs identifying the tenants business shall not be
displayed, except the freestanding area identification sign may
identify up to four (4) major tenants.
3) Individual tenants may have an exterior wall sign provided the total
building signage does not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the building
façade and individual signs do not exceed the district standard.
4) In any multiple occupancy structure or shopping center, directory
signs shall be permitted for each common public entrance. Each
directory sign area shall not exceed a total of fifty (50) square feet
and shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the common public
entrance being served. The size of individual business
identification signing within the directory shall be established during
the site plan review process. Attention shall be given to the
possible number of tenant or occupancy bays which may be served
by the common public entrance for which the directory size is
intended.
d. Special Event Signage.
1) Banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers or spinners and
any similar devices which are designed and utilized primarily to
draw attention to an object, product, place, activity, person,
institution, organization or business are allowed, provided that:
a) The use of such devices shall require a permit. The permit
shall be valid for no more than fifteen (15) consecutive days
and no more than four (4) such permits per business shall be
granted during any twelve (12) month period.
b) Such devices are kept in good condition and repair so as to
not create a public nuisance or hazard.
c) All setback requirements as prescribed by this and all other
applicable regulations, rules or ordinances are met. Except
for civic and city holiday decorations or devices, all such
devices are not permitted in the public right-of-way.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-118
d) Such devices do not create any hazards in regards to
visibility or obstruction of safe pedestrian or traffic movement
on the site.
e) The additional gross sign area of such devices when added
to the existing sign area shall not exceed one hundred ten
(110) percent of the total allowable sign area.
2) Search lights and lighter than air inflatable devices and/or balloons
and any similar devices which are designed and utilized primarily to
draw attention to an object, product, place, activity, person,
institution, organization or business are allowed, provided that:
a) The use of such devices shall require a permit. The permit
shall be valid for no more than fifteen (15) consecutive days
and no more than four (4) such permits per business shall be
granted during any twelve (12) month period. There shall be
a thirty (30) day waiting period between consecutive permits.
b) Such devices are kept in good condition and repair so as to
not create a public nuisance or hazard.
c) All setback requirements as prescribed by this and all other
applicable regulations, rules or ordinances are met. All such
devices are not permitted in the public right-of-way.
d) Such devices do not create any hazards in regards to
visibility or obstruction of safe pedestrian or traffic movement
on the site.
e) The additional gross sign area of such devices when added
to the existing sign area shall not exceed one hundred
twenty-five (125) percent of the total allowable sign area.
f) Such devices shall not be taller than fifteen (15) feet in
height.
g) Such devices may only be internally lit or illuminated. No
external lighting of such devices is permitted.
h) For shopping centers, these provisions shall apply to each
tenant on an individual basis.
3) Portable Signs. The following provisions shall apply to portable
signs in the City:
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-119
a) Portable signs are prohibited in residential rezoning districts
except in conjunction with church or school sites.
b) Except for legally established, non-conforming portable signs
existing prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, portable
signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per side.
c) All portable signs illegally established prior to the effective
date of this Ordinance shall be brought into conformance
with the applicable provisions of this and all other ordinances
or regulations within thirty (30) days of the effective date of
this Ordinance.
d) Wherever possible, property owners are encouraged to
include reader board signs as part of freestanding signs to
minimize the need for and use of temporary or portable
signs. Such reader board signs will be included in sign
calculations when determining how much signage is allowed
or used for a building or property.
e) Signs may not be illuminated with any flashing device.
f) The use of portable signs required a City permit and is
restricted to information only. The permit shall be valid for
no more than fifteen (15) consecutive days and no more
than four (4) such permits per business shall be granted
during any twelve (12) month period.
g) All electrical connections shall be made in a National
Electrical Code and State Building Code approved manner
and shall use a GFI receptacle outlet.
h) All temporary and portable signs shall be braced and
secured in such a manner to prevent motion or movement.
i) For shopping centers, Subd. 3.1.f of this Ordinance shall
apply to tenants on an individual basis.
8. Inspection. All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to
inspection by the Building Official and/or the Zoning Administrator. The Building
Official or Zoning Administrator may order the removal of any sign that is not
maintained in accordance with the maintenance provisions of this Ordinance.
9. Permits, Applications, Licenses, Variances and Council Approval.
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-120
a. Except as provided in Section 51.03, Subd. N.4.a of this Ordinance, it is
unlawful for any person to erect, construct, alter, rebuild or relocate any
sign or structure until a permit has first been issued by the City.
b. Sign Application. The following information for a sign license shall be
supplied by an applicant if requested by the City:
1) Name, address and telephone number of person making
application.
2) A site plan to scale showing the location of lot lines, building
structures, parking areas, existing and proposed signs and any
other physical features.
3) Plans, location and specifications and method of construction and
attachment to the buildings or placement method in the ground.
4) Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing that the structure is
designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the
amount required by this and all other laws and City Code
provisions.
5) Written consent of the owner or lessee of any site on which the sign
it is to erected.
6) Any electrical permit required and issued for the sign.
7) Such other information as the City shall require to show full
compliance with this and all other laws and City Code provisions.
c. License Issues if Application is in Order. The Building Official or Zoning
Administrator, upon the filing of an application for a license, shall examine
such plans, specifications and other data and the premises upon which it
is proposed to erect the sign. If it appears that the requirements of this
Ordinance and all other laws and City Code provisions, the license shall
be issued. If the work authorized under a license has not been completed
within sixty (60) days after the date of issuance, the license shall be null
and void.
d. Council Approval. When this Ordinance requires Council approval for a
sign, the application shall be processed in accordance with the procedural
and substantive requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for a site plan
review.
e. Variances. The Council may, upon application, grant a variance from the
terms of this Ordinance. The request for a variance shall be processed in
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-121
accordance with the procedural and substantive requirements of Section
51.02, Subd. D of the Delano Zoning Ordinance.
f. Fees. Fees for the review and processing of a sign license applications
and variance requests shall be imposed in accordance with the fee
schedule established by Council ordinance set forth in this Ordinance.
1) Payment of Fees. Fees shall be collected by the City before the
issuance of any permits by the City Clerk, Building Official, or other
persons duly authorized to issue such permits for which the
payment of a fee is required. Under the provisions of this
Ordinance, authorized personnel may not issue a permit until such
fee has been paid.
2) Double Fees. If a person begins work of any kind for which a
permit form the City is required, without having secured the
necessary permits therefore, either previous to or on the date of
commencement of such work, they shall, when subsequently
securing such permit, pay double the fee provided for such permit,
or is subject to the penalty provisions of this Ordinance.
3) Fees Required. Sign applications and subsequent fees will be
required for all signs which do not appear in Section 51.03, Subd.
N.3 (Permitted and Prohibited Signs) of this Ordinance. Fees shall
not be required for incidental repairs and/or maintenance of signs
and sign structures.
4) Special Permit Fees. Special permit fees shall be assessed for all
attention seeking devices as described in Section 51.03, Subd.
N.6.d of this Ordinance. The fee shall be determined by resolution
of the City Council.
10. Enforcement. This Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the
Building Official and/or the Zoning Administrator. The Building Official, Zoning
Administrator, or other persons duly authorized may institute in the name of the
City appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator.
11. Violation a Misdemeanor. Every person violates a section, subdivision,
paragraph or provision of this Ordinance when he performs an act thereby
prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby
prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
as for a misdemeanor.
12. Severability. Should any section, subdivision, clause or other provisions of this
Ordinance be held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
Delano Zoning Ordinance General Provisions
3-122
shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof
except the part held to be invalid.
SECTION 51.04. ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING CLASSIFICATIONS
Subd. A. Establishment of Districts. The following classifications are hereby
established within the City of Delano:
1. Rural Districts.
a. R-A, Rural/Agricultural District
2. Residential Districts.
a. R-E, Single Family Estate Residential District.
b. R-1, Single Family Residential District.
c. R-2, Single Family Residential District.
d. R-3, Single Family Residential District.
e. R-4, Single Family Residential District.
f. R-5, Single Family Residential District.
g. R-6, Single and Two Family Residential District.
h. R-7, Medium Density Residential District.
i. R-8, High Density Residential District.
j. R-B, Residential Business District.
3. Business Districts.
a. B-1, Neighborhood Business District.
b. B-2, General Business District.
c. B-3, Highway Business District.
d. B-4, Central Business District.
4. Industrial Districts.
a. B-W, Business/Warehouse District.
b. I-1, Limited Industry District.
c. I-2, General Industry District.
5. Special Districts.
a. PUD, Planned Unit Development District.
b. S, Shoreland District.
c. W, Wetland Systems District.
Subd. B. Map. The location and boundaries of the districts established by this
Ordinance are hereby set forth on the zoning map, entitled “zoning map of Delano.”
Said map shall remain on file with the Zoning Administrator, and hereinafter referred to
as the “zoning map”, which map and all of the notations, references and other
Delano Zoning Ordinance Zoning Classifications
4-1
information sown thereon shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein
and thereby made a part of this Ordinance by reference.
Subd. C. Zoning District Boundaries. Zoning district boundary lines of this
Ordinance follow lot lines, railroad right-of-way lines, the center of watercourses or the
corporate limit lines, all as they exist upon the effective date of this Ordinance.
1. Appeals concerning the exact location of a zoning district boundary line shall be
heard by the City Council serving as the Board of Adjustment and Appeals.
2. When any street, alley or right-of-way vacated by official action of the City, the
zoning district abutting the center line of said alley or other public right-of-way
shall not be affected by such proceedings.
Subd. D. Annexations. In the event of annexation proceedings becoming final
before the permanent zoning is determined, the annexed area shall be placed in the RA,
Rural/Agricultural District and such classification shall be considered an interim step
pending permanent classification.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Zoning Classifications
4-2
SECTION 51.05. R-A, RURAL/AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
Subd. A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-A, Rural/Agricultural District is to preserve
a low density, rural environment in a manner conducive to future urbanization. This
district is intended to function as a “holding zone” for future urban development,
preventing subdivisions of an urban density until such time as suitable infrastructure can
be provided.
Subd. B. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses in the R-A District:
1. Agriculture, farming, gardening, with related buildings and structures subject to
Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, but not including commercial feedlots.
2. Commercial nurseries, greenhouses, and tree farms.
3. Day care facilities, as defined by Section 51.02 of this Ordinance, licensed by the
State, and serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons.
4. Essential services.
5. Public parks, playgrounds, wildlife areas and game refuges.
6. Residential facilities, as defined by Section 51.02 of this Ordinance, licensed by
the State, and serving six (6) or fewer persons.
7. Single family dwellings.
8. Stands for the sale of agricultural products provided said products are primarily
raised on the premises.
Subd. C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory uses
in an R-A District:
1. Accessory buildings, including garages, tool houses, sheds and similar buildings
for storage of domestic supplies and non-commercial recreational equipment as
regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. C.8.
2. Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two (2) persons.
3. Fences as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. D.11 of this Ordinance.
4. Living quarters of persons employed on the premises.
5. Non-commercial greenhouses and conservatories.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-A District
5-1
6. Operation and storage of such vehicles, equipment and machinery which are
incidental to permitted or conditional uses allowed in this district.
7. Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs three (3)
meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those
necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers,
ham radio transmitters and television receivers as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. M of this Ordinance.
8. Storage of recreational vehicles and equipment per Section 51.03, Subd. D.9.
9. Swimming pools, sport courts, and other recreational facilities which are operated
for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their
guests, as regulated by conditions of Sections 51.03, Subd. C.7.d or Section
51.03, Subd. C.7.e.
Subd. D. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses allowed in an R-A
District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.)
1. Accessory apartments provided that conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. I.3 of this
Ordinance are met.
2. Bed and breakfast establishment provided that conditions of Section 51.03,
Subd. I.1 of this Ordinance are met.
3. Cemeteries, provided that:
a. The site accesses on a collector street.
b. Where abutting a residential zoning district, the periphery of the site is
screened from view in accordance with Section 51.03, Subd. B.7 of this
Ordinance.
c. The periphery of the site is fenced.
d. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
4. Commercial feedlots provided that:
a. All applicable rules of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency are
complied with.
b. Feedlot buildings for sheltering animals shall maintain a minimum setback
of one thousand (1,000) feet from any existing residential use.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-A District
5-2
c. Manure application stockpiles shall maintain a setback of one thousand
(1,000) feet from any existing residential use.
d. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
5. Commercial outdoor recreational areas limited to golf courses, driving ranges,
country clubs, tennis clubs, swimming pools provided that:
a. The principal use, function or activity is open and outdoor in character.
b. Not more than five (5) percent of the land area of the site shall be covered
by buildings or structures.
c. All buildings shall maintain a minimum setback of thirty (30) feet from any
lot lines.
d. Commercial activities limited to actual pro shops, restaurants, cafes,
taverns, equipment rental, banquet facilities, may be allowed as an
accessory use to the outdoor recreational use.
e. Where the use abuts a residential zoning district, the property is screened
and landscaped in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D of this
Ordinance.
f. Adequate parking and off-street loading is provided in compliance with
Section 51.03, Subd. E and F of this Ordinance. No parking or loading
area shall be located with thirty (30) feet of and adjoining residential
zoning district.
g. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are complied
with.
6. Commercial riding stables, dog kennels, animal hospitals with overnight care and
similar uses provided that:
a. Minimum lot size shall be ten (10) acres.
b. Any building in which animals are kept, whether roofed shelter or enclosed
structure, shall be located a distance of three hundred (300) feet of more
from any lot line.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-A District
5-3
c. The animals shall, at a minimum, be kept in an enclosed pen or corral of
sufficient height and strength to retain such animals. Said pen or corral
may not be located closer than one hundred (100) feet from a lot line.
d. All applicable Minnesota Pollution Control Agency rules are complied with.
e. All other applicable State and local regulations pertaining to nuisance,
health and safety conditions, etc. are complied with.
f. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
7. Farm buildings for keeping animals (new after July 1, 2006) within three hundred
(300) feet of an existing residence or residential platted lot, provided that:
a. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
8. Governmental and public regulated utility buildings and structures necessary for
the health, safety and general welfare of the community provided that:
a. When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property is
screened and landscaped in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of
this Ordinance.
b. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
9. Planned unit development as regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. J of this
Ordinance.
10. Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or community
centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior
high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches,
chapels, temples and synagogues provided that:
a. Side yards shall be thirty (30) feet.
b. Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
c. Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site or on lots
directly abutting or directly across a public street or alley to the principal
use in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance and that
such parking is adequately screened and landscaped from surrounding
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-A District
5-4
and abutting residential uses in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd.
D.10 of this Ordinance.
d. Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and
regulated where applicable by Section 51.03, Subd. F of this Ordinance.
e. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
Subd. E. Interim Uses. The following are interim uses in the R-A District:
(Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated in
Section 51.02, Subd. C of this Ordinance.)
1. Special home occupation provided that conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. H of
this Ordinance are met.
Subd. F. Uses by Administrative Permit. The following are uses allowed by an
administrative permit in the R-A District (based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. E of this Ordinance):
1. Personal wireless service antennas as secondary uses as regulated by Section
51.03, Subd. M of this Ordinance.
2. Permitted home occupations as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. H of this
Ordinance.
Subd. G. Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in an R-A District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Minimum Lot Area. Ten (10) gross acres with at least two (2) acres of
buildable land.
2. Minimum Lot Width. Three hundred (300) feet.
3. Minimum Lot Depth. None.
4. Setbacks.
a. Principal Building Setbacks.
1) Front Yard.
a) From a Local Street. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-A District
5-5
b) From a Collector or Arterial Street: Not less than forty (40)
feet.
2) Side Yard.
a) Interior. Not less than twenty (20) feet.
b) From a Local Street. No less than thirty (30) feet.
c) From a Collector or Arterial Street. Not less than forty (40)
feet.
3) Rear Yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
b. Accessory Building Setbacks. Accessory buildings shall comply with the
following setbacks:
1) Front Setback. No detached accessory building shall be located
in any front yard.
a) Accessory buildings and structures shall be constructed
within the buildable area of the lot as defined in Section
51.03, Subd. C.8 of this Ordinance, except as provided in
Section 51.03, Subd. C.3 of this Ordinance.
b) Accessory buildings that have one hundred twenty (120)
square feet or less of floor area and which do not require a
building permit may be allowed in the required rear yard not
less than five (5) feet from the rear lot line.
Subd. H. Building Requirements.
1. Height. No structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet. These regulations shall
not apply to barns, silos, or other farm buildings.
2. Building Type and Construction. Structures shall comply with requirements
of Section 51.03, Subd. C.3.a of this Ordinance.
3. Accessory Buildings/Structures. Accessory buildings/structures shall comply
with the requirements of Section 51.03, Subd. C.7 of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-A District
5-6
SECTION 51.06. R-E, SINGLE FAMILY ESTATE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Subd. A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-E, Single Family Estate Residential District
is to provide for larger, urban sewer lots in areas containing unique natural features and
amenities as a means of protecting the amenities and promoting quality housing.
Subd. B. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses in the R-E District:
1. Day care facilities, as defined by Section 51.02 of this Ordinance, licensed by the
State, and serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons.
2. Essential services.
3. Public parks and playgrounds.
4. Residential facilities, as defined by Section 51.02 of this Ordinance, licensed by
the State, and serving six (6) or fewer persons.
5. Single family dwellings.
Subd. C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory uses
in an R-E District:
1. Accessory buildings including garages, tool houses, sheds and similar buildings
for storage of domestic supplies and non-commercial recreational equipment, as
regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. C.8 of this Ordinance.
2. Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two (2) persons.
3. Fences as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. D.11 of this Ordinance
4. Non-commercial greenhouses and conservatories.
5. Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs three (3)
meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those
necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers,
ham radio transmitters and television receivers as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. M of this Ordinance.
6. Storage of recreational vehicles and equipment as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. D.9 of this Ordinance.
7. Swimming pools, sport courts and other recreational facilities which are operated
for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-E District
6-1
guests, as regulated by conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. C.7.d or Section
51.03, Subd. C.7.e of this Ordinance.
Subd. D. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses allowed in an R-E
District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.)
1. Accessory apartments provided that conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. I.3 of this
Ordinance are met.
2. Bed and breakfast establishments provided that conditions of Section 51.03,
Subd. I.1 of this Ordinance are met.
3. Commercial outdoor recreational areas limited to golf courses, driving ranges,
country clubs, tennis clubs, swimming pools provided that:
a. The principal use, function or activity is open and outdoor in character.
b. Not more than five (5) percent of the land area of the site shall be covered
by buildings or structures.
c. All buildings shall maintain a minimum setback of thirty (30) feet from any
lot lines.
d. Commercial activities limited to actual pro shops, restaurants, cafes,
taverns, equipment rental, banquet facilities, may be allowed as an
accessory use to the outdoor recreational use.
e. Where the use abuts a residential zoning district, the property is screened
and landscaped in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D of this
Ordinance.
f. Adequate parking and off-street loading is provided in compliance with
Section 51.03, Subd. E and F of this Ordinance. No parking or loading
area shall be located with thirty (30) feet of and adjoining residential
zoning district.
g. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are complied
with.
4. Governmental and public regulated utility buildings and structures necessary for
the health, safety and general welfare of the community provided that:
a. When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property is
screened and landscaped in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of
this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-E District
6-2
b. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
5. Planned unit developments as regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. J of this
Ordinance.
6. Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or community
centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior
high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches,
chapels, temples and synagogues provided that:
a. Side yards shall be double that required for the district, but no greater than
thirty (30) feet.
b. Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
c. Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site or on lots
directly abutting or directly across a public street or alley to the principal
use in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance and that
such parking is adequately screened and landscaped from surrounding
and abutting residential uses in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd.
D.10 of this Ordinance.
d. Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and
regulated where applicable by Section 51.03, Subd. F of this Ordinance.
e. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
Subd. E. Interim Uses. The following are interim uses in the R-E District:
(Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated in
Section 51.02, Subd. C of this Ordinance.)
1. Model homes and sales centers.
2. Special home occupations as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. H of this
Ordinance are met.
3. Temporary sales centers provided that conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. I.2 of
this Ordinance are met.
Subd. F. Uses by Administrative Permit. The following are uses allowed by an
administrative permit in the R-E District (based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. E of this Ordinance):
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-E District
6-3
1. Personal wireless service antennas as secondary uses as regulated by Section
51.03, Subd. M of this Ordinance.
2. Permitted home occupations as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. H of this
Ordinance.
Subd. G. Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in an R-E District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Minimum Lot Area. Twenty-two thousand (22,000) square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width. One hundred (100) feet.
3. Minimum Lot Depth. One hundred fifty (150) feet.
4. Setbacks.
a. Principal Building Setbacks.
1) Front Yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
2) Side Yard.
a) Interior. Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
b) From a Street. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
3) Rear Yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
b. Accessory Building Setbacks.
1) Front Setback. No detached accessory building shall be located
in any front yard.
2) Accessory buildings and structures shall be constructed within the
buildable area of the lot as defined in Section 51.03, Subd. C.8 of
this Ordinance, except as provided in Section 51.03, Subd. C.3 of
this Ordinance.
3) Accessory buildings that have one hundred twenty (120) square
feet or less of floor area and which do not require a building permit
may be allowed in the required rear yard not less than five (5) feet
from the rear lot line.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-E District
6-4
Subd. H. Building Requirements.
1. Height. No structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
2. Building Type and Construction. Structures shall comply with requirements
of Section 51.03, Subd. C.3.a of this Ordinance.
3. Accessory Buildings/Structures. Accessory buildings/structures shall comply
with the requirements of Section 51.03, Subd. C.7 of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-E District
6-5
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-E District
6-6
SECTION 51.07. R-1, SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Subd. A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-1, Single Family Residential District is to
provide large lots for low density single family detached residential dwelling units and
directly related, complementary uses.
Subd. B. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses in the R-1 District:
1. Day care facilities, as defined by Section 51.02 of this Ordinance, licensed by the
State, and serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons.
2. Essential services.
3. Public parks and playgrounds.
4. Residential facilities, as defined by Section 51.02 of this Ordinance, licensed by
the State, and serving six (6) or fewer persons.
5. Single family detached dwellings.
Subd. C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory uses
in an R-1 District:
1. Accessory buildings including garages, tool houses, sheds and similar buildings
for storage of domestic supplies and non-commercial recreational equipment, as
regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. C.8 of this Ordinance.
2. Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two (2) persons.
3. Fences as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. D.11 of this Ordinance
4. Non-commercial greenhouses and conservatories.
5. Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs three (3)
meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those
necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers,
ham radio transmitters and television receivers as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. M of this Ordinance.
6. Storage of recreational vehicles and equipment as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. D.9 of this Ordinance.
7. Swimming pools, sport courts and other recreational facilities which are operated
for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-1 District
7-1
guests, as regulated by conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. C.7.d or Section
51.03, Subd. C.7.e of this Ordinance.
Subd. D. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses allowed in an R-1
District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.)
1. Accessory apartments provided that conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. I.3 of this
Ordinance are met.
2. Bed and breakfast establishments provided that conditions of Section 51.03,
Subd. I.1 of this Ordinance are met.
3. Commercial outdoor recreational areas limited to golf courses, driving ranges,
country clubs, tennis clubs, swimming pools provided that:
a. The principal use, function or activity is open and outdoor in character.
b. Not more than five (5) percent of the land area of the site shall be covered
by buildings or structures.
c. All buildings shall maintain a minimum setback of thirty (30) feet from any
lot lines.
d. Commercial activities limited to actual pro shops, restaurants, cafes,
taverns, equipment rental, banquet facilities, may be allowed as an
accessory use to the outdoor recreational use.
e. Where the use abuts a residential zoning district, the property is screened
and landscaped in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D of this
Ordinance.
f. Adequate parking and off-street loading is provided in compliance with
Section 51.03, Subd. E and F of this Ordinance. No parking or loading
area shall be located with thirty (30) feet of and adjoining residential
zoning district.
g. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are complied
with.
4. Governmental and public regulated utility buildings and structures necessary for
the health, safety and general welfare of the community provided that:
a. When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property is
screened and landscaped in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of
this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-1 District
7-2
b. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
5. Planned unit developments as regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. J of this
Ordinance.
6. Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or community
centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior
high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches,
chapels, temples and synagogues provided that:
a. Side yard setbacks shall be thirty (30) feet.
b. Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
c. Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site or on lots
directly abutting or directly across a public street or alley to the principal
use in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance and that
such parking is adequately screened and landscaped from surrounding
and abutting residential uses in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd.
D.10 of this Ordinance.
d. Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and
regulated where applicable by Section 51.03, Subd. F of this Ordinance.
e. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
Subd. E. Interim Uses. The following are interim uses in the R-1 District: (Requires
a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated in Section
51.02, Subd. C of this Ordinance.)
1. Model homes and sales centers.
2. Special home occupations as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. H of this
Ordinance are met.
3. Temporary sales centers provided that conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. I.2 of
this Ordinance are met.
Subd. F. Uses by Administrative Permit. The following are uses allowed by an
administrative permit in the R-1 District (based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. E of this Ordinance):
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-1 District
7-3
1. Personal wireless service antennas as secondary uses as regulated by Section
51.03, Subd. M of this Ordinance.
2. Permitted home occupations as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. H of this
Ordinance.
Subd. G. Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in an R-1 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Minimum Lot Area.
a. Interior Lot. Fifteen thousand five hundred (15,500) square feet.
b. Corner Lot. Seventeen thousand five hundred (17,500) square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width.
a. Interior Lot. Ninety (90) feet.
b. Corner Lot. One hundred (100) feet.
3. Minimum Lot Depth. One hundred fifty (150) feet.
4. Setbacks.
a. Principal Building Setbacks.
1) Front Yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
2) Side Yard. Not less than ten (10) feet on each side nor less than
thirty (30) feet on a side yard abutting a public right-of-way.
3) Rear Yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
b. Accessory Building Setbacks.
1) Front Setback. No detached accessory building shall be located
in any front yard.
2) Accessory buildings and structures shall be constructed within the
buildable area of the lot as defined in Section 51.03, Subd. C.8 of
this Ordinance, except as provided in Section 51.03, Subd. C.3 of
this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-1 District
7-4
3) Accessory buildings that have one hundred twenty (120) square
feet or less of floor area and which do not require a building permit
may be allowed in the required rear yard not less than five (5) feet
from the rear lot line.
Subd. H. Building Requirements.
1. Height. No structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
2. Building Type and Construction. Structures shall comply with requirements
of Section 51.03, Subd. C.3.a of this Ordinance.
3. Accessory Buildings/Structures. Accessory buildings/structures shall comply
with the requirements of Section 51.03, Subd. C.7 of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-1 District
7-5
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-1 District
7-6
SECTION 51.08. R-2, SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Subd. A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-2, Single Family Residential District is to
provide for low density single family detached residential dwelling units and directly
related, complementary uses.
Subd. B. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses in the R-2 District:
1. Day care facilities, as defined by Section 51.02 of this Ordinance, licensed by the
State, and serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons.
2. Essential services.
3. Public parks and playgrounds.
4. Residential facilities, as defined by Section 51.02 of this Ordinance, licensed by
the State, and serving six (6) or fewer persons.
5. Single family detached dwellings.
Subd. C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory uses
in an R-2 District:
1. Accessory buildings including garages, tool houses, sheds and similar buildings
for storage of domestic supplies and non-commercial recreational equipment, as
regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. C.8 of this Ordinance.
2. Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two (2) persons.
3. Fences as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. D.11 of this Ordinance
4. Non-commercial greenhouses and conservatories.
5. Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs three (3)
meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those
necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers,
ham radio transmitters and television receivers as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. M of this Ordinance.
6. Storage of recreational vehicles and equipment as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. D.9 of this Ordinance.
7. Swimming pools, sport courts and other recreational facilities which are operated
for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-2 District
8-1
guests, as regulated by conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. C.7.d or Section
51.03, Subd. C.7.e of this Ordinance.
Subd. D. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses allowed in an R-2
District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.)
1. Accessory apartments provided that conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. I.3 of this
Ordinance are met.
2. Bed and breakfast establishments provided that conditions of Section 51.03,
Subd. I.1 of this Ordinance are met.
3. Commercial outdoor recreational areas limited to golf courses, driving ranges,
country clubs, tennis clubs, swimming pools provided that:
a. The principal use, function or activity is open and outdoor in character.
b. Not more than five (5) percent of the land area of the site shall be covered
by buildings or structures.
c. All buildings shall maintain a minimum setback of thirty (30) feet from any
lot lines.
d. Commercial activities limited to actual pro shops, restaurants, cafes,
taverns, equipment rental, banquet facilities, may be allowed as an
accessory use to the outdoor recreational use.
e. Where the use abuts a residential zoning district, the property is screened
and landscaped in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D of this
Ordinance.
f. Adequate parking and off-street loading is provided in compliance with
Section 51.03, Subd. E and F of this Ordinance. No parking or loading
area shall be located with thirty (30) feet of and adjoining residential
zoning district.
g. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are complied
with.
4. Governmental and public regulated utility buildings and structures necessary for
the health, safety and general welfare of the community provided that:
a. When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property is
screened and landscaped in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of
this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-2 District
8-2
b. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
5. Planned unit developments as regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. J of this
Ordinance.
6. Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or community
centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior
high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches,
chapels, temples and synagogues provided that:
a. Side yard setbacks shall be thirty (30) feet.
b. Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
c. Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site or on lots
directly abutting or directly across a public street or alley to the principal
use in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance and that
such parking is adequately screened and landscaped from surrounding
and abutting residential uses in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd.
D.10 of this Ordinance.
d. Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and
regulated where applicable by Section 51.03, Subd. F of this Ordinance.
e. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
Subd. E. Interim Uses. The following are interim uses in the R-2 District: (Requires
a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated in Section
51.02, Subd. C of this Ordinance.)
1. Model homes and sales centers.
2. Special home occupations as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. H of this
Ordinance are met.
3. Temporary sales centers provided that conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. I.2 of
this Ordinance are met.
Subd. F. Uses by Administrative Permit. The following are uses allowed by an
administrative permit in the R-2 District (based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. E of this Ordinance):
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-2 District
8-3
1. Personal wireless service antennas as secondary uses as regulated by Section
51.03, Subd. M of this Ordinance.
2. Permitted home occupations as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. H of this
Ordinance.
Subd. G. Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in an R-2 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Minimum Lot Area.
a. Interior Lot. Twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet.
b. Corner Lot. Thirteen thousand five hundred (13,500) square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width.
a. Interior Lot. Eighty (80) feet.
b. Corner Lot. One hundred (100) feet.
3. Minimum Lot Depth. One hundred thirty-five (135) feet. On double frontage
lots one hundred fifty-five (155) feet.
4. Setbacks.
a. Principal Building Setbacks.
1) Front Yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
2) Side Yard. Not less than ten (10) feet on each side nor less than
thirty (30) feet on a side yard abutting a public right-of-way.
3) Rear Yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
b. Accessory Building Setbacks.
1) Front Setback. No detached accessory building shall be located
in any front yard.
2) Accessory buildings and structures shall be constructed within the
buildable area of the lot as defined in Section 51.03, Subd. C.8 of
this Ordinance, except as provided in Section 51.03, Subd. C.3 of
this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-2 District
8-4
3) Accessory buildings that have one hundred twenty (120) square
feet or less of floor area and which do not require a building permit
may be allowed in the required rear yard not less than five (5) feet
from the rear lot line.
Subd. H. Building Requirements.
1. Height. No structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
2. Building Type and Construction. Structures shall comply with requirements
of Section 51.03, Subd. C.3.a of this Ordinance.
3. Accessory Buildings/Structures. Accessory buildings/structures shall comply
with the requirements of Section 51.03, Subd. C.7 of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-2 District
8-5
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-2 District
8-6
SECTION 51.09. R-3, SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Subd. A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-3, Single Family Residential District is to
provide for low density single family detached residential dwelling units and directly
related, complementary uses.
Subd. B. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses in the R-3 District:
1. Day care facilities, as defined by Section 51.02 of this Ordinance, licensed by the
State, and serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons.
2. Essential services.
3. Public parks and playgrounds.
4. Residential facilities, as defined by Section 51.02 of this Ordinance, licensed by
the State, and serving six (6) or fewer persons.
5. Single family detached dwellings.
Subd. C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory uses
in an R-3 District:
1. Accessory buildings including garages, tool houses, sheds and similar buildings
for storage of domestic supplies and non-commercial recreational equipment, as
regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. C.8 of this Ordinance.
2. Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two (2) persons.
3. Fences as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. D.11 of this Ordinance
4. Non-commercial greenhouses and conservatories.
5. Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs three (3)
meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those
necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers,
ham radio transmitters and television receivers as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. M of this Ordinance.
6. Storage of recreational vehicles and equipment as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. D.9 of this Ordinance.
7. Swimming pools, tennis courts and other recreational facilities which are
operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-3 District
9-1
and their guests as regulated by conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. C.7.d or
Section 51.03, Subd. C.7.e of this Ordinance.
Subd. D. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses allowed in an R-3
District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.)
1. Bed and breakfast establishments provided that conditions of Section 51.03,
Subd. I.1 of this Ordinance are met.
2. Governmental and public regulated utility buildings and structures necessary for
the health, safety and general welfare of the community provided that:
a. When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property is
screened and landscaped in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of
this Ordinance.
b. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
3. Planned unit developments as regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. J of this
Ordinance.
4. Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or community
centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior
high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches,
chapels, temples and synagogues provided that:
a. Side yard setbacks shall be thirty (30) feet.
b. Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
c. Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site or on lots
directly abutting or directly across a public street or alley to the principal
use in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance and that
such parking is adequately screened and landscaped from surrounding
and abutting residential uses in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd.
D.10 of this Ordinance.
d. Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and
regulated where applicable by Section 51.03, Subd. F of this Ordinance.
e. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-3 District
9-2
Subd. E. Interim Uses. The following are interim uses in the R-3 District: (Requires
a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated in Section
51.02, Subd. C of this Ordinance.)
1. Model homes and sales centers.
2. Special home occupations provided that conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. H of
this Ordinance are met.
3. Temporary sales centers provided that conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. I.2 of
this Ordinance are met.
Subd. F. Uses by Administrative Permit. The following are uses allowed by an
administrative permit in the R-3 District (based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. E of this Ordinance):
1. Personal wireless service antennas as secondary uses as regulated by Section
51.03, Subd. M of this Ordinance.
2. Permitted home occupations as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. H of this
Ordinance.
Subd. G. Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in an R-3 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Minimum Lot Area.
a. Interior Lot. Ten thousand five hundred (10,500) square feet.
b. Corner Lot. Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width.
a. Interior Lot. Seventy (70) feet.
b. Corner Lot. Ninety (90) feet.
3. Minimum Lot Depth. One hundred thirty-five (135) feet. On double frontage
lots, one hundred fifty-five (155) feet.
4. Setbacks.
a. Principal Building Setbacks.
1) Front Yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-3 District
9-3
2) Side Yard. Not less than ten (10) feet nor less than twenty (20) feet
on a side yard abutting a public right-of-way.
3) Rear Yard. Thirty (30) feet.
b. Accessory Building Setbacks. Accessory buildings shall comply with the
following setbacks:
1) Front Setback. No detached accessory building shall be located
in any front yard.
2) On lots platted prior to 1 July 1987:
(a) Side Yard Setback. Not less than five (5) feet on any side
yard abutting adjoining lots, nor less than thirty (30) feet on a
side yard abutting a street.
(b) Rear Yard Setback.
(1) Except as provided below, not less than fifteen (15)
feet from a rear lot line.
(2) Garages that are oriented on a lot so that the direction
of the vehicle access to the garage parallels the rear
lot line may be located not less than five (5) feet from
the lot line. This design is intended to prohibit direct
backing from the garage onto an alley.
(c) Accessory buildings that have one hundred twenty (120)
square feet or less floor area and which do not require a
building permit may be set back not less than five (5) feet
from the rear lot line.
3) On all lots platted subsequent to 1 July 1987:
(a) Accessory buildings and structures shall be constructed
within the buildable area of the lot as defined in Section
51.03, Subd. C.8 of this Ordinance, except as provided in
Section 51.03, Subd. C.3 of this Ordinance.
(b) Accessory buildings that have one hundred twenty (120)
square feet or less of floor area and which do not require a
building permit may be allowed in the required rear yard not
less than five (5) feet from the rear lot line.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-3 District
9-4
Subd. H. Building Requirements.
1. Height. No structure shall exceed two and one-half (2-1/2) stories, or thirty (30)
feet, whichever is least.
2. Building Type and Construction. Structures shall comply with requirements
of Section 51.03, Subd. C.3.a of this Ordinance.
3. Accessory Buildings/Structures. Accessory buildings/structures shall comply
with the requirements of Section 51.03, Subd. C.7 of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-3 District
9-5
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-3 District
9-6
SECTION 51.10. R-4, SINGLE AND TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Subd. A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-4, Single and Two Family Residential
District is to provide for low density single family detached residential dwelling units and
directly related, complementary uses.
Subd. B. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses in the R-4 District:
1. Day care facilities, as defined by Section 51.01, Subd. B of this Ordinance,
licensed by the State, and serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons.
2. Essential services.
3. Public parks and playgrounds.
4. Residential facilities, as defined by Section 51.01, Subd. B of this Ordinance,
licensed by the State, and serving six (6) or fewer persons.
5. Single family detached dwellings.
6. Two family dwellings.
Subd. C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory uses
in an R-4 District:
1. Accessory buildings including garages, tool houses, sheds and similar buildings
for storage of domestic supplies and non-commercial recreational equipment, as
regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. C.8 of this Ordinance.
2. Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than one (1) person.
3. Fences as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. D.11 of this Ordinance.
4. Non-commercial greenhouses and conservatories.
5. Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs three (3)
meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those
necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers,
ham radio transmitters and television receivers as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. M of this Ordinance.
6. Storage of recreational vehicles and equipment as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. D.9 of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-4 District
10-1
7. Swimming pools, sport courts and other recreational facilities which are operated
for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their
guests, as regulated by conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. C.7.d or Section
51.03, Subd. C.7.e of this Ordinance.
Subd. D. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses allowed in an R-4
District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.)
1. Bed and breakfast establishments provided that conditions of Section 51.03,
Subd. I.1 of this Ordinance are met.
2. Governmental and public regulated utility buildings and structures necessary for
the health, safety and general welfare of the community provided that:
a. When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property is
screened and landscaped in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of
this Ordinance.
b. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
3. Planned unit developments as regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. J of this
Ordinance.
4. Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or community
centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior
high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches,
chapels, temples and synagogues provided that:
a. Side yards shall be thirty (30) feet.
b. Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
c. Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site or on lots
directly abutting or directly across a public street or alley to the principal
use in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance and that
such parking is adequately screened and landscaped from surrounding
and abutting residential uses in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd.
D.10 of this Ordinance.
d. Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and
regulated where applicable by Section 51.03, Subd. F of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-4 District
10-2
e. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
Subd. E. Interim Uses. The following are interim uses in the R-4 District: (Requires
a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated in Section
51.02, Subd. C of this Ordinance.)
1. Model homes and sales centers.
2. Special home occupations provided that conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. H of
this Ordinance are met.
3. Temporary sales centers provided that conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. I.2 of
this Ordinance are met.
Subd. F. Uses by Administrative Permit. The following are uses allowed by an
administrative permit in the R-4 District (based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. E of this Ordinance):
1. Personal wireless service antennas as secondary uses as regulated by Section
51.03, Subd. M of this Ordinance.
2. Permitted home occupations as regulations by Section 51.03, Subd. H of this
Ordinance.
Subd. G. Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in an R-4 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Minimum Lot Area.
a. Single Family.
1) Interior Lot. Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
2) Corner Lot. Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
b. Two Family.
1) Interior Lot. Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
2) Corner Lot. Fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-4 District
10-3
a. Single Family.
1) Interior Lot. Seventy (70) feet.
2) Corner Lot. Ninety (90) feet.
b. Two Family.
1) Interior Lot. Eighty (80) feet.
2) Corner Lot. Ninety (90) feet.
3. Minimum Lot Depth. One hundred thirty-five (135) feet. On double frontage
lots, one hundred fifty-five (155) feet.
4. Setbacks.
a. Principal Building Setbacks.
1) Front Yard. Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
2) Side Yard.
a) Ten (10) foot setback is required except a five (5) foot side
yard interior setback is permitted for an attached garage.
b) Not less than twenty (20) feet on a side yard abutting a
public right-of-way.
3) Rear Yard. Thirty (30) feet.
b. Accessory Building Setbacks. Accessory buildings shall comply with the
following setbacks:
1) Front Setback. No detached accessory building shall be located
in any front yard.
2) On lots platted prior to 1 July 1987:
(a) Side Yard Setback. Not less than five (5) feet on any side
yard abutting adjoining lots, nor less than twenty (20) feet on
a side yard abutting a street.
(b) Rear Yard Setback.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-4 District
10-4
(1) Except as provided below, not less than fifteen (15)
feet from a rear lot line.
(2) Garages that are oriented on a lot so that the direction
of the vehicle access to the garage parallels the rear
lot line may be located not less than five (5) feet from
the lot line. This design is intended to prohibit direct
backing from the garage onto an alley.
(c) Accessory buildings that have one hundred twenty (120)
square feet or less floor area and which do not require a
building permit may be set back not less than five (5) feet
from the rear lot line.
3) On all lots platted subsequent to 1 July 1987:
(a) Accessory buildings and structures shall be constructed
within the buildable area of the lot as defined in Section
51.03, Subd. C.8 of this Ordinance, except as provided in
Section 51.03, Subd. C.3 of this Ordinance.
(b) Accessory buildings that have one hundred twenty (120)
square feet or less of floor area and which do not require a
building permit may be allowed in the required rear yard not
less than five (5) feet from the rear lot line.
Subd. H. Building Requirements.
1. Height. No structure shall exceed two and one-half (2-1/2) stories, or thirty (30)
feet, whichever is least.
2. Building Type.
a. Single Family. Structures shall comply with requirements of Section
51.03, Subd. C.3.a of this Ordinance.
b. Two Family. Structures shall comply with requirements of Section 51.03,
Subd. C.3.b of this Ordinance.
3. Accessory Buildings/Structures. Accessory buildings/structures shall comply
with the requirements of Section 51.03, Subd. C.7 of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-4 District
10-5
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-4 District
10-6
SECTION 51.11. R-5, SINGLE AND TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Subd. A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-5, Single and Two Family Residential
District is to provide for low density single family detached residential dwelling units and
directly related, complementary uses. The R-5 District establishes performance
standards to address conditions in the City’s older historic residential neighborhoods.
Subd. B. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses in the R-5 District:
1. Day care facilities, as defined by Section 51.01, Subd. B of this Ordinance,
licensed by the State, and serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons.
2. Essential services.
3. Public parks and playgrounds.
4. Residential facilities, as defined by Section 51.01, Subd. B of this Ordinance,
licensed by the State, and serving six (6) or fewer persons.
5. Single family detached dwellings.
6. Two family dwellings.
Subd. C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory uses
in an R-5 District:
1. Accessory buildings including garages, tool houses, sheds and similar buildings
for storage of domestic supplies and non-commercial recreational equipment, as
regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. C.8 of this Ordinance.
2. Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than one (1) person.
3. Fences as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. D.11 of this Ordinance.
4. Non-commercial greenhouses and conservatories.
5. Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs three (3)
meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those
necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers,
ham radio transmitters and television receivers as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. M of this Ordinance.
6. Storage recreational vehicles and equipment as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. D.9 of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-5 District
11-1
7. Swimming pools, sport courts and other recreational facilities which are operated
for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their
guests, as regulated by conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. C.7.d or Section
51.03, Subd. C.7.e of this Ordinance.
Subd. D. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses allowed in an R-5
District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.)
1. Bed and breakfast establishments provided that conditions of Section 51.03,
Subd. I.1 of this Ordinance are met.
2. Governmental and public regulated utility buildings and structures necessary for
the health, safety and general welfare of the community provided that:
a. When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property is
screened and landscaped in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of
this Ordinance.
b. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
3. Planned unit developments as regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. J of this
Ordinance.
4. Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or community
centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior
high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches,
chapels, temples and synagogues provided that:
a. Side yards shall be thirty (30) feet.
b. Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
c. Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site or on lots
directly abutting or directly across a public street or alley to the principal
use in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance and that
such parking is adequately screened and landscaped from surrounding
and abutting residential uses in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd.
D.10 of this Ordinance.
d. Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and
regulated where applicable by Section 51.03, Subd. F of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-5 District
11-2
e. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
Subd. E. Interim Uses. The following are interim uses in the R-5 District: (Requires
a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated in Section
51.02, Subd. C of this Ordinance.)
1. Model homes and sales centers.
2. Special home occupations provided that conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. H of
this Ordinance are met.
3. Temporary sales centers provided that conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. I.2 of
this Ordinance are met.
Subd. F. Uses by Administrative Permit. The following are uses allowed by an
administrative permit in the R-5 District (based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. E of this Ordinance):
1. Personal wireless service antennas as secondary uses as regulated by Section
51.03, Subd. M of this Ordinance.
2. Permitted home occupations as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. H of this
Ordinance.
Subd. G. Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in an R-5 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Minimum Lot Area.
a. Single Family:
1) Interior Lot: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
2) Corner Lot: Ten thousand eight hundred (10,800) square feet.
b. Two Family:
1) Interior Lot: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
2) Corner Lot: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-5 District
11-3
a. Single Family:
1) Interior Lot: Sixty-five (65) feet.
2) Corner Lot: Seventy (70) feet.
b. Two Family:
1) Interior Lot: Seventy-five (75) feet.
2) Corner Lot: Eighty (80) feet.
3. Minimum Lot Depth. One hundred twenty (120) feet.
4. Setbacks.
a. Principal Building Setbacks.
1) Front Yard. Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
2) Side Yard. Not less than five (5) feet. For side yard corner:
twenty (20) feet.
3) Rear Yard. Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
b. Accessory Building Setbacks. Accessory buildings shall comply with the
following setbacks:
1) Front Setback. No detached accessory building shall be located
in any front yard.
2) On lots platted prior to 1 July 1987:
(a) Side Yard Setback. Not less than five (5) feet on any side
yard abutting adjoining lots, nor less than twenty (20) feet on
a side yard abutting a street.
(b) Rear Yard Setback.
(1) Not less than five (5) feet.
(2) Except as provided below, accessory buildings taking
direct access from an alley, not less than fifteen (15)
feet from a rear lot line abutting an alley.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-5 District
11-4
(3) Garages that are oriented on a lot so that the direction
of the vehicle access to the garage parallels the rear
lot line may be located not less than five (5) feet from
the lot line. This design is intended to prohibit direct
backing from the garage onto an alley.
(c) Accessory buildings that have one hundred twenty (120)
square feet or less floor area and which do not require a
building permit may be set back not less than five (5) feet
from the rear lot line.
3) On all lots platted subsequent to 1 July 1987:
(a) Accessory buildings and structures shall be constructed
within the buildable area of the lot as defined in Section
51.03, Subd. C.8 of this Ordinance, except as provided in
Section 51.03, Subd. C.3 of this Ordinance.
(b) Accessory buildings that have one hundred twenty (120)
square feet or less of floor area and which do not require a
building permit may be allowed in the required rear yard not
less than five (5) feet from the rear lot line.
Subd. H. Building Requirements.
1. Height. No structure shall exceed two and one-half (2-1/2) stories, or thirty (30)
feet, whichever is least.
2. Building Type.
a. Single Family. Structures shall comply with requirements of Section
51.03, Subd. C.3.a of this Ordinance.
b. Two Family. Structures shall comply with requirements of Section 51.03,
Subd. C.3.b of this Ordinance.
3. Accessory Buildings/Structures. Accessory buildings/structures shall comply
with the requirements of Section 51.03, Subd. C.7 of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-5 District
11-5
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-5 District
11-6
SECTION 51.12. R-6, MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Subd. A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-6, Medium Density Residential District is to
provide for moderate density one and two unit dwellings and directly related,
complementary uses up to seven (7) units per acre.
Subd. B. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses in the R-6 District:
1. Essential services.
2. Public parks and playgrounds.
3. Residential facilities, as defined by Section 51.01 of this Ordinance, licensed by
the State and serving six (6) or fewer persons.
4. Day care facilities, as defined by Section 51.02 of this Ordinance, licensed by the
State, and serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons.
5. Single family dwellings.
6. Two family dwellings.
Subd. C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory uses
in an R-6 District:
1. Accessory buildings including garages, tool houses, sheds and similar buildings
for storage of domestic supplies and non-commercial recreational equipment, as
regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. C.8 of this Ordinance.
2. Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than one (1) person.
3. Fences as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. D.11 of this Ordinance.
4. Non-commercial greenhouses and conservatories.
5. Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs three (3)
meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those
necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers,
ham radio transmitters and television receivers as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. M of this Ordinance.
6. Storage of recreational vehicles and equipment as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. D.9 of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-6 District
12-1
7. Swimming pools, sport courts and other recreational facilities which are operated
for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their
guests, as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. C.7.d or Section 51.03, Subd. C.7.e
of this Ordinance.
Subd. D. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses allowed in an R-6
District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.)
1. Governmental and public regulated utility buildings and structures necessary for
the health, safety and general welfare of the community provided that:
a. When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property is
screened and landscaped in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of
this Ordinance.
b. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
2. Planned unit development residential, townhomes and quadraminiums as
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. J of this Ordinance.
3. Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or community
centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior
high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches,
chapels, temples and synagogues provided that:
a. Side yards shall be double that required for the district, but no greater than
thirty (30) feet.
b. Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
c. Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site or on lots
directly abutting or directly across a public street or alley to the principal
use in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance and that
such parking is adequately screened and landscaped from surrounding
and abutting residential uses in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd.
D.10 of this Ordinance.
d. Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and
regulated where applicable by Section 51.03, Subd. F of this Ordinance.
e. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-6 District
12-2
Subd. E. Interim Uses. The following are interim uses in the R-6 District: (Requires
a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated in Section
51.02, Subd. C of this Ordinance.)
1. Model homes and sales centers.
2. Special home occupations provided that conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. H of
this Ordinance are met.
3. Temporary sales centers provided that conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. I.2 of
this Ordinance are met.
Subd. F. Uses by Administrative Permit. The following are uses allowed by an
administrative permit in the R-6 District (based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. E of this Ordinance):
1. Personal wireless service antennas as secondary uses as regulated by Section
51.03, Subd. M of this Ordinance.
2. Permitted home occupations as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. H of this
Ordinance.
Subd. G. Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in an R-6 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Minimum Lot Area Per Unit.
a. Single Family:
1) Interior Lot: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet per unit.
2) Corner Lot: Ten thousand eight hundred (10,800) square feet per
unit.
b. Two Family:
1) Interior Lot: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet base lot; six
thousand (6,000) square feet per unit.
2) Corner Lot: Fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet base lot;
seven thousand (7,000) square feet per unit.
c. Townhouse or Quadraminium: Six thousand (6,000) square feet per unit.
2. Minimum Lot Width Per Unit.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-6 District
12-3
a. Single Family:
1) Interior Lot: Seventy (70) feet per unit.
2) Corner Lot: Eighty (80) feet per unit.
b. Two Family:
1) Interior Lot: Eighty (80) feet base lot; forty (40) feet per unit.
2) Corner Lot: Ninety (90) feet base lot; forty-five (45) feet per unit.
c. Townhouse or Quadraminium:
1) Base Lot: Not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet.
2) Unit Lot: Not less than twenty-four (24) feet per unit.
3. Minimum Lot Depth.
a. Single Family: One hundred thirty-five (135) feet.
b. Two Family: One hundred thirty-five (135) feet.
c. All Other Uses: One hundred thirty-five (135) feet.
d. Double Frontage Lots: One hundred fifty-five (155) feet.
4. Setbacks.
a. Principal Building Setbacks.
1) Front Yard. Twenty-five (25) foot setbacks are required except a
twenty (20) foot setback is required along public rights-of-way.
2) Side Yard.
a) Single or Two Family Dwelling: Not less than ten (10) feet,
nor less than twenty (20) feet on a side yard abutting a
street.
b) Townhouse or Quadraminium: Not less than fifteen (15)
feet from base lot line, nor less than thirty (30) feet on a side
yard abutting a street.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-6 District
12-4
3) Rear Yard. Twenty-five (25) feet.
4) Zero Lot Line. Side yard setback requirements shall not be applied
to a common wall of a two family, townhouse, quadraminium, or
multiple family dwelling unit.
b. Accessory Building Setbacks. Accessory buildings shall comply with the
following setbacks:
1) Front Setback. No detached accessory building shall be located
in any front yard.
2) On lots platted prior to 1 July 1987:
(a) Side Yard Setback. Not less than five (5) feet on any side
yard abutting adjoining lots, nor less than thirty (30) feet on a
side yard abutting a street.
(b) Rear Yard Setback.
(1) Except as provided below, not less than fifteen (15)
feet from a rear lot line.
(2) Garages that are oriented on a lot so that the direction
of the vehicle access to the garage parallels the rear
lot line may be located not less than five (5) feet from
the lot line. This design is intended to prohibit direct
backing from the garage onto an alley.
(c) Accessory buildings that have one hundred twenty (120)
square feet or less floor area and which do not require a
building permit may be set back not less than five (5) feet
from the rear lot line.
3) On all lots platted subsequent to 1 July 1987:
(a) Accessory buildings and structures shall be constructed
within the buildable area of the lot as defined in Section
51.03, Subd. C.8 of this Ordinance, except as provided in
Section 51.03, Subd. C.3 of this Ordinance.
(b) Accessory buildings that have one hundred twenty (120)
square feet or less of floor area and which do not require a
building permit may be allowed in the required rear yard not
less than five (5) feet from the rear lot line.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-6 District
12-5
Subd. H. Building Requirements.
1. Height. No structure shall exceed two and one-half (2-1/2) stories, or thirty-five
(35) feet, whichever is least.
2. Building Type.
a. Single Family. Structures shall comply with requirements of Section
51.03, Subd. C.3.a of this Ordinance.
b. Two Family, Townhome and Quadraminiums. Structures shall comply
with requirements of Section 51.03, Subd. C.3.b of this Ordinance.
3. Accessory Buildings/Structures. Accessory buildings/structures shall comply
with the requirements of Section 51.03, Subd. C.7 of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-6 District
12-6
SECTION 51.13. R-7, MEDIUM TO HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Subd. A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-7, Medium to High Density Residential
District is to provide a greater variety in housing types by allowing medium density
residential development at an overall density ranging from eight (8) to fourteen (14)
units per net acre.
Subd. B. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses in the R-7 District:
1. Day care facilities, as defined by Section 51.02 of this Ordinance, licensed by the
State, and serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons.
2. Essential services.
3. Multiple family dwellings containing eight (8) or less dwelling units.
4. Public parks and playgrounds.
5. Residential facility, as defined by Section 51.01 of this Ordinance, licensed by the
State and serving six (6) or fewer persons.
6. Two family dwellings.
Subd. C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory uses
in an R-7 District:
1. Accessory buildings including garages, tool houses, sheds and similar buildings
for storage of domestic supplies and non-commercial recreational equipment, as
regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. C.8 of this Ordinance.
2. Fences as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. D.11 of this Ordinance.
3. Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs three (3)
meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those
necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers,
ham radio transmitters and television receivers as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. M of this Ordinance.
4. Storage of recreational vehicles and equipment as regulated by Section 51.03,
D.9 of this Ordinance.
5. Swimming pools, sport courts and other recreational facilities which are operated
for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their
guests, as regulated by conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. C.7.d or Section
51.03, Subd. C.7.e of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-7 District
13-1
Subd. D. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses allowed in an R-7
District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.)
1. Governmental and public regulated utility buildings and structures necessary for
the health, safety and general welfare of the community provided that:
a. When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property is
screened and landscaped in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of
this Ordinance.
b. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
2. Planned unit development residential, townhomes and quadraminiums as
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. J of this Ordinance.
3. Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or community
centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior
high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches,
chapels, temples and synagogues provided that:
a. Side yards shall be double that required for the district, but no greater than
thirty (30) feet.
b. Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
c. Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site or on lots
directly abutting or directly across a public street or alley to the principal
use in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance and that
such parking is adequately screened and landscaped from surrounding
and abutting residential uses in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd.
D.10 of this Ordinance.
d. Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and
regulated where applicable by Section 51.03, Subd. F of this Ordinance.
e. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
Subd. E. Interim Uses. The following are interim uses in the R-7 District: (Requires
a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated in Section
51.02, Subd. C of this Ordinance.)
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-7 District
13-2
1. Model homes and sales centers.
2. Temporary sales centers provided that conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. I.2 of
this Ordinance are met.
Subd. F. Uses by Administrative Permit. The following are uses allowed by an
administrative permit in the R-7 District (based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. E of this Ordinance):
1. Personal wireless service antennas as secondary uses as regulated by Section
51.03, Subd. M of this Ordinance.
2. Permitted home occupations as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. H of this
Ordinance.
Subd. G. Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in an R-7 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Minimum Lot Area Per Unit.
a. Two Family: Five thousand (5,000) square feet per unit.
b. Townhouse or Quadraminium: Five thousand (5,000) square feet per unit.
c. Multiple Family: Three thousand (3,000) square feet per unit.
2. Minimum Lot Width.
a. Two Family: Seventy-five (75) feet.
b. Townhouse or Quadraminium:
1) Base Lot: Not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet.
2) Unit Lot: Not less than twenty-four (24) feet per unit.
c. Multiple Family: One hundred twenty (120) feet base lot.
3. Setbacks.
a. Principal Building Setbacks.
1) Front Yard. Twenty-five (25) from a private street feet except thirty
(30) feet when fronting on a public street.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-7 District
13-3
2) Side Yard.
a) Two Family Dwelling: Not less than ten (10) feet, nor less
than thirty (30) feet on a side yard abutting a street.
b) All Other Dwellings: Not less than fifteen (15) feet, nor less
than thirty (30) feet on a side yard abutting a street.
3) Rear Yard. Twenty-five (25) feet.
4) Zero Lot Line. Side yard setback requirements shall not be applied
to common walls of two family, townhome, quadraminium, or
multiple family dwellings.
b. Accessory Building Setbacks. Accessory buildings shall comply with the
following setbacks:
1) Front Setback. No detached accessory building shall be located
in any front yard.
2) Accessory buildings and structures shall be constructed within the
buildable area of the lot as defined in Section 51.03, Subd. C.8 of
this Ordinance, except as provided in Section 51.03, Subd. C.3 of
this Ordinance.
3) Accessory buildings that have one hundred twenty (120) square
feet or less of floor area and which do not require a building permit
may be allowed in the required rear yard not less than five (5) feet
from the rear lot line.
Subd. H. Building Requirements.
1. Height. No structure shall exceed two and one-half (2-1/2) stories, or thirty-five
(35) feet, whichever is least.
2. Building Type.
a. Single Family. Structures shall comply with requirements of Section
51.03, Subd. C.3.a of this Ordinance.
b. Two Family, Townhome and Quadraminiums. Structures shall comply
with requirements of Section 51.03, Subd. C.3.b of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-7 District
13-4
c. Multiple Family. Structures shall comply with requirements of Section
51.03, Subd. C.3.c of this Ordinance.
3. Accessory Buildings/Structures. Accessory buildings/structures shall comply
with the requirements of Section 51.03, Subd. C.7 of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-7 District
13-5
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-7 District
13-6
SECTION 51.14. R-8, HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Subd. A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-8, High Density Residential District is to
provide for areas in which higher density housing in multiple family structures at an
overall density at over fourteen (14) units per net acre.
Subd. B. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses in the R-8 District:
1. Essential services.
2. Multiple family dwellings.
3. Public parks and playgrounds.
Subd. C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory uses
in an R-8 District:
1. Accessory buildings including garages, tool houses, sheds and similar buildings
for storage of domestic supplies and non-commercial recreational equipment, as
regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. C.8 of this Ordinance.
2. Fences as regulated in Section 51.03, Subd. D.11 of this Ordinance.
3. Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs three (3)
meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those
necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers,
ham radio transmitters and television receivers as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. M of this Ordinance.
4. Storage of recreational vehicles and equipment as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. D.9 of this Ordinance.
5. Swimming pools, sport courts and other recreational facilities which are operated
for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their
guests, as regulated by conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. C.7.d or Section
51.03, Subd. C.7.e of this Ordinance.
Subd. D. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses allowed in an R-8
District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.)
1. Elderly (senior citizen) housing provided that:
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-8 District
14-1
a. Not more than twenty (20) percent of the occupants may be persons fiftyfive
(55) years of age or under (spouse of a person over fifty-five (55)
years of age or caretakers, etc.).
b. To continue to qualify for the elderly housing classification, the owner or
agency shall annually file with the City Clerk and the Zoning Administrator
a certified copy of a monthly resume of occupants of such a multiple
dwelling, listing the number of tenants by age and clearly identifying and
setting forth the relationship of all occupants sixty (60) years of age or
under to qualified tenants, or to the building.
c. There is adequate off-street parking in compliance with Section 51.03,
Subd. E of this Ordinance.
d. One (1) off-street loading space in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. F
of this Ordinance.
e. Parking areas are screened and landscaped from view of surrounding and
abutting residential districts in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. B.10
of this Ordinance.
f. The site of the principal use and its related parking is served by an arterial
or collector street.
g. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. N of this Ordinance.
h. Elevator service is provided to each floor level.
i. Usable open space as defined in Section 51.02 of this Ordinance at a
minimum is equal to twenty (20) percent of the gross lot area.
j. The provision of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
2. Governmental and public regulated utility buildings and structures necessary for
the health, safety and general welfare of the community provided that:
a. When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property is
screened and landscaped in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of
this Ordinance.
b. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-8 District
14-2
3. Multiple family density bonus. Except for senior housing, multiple family housing
containing ten (10) units or more may pursue a reduction up to twenty (20)
percent of the required lot area per unit based upon the following bonus features
and square foot reductions:
Square Foot
Bonus Feature Reduction Per Unit
a. Construction. Durable exterior wall finishes 300 square feet
consisting of glass, brick, stone or stucco on
up to seventy (70) percent of wall face.
b. Underground Parking. One (1) space per 300 square feet
unit of the required free parking is underground
or within principle structure (not including
attached or detached garages).
c. Recreation, Indoor. Indoor recreation and 100 square feet
social rooms equal to a minimum of twentyfive
(25) square feet per unit or seven hundred
fifty (750) square feet total, whichever is greater.
4. Planned unit development residential, townhomes and quadraminiums as
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. J of this Ordinance.
5. Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or community
centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior
high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches,
chapels, temples and synagogues provided that:
a. Side yards shall be double that required for the district, but no greater than
thirty (30) feet.
b. Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
c. Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site or on lots
directly abutting or directly across a public street or alley to the principal
use in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance and that
such parking is adequately screened and landscaped from surrounding
and abutting residential uses in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd.
D.10 of this Ordinance.
d. Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and
regulated where applicable by Section 51.03, Subd. F of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-8 District
14-3
e. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
6. Residential facilities or day care facilities, as defined by Section 51.01, Subd. B
of this Ordinance, licensed by the State, and serving sixteen (16) or fewer
persons, provided that the provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this
Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met.
Subd. E. Interim Uses. The following are interim uses in the R-8 District: (Requires
a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated in Section
51.02, Subd. C of this Ordinance.)
1. Model homes and sales centers.
2. Temporary sales centers provided that conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. I.2 of
this Ordinance are met.
Subd. F. Uses by Administrative Permit. The following are uses allowed by an
administrative permit in the R-8 District (based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. E of this Ordinance):
1. Personal wireless service antennas as secondary uses as regulated by Section
51.03, Subd. M of this Ordinance.
2. Permitted home occupations as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. H of this
Ordinance.
Subd. G. Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in an R-8 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Minimum Lot Area Per unit.
a. Townhouse, Quadraminium: Four thousand (4,000) square feet per unit.
b. Multiple Family: Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet per unit.
c. Elderly (Senior Citizen) Housing: One thousand (1,000) square feet per
unit.
2. Minimum Lot Width Per Unit.
a. Townhome/Quadraminium.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-8 District
14-4
1) Base Lot: Not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet.
2) Unit Lot: Not less than twenty-four (24) feet per unit.
b. Multiple Family. One hundred twenty (120) feet.
3. Minimum Lot Depth. None.
4. Setbacks.
a. Principal Building Setbacks from Base Lot.
1) Front Yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
2) Side Yard. Not less than fifteen (15) feet, nor less than thirty (30)
feet on a side yard abutting a street.
3) Rear Yard. Twenty-five (25) feet.
4) Zero Lot Line. Side yard setback requirements shall not be applied
to common walls of two family, townhome, quadraminium, or
multiple family dwellings.
b. Accessory Building Setbacks. Accessory buildings shall comply with the
following setbacks:
1) Front Setback. No detached accessory building shall be located
in any front yard.
2) Accessory buildings and structures shall be constructed within the
buildable area of the lot as defined in Section 51.03, Subd. C.8 of
this Ordinance, except as provided in Section 51.03, Subd. C.3 of
this Ordinance.
3) Accessory buildings that have one hundred twenty (120) square
feet or less of floor area and which do not require a building permit
may be allowed in the required rear yard not less than five (5) feet
from the rear lot line.
Subd. H. Building Requirements.
1. Height. No structure shall exceed three (3) stories, or thirty-six (36) feet,
whichever is least, however, building heights in excess of the prescribed
standard may be permitted through a conditional use permit, provided that:
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-8 District
14-5
a. The site is capable of accommodating any increased intensity of use.
b. Any increased intensity of use does not cause an increase in traffic
volumes beyond the capacity of the surrounding streets.
c. Public utilities and services are adequate.
d. The front and side yard setbacks shall be increased one (1) foot for every
three (3) feet of height in excess of three (3) stories or thirty-six (36) feet,
whichever is least.
e. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily complied with.
2. Building Type. Structures shall comply with requirements of Section 51.03,
Subd. C.3.b or Subd. C.3.c of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-8 District
14-6
SECTION 51.15. R-B, RESIDENTIAL/BUSINESS DISTRICT
Subd. A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-B, Residential/Business District is to
provide for a transition in land use from residential to low intensity business and allows
for the intermixing of such uses.
Subd. B. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses in the R-B District:
1. Essential services.
2. Multiple family dwellings.
3. Public parks and playgrounds.
Subd. C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory uses
in an R-B District:
1. Accessory buildings including garages, tool houses, sheds and similar buildings
for storage of domestic supplies and non-commercial recreational equipment, as
regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. C.8 of this Ordinance.
2. Fences as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. D.11 of this Ordinance.
3. Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs three (3)
meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those
necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers,
ham radio transmitters and television receivers as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. M of this Ordinance.
4. Storage of recreational vehicles and equipment as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. D.9 of this Ordinance.
5. Swimming pools, sport courts and other recreational facilities which are operated
for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their
guests, as regulated by conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. C.7.e or Section
51.03, Subd. C.7.e of this Ordinance.
Subd. D. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses allowed in an R-B
District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.)
1. Buildings combining residential and non-residential uses allowed in this district,
provided:
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-B District
15-1
a. Commercial use shall be located at the street level floor of the principal
building.
b. The residential and non-residential uses shall not conflict in any manner.
c. The residential building standards as required by this district are met.
d. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
2. Elderly (senior citizen) housing, provided that:
a. Not more than twenty (20) percent of the occupants may be persons fiftyfive
(55) years of age or under (spouse of a person over fifty-five (55)
years of age or caretakers, etc.).
b. To continue to qualify for the elderly housing classification, the owner or
agency shall annually file with the City Clerk and the Zoning Administrator
a certified copy of a monthly resume of occupants of such a multiple
dwelling, listing the number of tenants by age and clearly identifying and
setting forth the relationship of all occupants sixty (60) years of age or
under to qualified tenants, or to the building.
c. There is adequate off-street parking in compliance with Section 51.03,
Subd. E of this Ordinance.
d. One (1) off-street loading space in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. F
of this Ordinance.
e. Parking areas are screened and landscaped from view of surrounding and
abutting residential districts in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. B.10
of this Ordinance.
f. The site of the principal use and its related parking is served by an arterial
or collector street.
g. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with Section N of this Ordinance.
h. Elevator service is provided to each floor level.
i. Usable open space as defined in Section 51.02 of this Ordinance at a
minimum is equal to twenty (20) percent of the gross lot area.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-B District
15-2
j. The site of the main entrance of the principal use is within four hundred
(400) feet of commercial shopping development or adequate provision for
access to such facilities is provided,
k. The provision of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
3. Governmental and public regulated utility buildings and structures necessary for
the health, safety and general welfare of the community provided that:
a. When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property is
screened and landscaped in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of
this Ordinance.
b. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
4. Multiple family density bonus. Except for senior housing, multiple family housing
containing ten (10) units or more may pursue a reduction up to twenty (20)
percent of the required lot area per unit based upon the following bonus features
and square foot reductions:
Square Foot
Bonus Feature Reduction Per Unit
a. Construction. Durable exterior wall finishes 300 square feet
consisting of glass, brick, stone or stucco on
up to seventy (70) percent of wall face.
b. Underground Parking. One (1) space per 300 square feet
unit of the required free parking is underground
or within principle structure (not including
attached or detached garages).
c. Recreation, Indoor. Indoor recreation and 100 square feet
social rooms equal to a minimum of twentyfive
(25) square feet per unit or seven hundred
fifty (750) square feet total, whichever is greater.
5. Office business-clinical, office business-general, veterinary clinics (not including
outside kennels), personal services, and funeral homes and mortuaries, provided
that:
a. The site and related parking and service entrances are served by an
arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic
which will be generated.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-B District
15-3
b. Adequate off-street parking is provided in compliance with Section 51.03,
Subd. E of this Ordinance.
c. Adequate off-street loading is provided in compliance with Section 51.03,
Subd. F of this Ordinance.
d. Vehicular entrances to parking or service areas shall create a minimum of
conflict with through traffic movement.
e. When abutting an R-A, R-E, R-1, or R-2 District, a buffer area with
screening and landscaping in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10
of this Ordinance shall be provided.
f. All signs and information or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with Section N of this Ordinance.
g. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
6. Nursing homes and similar group housing, but not including hospitals,
sanitariums or similar institutions, provided that:
a. Side yards are double the minimum requirements established for this
district and are screened in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. B.7 of
this Ordinance.
b. Only the rear yard shall be used for play or recreational areas. Said area
shall be fenced and controlled and screened in compliance with Section
51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
c. The site shall be served by an arterial or collector street of sufficient
capacity to accommodate traffic which will be generated.
d. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with Section N of this Ordinance.
e. All State laws and statutes governing such use are strictly adhered to and
all required operating permits are secured.
f. Adequate off-street parking is provided in compliance with Section 51.03,
Subd. E of this Ordinance.
g. One (1) off-street loading space in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. F
of this Ordinance is provided.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-B District
15-4
h. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily et.
7. Planned unit developments residential, townhomes and quadraminiums as
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. J of this Ordinance.
8. Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or community
centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior
high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches,
chapels, temples and synagogues provided that:
a. Side yards shall be double that required for the district, but no greater than
thirty (30) feet.
b. Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
c. Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site or on lots
directly abutting or directly across a public street or alley to the principal
use in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance and that
such parking is adequately screened and landscaped from surrounding
and abutting residential uses in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd.
D.10 of this Ordinance.
d. Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and
regulated where applicable by Section 51.03, Subd. F of this Ordinance.
e. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
9. Residential facilities or day care facilities, as defined by Section 51.01, Subd. B
of this Ordinance, licensed by the State, and serving sixteen (16) or fewer
persons, provided that the provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this
Ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met.
10. Retail commercial activities, provided that:
a. Merchandise is sold at retail.
b. The retail activity shall not occupy more than fifteen (15) percent of the
gross floor area of the principal building.
c. The retail activity is located on the street level floor of the principal
building.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-B District
15-5
d. No directly or indirectly illuminated sign or sign in excess of ten (10)
square feet identifying the name of the business shall be visible from the
outside of the building.
e. All signage and informational or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. N of this Ordinance.
f. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
Subd. E. Interim Uses. The following are interim uses in the R-B District:
(Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated in
Section 51.02, Subd. C of this Ordinance.)
1. Temporary sales centers provided that conditions of Section 51.03, Subd. I.2 of
this Ordinance are met.
Subd. F. Uses by Administrative Permit. The following are uses allowed by an
administrative permit in the R-B District (based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. E of this Ordinance):
1. Personal wireless service antennas as secondary uses as regulated by Section
51.03, Subd. M of this Ordinance.
2. Permitted home occupations as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. N of this
Ordinance.
Subd. G. Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in an R-B District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Minimum Lot Area.
a. Townhome, Quadraminiums: Four thousand (4,000) square feet per unit.
b. Multiple Family: Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet per unit.
c. Elderly (Senior Citizen) Housing: One thousand (1,000) square feet per
unit.
d. All Other Uses: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet base lot.
2. Minimum Lot Width.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-B District
15-6
a. Townhome, Quadraminium:
1) Base Lot: One hundred twenty (120) feet.
2) Unit Lot: Twenty-four (24) feet per unit.
b. Multiple Family/Elderly Housing: One hundred twenty (120) feet.
c. Other Uses: One hundred (100) feet.
3. Minimum Lot Depth. One hundred twenty (120) feet.
4. Setbacks.
a. Principal Building Setbacks.
1) Front Yard. Not less than twenty (25) feet.
2) Side Yard: Not less than fifteen (15) feet, nor less than thirty (30)
feet on a side yard abutting a street.
3) Rear Yard. Not less than twenty-five (25) feet. Not less than thirtyfive
(35) feet for a non-residential use on a rear yard abutting a
single family residential zoning district.
4) Zero Lot Line. Side yard setback requirements shall not be applied
to common walls of two family, townhome, quadraminium, or
multiple family dwellings.
b. Accessory Building Setbacks. Accessory buildings shall comply with the
following setbacks:
1) Front Setback. No detached accessory building shall be located
in any front yard.
2) On lots platted prior to 1 July 1987:
(a) Side Yard Setback. Not less than five (5) feet on any side
yard abutting adjoining lots, nor less than thirty (30) feet on a
side yard abutting a street.
(b) Rear Yard Setback.
(1) Except as provided below, not less than fifteen (15)
feet from a rear lot line.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-B District
15-7
(2) Garages that are oriented on a lot so that the direction
of the vehicle access to the garage parallels the rear
lot line may be located not less than five (5) feet from
the lot line. This design is intended to prohibit direct
backing from the garage onto an alley.
(c) Accessory buildings that have one hundred twenty (120)
square feet or less floor area and which do not require a
building permit may be set back not less than five (5) feet
from the rear lot line.
3) On all lots platted subsequent to 1 July 1987:
(a) Accessory buildings and structures shall be constructed
within the buildable area of the lot as defined in Section
51.03, Subd. C.8 of this Ordinance, except as provided in
Section 51.03, Subd. C.3 of this Ordinance.
(b) Accessory buildings that have one hundred twenty (120)
square feet or less of floor area and which do not require a
building permit may be allowed in the required rear yard not
less than five (5) feet from the rear lot line.
Subd. H. Building Requirements.
1. Height. No structure shall exceed three (3) stories, or thirty-six (36) feet,
whichever is least.
2. Building Type.
a. Townhomes and quadraminiums shall comply with regulations set forth in
Section 51.03, Subd. C.3.b of this Ordinance.
b. Multiple family shall comply with regulations set forth in Section 51.03,
Subd. C.3.c of this Ordinance.
c. Elderly (senior citizen) housing shall comply with regulations set forth in
Section 51.03, Subd. C.3.c.
d. Commercial shall comply with regulations set forth in Section 51.03, Subd.
C.3.d of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance R-B District
15-8
SECTION 51.20. B-1, NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT
Subd. A. Purpose. The purpose of the B-1, Neighborhood Business District is to
provide for the establishment of local centers of convenient, limited office, retail or
service outlets which deal directly with the customer for whom the goods or services are
furnished. These centers are to provide services and goods only for the surrounding
neighborhoods and are not intended to draw customers from the entire community.
Subd. B. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses in the B-1 District:
1. Governmental or public buildings, utilities and/or structures necessary for the
health, safety, and general welfare of the City.
2. Office business – clinic.
3. Office business – general.
4. Personal services (subject to any licensing requirements of City Code, County or
State).
5. Prepared food services: delivery and/or take out only.
6. Retail businesses without drive-through service facilities.
7. Service business – on-site without drive-through service facilities.
8. Sexually oriented uses – accessory as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. L of
this Ordinance.
Subd. C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory uses
in an B-1 District:
1. Commercial accessory buildings provided that they do not exceed thirty (30)
percent of the gross floor space of the principal building.
2. Fences, as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. D.11 of this Ordinance.
3. Off-street loading as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. F of this Ordinance.
4. Off-street parking as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance, but
not including semi-trailer trucks except as designated areas not to exceed four
(4) hours.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-1 District
20-1
5. Outside services, sales, and equipment rental accessory to the principal use and
limited in area to fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area of the principal
building or fifteen (15) percent of a tenant bay if it is a multiple tenant building.
6. Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs three (3)
meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those
necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers,
ham radio transmitters and television receivers as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. M of this Ordinance.
7. Signs as regulated by the Section 51.03, Subd. N of this Ordinance.
Subd. D. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses allowed in an B-1
District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.)
1. Commercial day care facilities provided that:
a. All requirements of the Minnesota Department of Health and Human
Services, as may be amended, are satisfactorily met and the structure and
operation is licensed accordingly.
b. Screening is provided along property lines that adjoin a residential zoning
district. Such required fencing and screening shall be in compliance with
the applicable provisions of Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
c. Adequate off-street parking is provided in a location separated from any
outdoor play area(s).
d. Outdoor play areas shall be fenced.
2. Fitness center limited to two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area or
less provided that adequate off-street parking and off-street loading is provided.
3. Motor fuel stations provided that:
a. Installation is in accordance with State and City standards. Additionally,
adequate space shall be provided to access fuel pumps and allow
maneuverability around the pumps. Underground fuel storage tanks are
to be positioned to allow adequate access by motor fuel transports and
unloading operations which do not conflict with circulation, access and
other activities on the site. Fuel pumps shall be installed on pump islands.
b. A minimum lot area of one and one-quarter (1 ¼) acres and minimum lot
frontage of one hundred fifty (150) feet. If the canopy is attached to the
principal structure, the minimum lot size may be reduced to one acre. The
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-1 District
20-2
City Council may exempt previously developed or previously platted
property from this requirement provided that the site is capable of
adequately and safely handling all activities and required facilities.
c. Architectural standards are compliant with the required commercial design
construction standards of Section 51.20, Subd. H.3.
d. A protective canopy structure may be located over the pump island(s) as
an accessory structure. The canopy shall meet the following performance
standards:
1) The edge of the canopy shall be twenty (20) feet or more from the
front and/or side lot line, provided that adequate traffic visibility both
on-site and off-site is maintained.
2) The canopy shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height and must
provide fourteen (14) feet of clearance to accommodate a semitrailer
truck passing underneath.
3) The canopy fascia shall not exceed three (3) feet in vertical height.
4) Canopy lighting shall consist of canister spotlights recessed into the
canopy. No portion of the light source or fixture may extend below
the bottom face of the canopy. Total canopy illumination may not
exceed one hundred fifteen (115) foot candles below the canopy at
ground level. The fascia of the canopy shall not be illuminated.
5) The architectural design, colors, and character of the canopy shall
be consistent with the principal building on the site.
6) Signage may be allowed on a detached canopy in lieu of wall
signage on the principal structure, provided that:
a) The individual canopy sign does not exceed more than
twenty (20) percent of the canopy façade facing a public
right-of-way.
b) The canopy fascia shall not be illuminated except for
permitted canopy signage.
7) Canopy posts/sign posts shall not obstruct traffic or the safe
operation of the gas pumps.
e. Pump islands must comply with the following performance standards:
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-1 District
20-3
1) Pump islands must be elevated six (6) inches above the traveled
surface of the site.
2) All pump islands must be set at least thirty (30) feet back from any
property line. Additionally, the setback between the pump islands
curb face must be at least twenty-four (24) feet.
f. Landscaping with the following standards:
1) Must comply with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
2) Where lots abut residentially zoned property, a buffer yard of not
less than twenty (20) feet wide shall be landscaped and screened
in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10.e of this Ordinance.
g. Lighting shall be in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.2 of this
Ordinance.
h. Circulation and Loading. The site design must accommodate adequate
turning radius and vertical clearance for a semi-trailer truck. Designated
loading areas must be exclusive of off-street parking stalls and drive
aisles. A site plan must be provided to illustrate adequate turning radius,
using appropriate engineering templates.
i. Pedestrian Traffic. An internal site pedestrian circulation system shall be
defined and appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from
encroachments by parked cars or moving vehicles. In front of the principal
structure, the pedestrian sidewalk must be a minimum of five (5) feet wide
and clear of any obstacle or impediment. The pedestrian sidewalk may be
reduced to a minimum of three (3) feet wide and clear of any obstacle or
impediment when segregated from parking or drive aisles by a physical
barrier that prevents vehicles from overhanging the pedestrian sidewalk.
j. Noise. Public address systems shall not be audible at any property line.
Play of music or advertisement from the public address system is
prohibited. Noise control shall be required as regulated in Section 51.03,
Subd. D.5 of this Ordinance.
k. Outside Sales. Outside sales and service shall be allowed on a limited
basis, provided that:
1) Areas for outdoor sales and services shall be clearly indicated on
the site plan and reviewed at the time of application for a
conditional use permit. No outdoor sales or services shall be
allowed outside of those areas so designated on the approved site
plan without approval of an amended conditional use permit.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-1 District
20-4
2) Limited to fifteen (15) percent or less of gross floor areas of
principal building.
3) Shall be located on a concrete or asphalt surface adjacent to the
principal building and shall meet the required setbacks for the
principal building.
4. Planned unit developments as regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. J of this
Ordinance.
Subd. E. Interim Uses. The following are interim uses in the B-1 District: (Requires
a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated in Section
51.02, Subd. C of this Ordinance.)
1. None.
Subd. F. Uses by Administrative Permit. The following are uses allowed by an
administrative permit in the B-1 District (based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. E of this Ordinance):
1. Personal wireless service antennas as secondary uses as regulated by Section
51.03, Subd. M of this Ordinance.
2. Temporary/seasonal outdoor promotional events and sales provided that:
a. Such activity is targeted toward the general public and includes grand
openings, warehouse sales, sidewalk sales, inventory reduction and
liquidation sales, and seasonal merchandise sales.
b. The maximum term of the event shall not exceed fourteen (14)
consecutive days, with a maximum of four (4) permits per calendar year
for each use. Consecutive permits may be issued.
c. No portion of the use shall take place within any public right-of-way or
landscaped green strip.
d. Parking and display areas associated with the use shall not distract or
interfere with existing business operations or traffic circulation patterns.
e. Display areas and parking spaces shall use those parking lot spaces that
are in excess of the minimum required parking for the primary use of that
property.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-1 District
20-5
f. The site shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner and display of items
shall be as compact as possible so as to not interfere with existing
business, parking or driveway operations.
g. Sales products, trailers, temporary stands, etc. shall be located on an
asphalt or concrete surface as approved in the administrative permit.
h. Temporary outdoor seasonal sales uses (with a valid administrative
permit) may have one (1) on-site temporary sign not to exceed twenty-four
(24) square feet in area and not more than six (6) feet in height.
i. A daily clean up program shall be presented as part of the administrative
permit application.
Subd. G. Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in an B-1 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Minimum Lot Area. Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width. One hundred (100) feet.
3. Minimum Lot Depth. One hundred twenty (120) feet.
4. Setbacks.
a. Principal Building Setbacks.
1) Front Yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
2) Side Yard. Not less than fifteen (15) feet, nor less than thirty (30)
feet on a side yard abutting a street.
3) Rear Yard. Thirty (30) feet. Not less than forty (40) feet on a rear
yard abutting a single family residential or medium density
residential zoning district.
b. Accessory Building Setbacks.
1) Front Yard: Accessory building shall not be located forward of the
principal building.
2) Side Yard: Not less than ten (10) feet nor less than thirty (30) feet
on a side yard abutting a street.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-1 District
20-6
3) Rear Yard: Not less than ten (10) feet nor less than twenty (20)
feet when abutting a residential zoning district.
Subd. H. Building Requirements.
1. Height. No structure shall exceed two and one-half (2-1/2) stories, or thirty (30)
feet, whichever is least.
2. Minimum Floor Area. Commercial buildings (principal structure) having less
than one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area may only be allowed upon
approval of a conditional use permit as provided for in Section 51.02, Subd. B of
this Ordinance.
3. Exterior Building Elevations.
a. Principal Buildings. Within the B-1 District, all exterior wall surfaces may
be a combination of materials including brick, dimensioned stone, rock
faced block, decorative concrete panel, architectural concrete block, castin-
place concrete, stone, stucco, wood, or glass. An average of said
materials shall constitute no less than ninety (90) percent of the exterior
wall façade (except as allowed in Section 51.03, Subd. E.3.f or Subd.
E.3.g of this Ordinance.
b. Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings shall be constructed of building
materials to match the principal structure and comply with the building
material requirements of this Ordinance.
c. In all zoning districts, mechanical equipment such as heating, ventilation,
or air conditioning units located anywhere on the property shall be
screened and painted to match the building exterior.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-1 District
20-7
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-1 District
20-8
SECTION 51.21. B-2, GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
Subd. A. Purpose. The purpose of the B-2, General Business District is to provide
for the establishment of commercial and service activities which draw from and serve
customers from the entire community or region and are located in areas which are well
served by collector or arterial street facilities outside the Central Business District.
Subd. B. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses in the B-2 District:
1. Commercial recreational uses – indoor.
2. Financial institutions.
3. Governmental and public buildings, utilities, and/or structures.
4. Hospitality businesses.
5. Liquor sales, on and off sale.
6. Office businesses – clinical.
7. Office businesses – general.
8. Personal services.
9. Recreational businesses - indoor.
10. Restaurants.
11. Retail businesses.
12. Service businesses – off site.
13. Service businesses – on site.
14. Sexually oriented use – principal and accessory, as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. L of this Ordinance.
15. Specialty schools such as music, dance, gymnastics, or business/trade schools.
16. Theaters.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-2 District
21-1
Subd. C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory uses
in the B-2 District:
1. Commercial accessory buildings shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the gross
floor space of the principal building.
2. Drive-through service facilities provided that:
a. Not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet of segregated automobile
stacking must be provided for the single service lane. Where multiple
service lanes are provided, the minimum automobile stacking may be
reduced to sixty (60) feet per lane.
b. The stacking lane and its access must be designed to control traffic in a
manner to protect the buildings and will not interfere with on-site traffic
circulation or access to the required parking space.
c. No part of the public street or boulevard may be used for stacking of
automobiles.
d. The stacking lane, order board intercom, and window placement shall be
designed and located in such a manner as to minimize glare to adjacent
premises, particularly residential premises, and to maximize
maneuverability of vehicles on the site.
e. The drive-through window and its stacking lanes shall be screened from
view of adjoining residential zoning districts and public street rights-ofway.
f. A lighting and photometric plan will be required that illustrates the drivethrough
service lane lighting and shall comply with Section 51.03, Subd.
D.2 of this Ordinance.
3. Fences, as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. D.11 of this Ordinance.
4. Off-street loading as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. F of this Ordinance.
5. Off-street parking as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance.
6. Outside services, sales, and equipment rental accessory to the principal use and
limited in area to fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area of the principal
building or fifteen (15) percent of the tenant bay if it is a multiple tenant building.
7. Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs three (3)
meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those
necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers,
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-2 District
21-2
ham radio transmitters and television receivers as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. M of this Ordinance.
8. Signs as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. N of this Ordinance.
Subd. D. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses allowed in the B-2
District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.)
1. Automobile and truck repair (including body shops) provided that:
a. The entire area other than occupied by buildings or structures or planting
shall be surfaced with bituminous or concrete which will control dust and
drainage. The entire area shall have a perimeter curb barrier, a storm
water drainage system and is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
b. The emission of odor by a use shall be in compliance with and regulated
by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota
regulations APC, as amended.
c. All flammable materials, including liquids and rags, shall conform with the
applicable provisions of the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code.
d. All outside storage shall be prohibited except the storage of customer
vehicles waiting for repair.
e. All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the
Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the
general welfare and public betterment can be served by modifying the
conditions.
2. Commercial car washes (drive-through, mechanical and self-service) provided
that:
a. Magazining or stacking space is constructed to accommodate that number
of vehicles which can be washed during a maximum thirty (30) minute
period and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
b. At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not less than twenty
(20) feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Section
51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
c. Parking or car magazine storage space shall be screened from view of
abutting residential districts in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10
of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-2 District
21-3
d. The entire area other than occupied by the building or plantings shall be
surfaced with material which will control dust and drainage which is
subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
e. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source is not
visible from the public right-of-way or from an abutting residence and shall
be in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.2 of this Ordinance.
f. Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict
with through traffic movement and shall be subject to the approval of the
City.
g. Provisions are made to control and reduce noise.
3. Commercial day care facilities provided that:
a. All requirements of the Minnesota Department of Health and Human
Services, as may be amended, are satisfactorily met and the structure and
operation is licensed accordingly.
b. Screening is provided along property lines adjoin a residential zoning
district. Such required fencing and screening shall be in compliance with
the applicable provisions of Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
c. Adequate off-street parking is provided in a location separated from any
outdoor play area(s).
d. Outdoor play area shall be fenced with secure access.
4. Hospitals provided that:
a. Side yards are double the minimum requirements established for this
district and are screened in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of
this Ordinance.
b. The site shall be served by an arterial or collector street of sufficient
capacity to accommodate traffic which will be generated.
c. All State Statutes and regulations governing such use are strictly adhered
to and all required operating permits are secured.
5. Motor fuel stations provided that:
a. Installation is in accordance with State and City standards. Additionally,
adequate space shall be provided to access fuel pumps and allow
maneuverability around the pumps. Underground fuel storage tanks are
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-2 District
21-4
to be positioned to allow adequate access by motor fuel transports and
unloading operations which do not conflict with circulation, access and
other activities on the site. Fuel pumps shall be installed on pump islands.
b. A minimum lot area of one (1) acre and minimum lot frontage of one
hundred fifty (150) feet. If the canopy is attached to the principal structure,
the minimum lot size may be reduced to one acre. The City Council may
exempt previously developed or previously platted property from this
requirement provided that the site is capable of adequately and safely
handling all activities and required facilities.
c. Architectural standards are compliant with the required commercial design
construction standards of Section 51.21, Subd. H.3 of this Ordinance.
d. A protective canopy structure may be located over the pump island(s) as
an accessory structure. The canopy shall meet the following performance
standards:
1) The edge of the canopy shall be twenty (20) feet or more from the
front and/or side lot line, provided that adequate traffic visibility both
on-site and off-site is maintained.
2) The canopy shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height and must
provide fourteen (14) feet of clearance to accommodate a semitrailer
truck passing underneath.
3) The canopy fascia shall not exceed three (3) feet in vertical height.
4) Canopy lighting shall consist of canister spotlights recessed into the
canopy. No portion of the light source or fixture may extend below
the bottom face of the canopy. Total canopy illumination may not
exceed one hundred fifteen (115) foot candles below the canopy at
ground level. The fascia of the canopy shall not be illuminated.
5) The architectural design, colors, and character of the canopy shall
be consistent with the principal building on the site.
6) Signage may be allowed on a detached canopy in lieu of wall
signage on the principal structure, provided that:
a) The individual canopy sign does not exceed more than
twenty (20) percent of the canopy façade facing a public
right-of-way.
b) The canopy fascia shall not be illuminated except for
permitted canopy signage.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-2 District
21-5
7) Canopy posts/sign posts shall not obstruct traffic or the safe
operation of the gas pumps.
e. Pump islands must comply with the following performance standards:
1) Pump islands must be elevated six (6) inches above the traveled
surface of the site.
2) All pump islands must be set at least thirty (30) feet back from any
property line. Additionally, the setback between the pump islands
curb face must be at least twenty-four (24) feet.
f. Landscaping with the following standards:
1) Must comply with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
2) Where lots abut residentially zoned property, a buffer yard of not
less than twenty (20) feet wide shall be landscaped and screened
in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10.e of this Ordinance.
g. Lighting shall be in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.2 of this
Ordinance.
h. Circulation and Loading. The site design must accommodate adequate
turning radius and vertical clearance for a semi-trailer truck. Designated
loading areas must be exclusive of off-street parking stalls and drive
aisles. A site plan must be provided to illustrate adequate turning radius,
using appropriate engineering templates.
i. Pedestrian Traffic. An internal site pedestrian circulation system shall be
defined and appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from
encroachments by parked cars or moving vehicles. In front of the principal
structure, the pedestrian sidewalk must be a minimum of five (5) feet wide
and clear of any obstacle or impediment. The pedestrian sidewalk may be
reduced to a minimum of three (3) feet wide and clear of any obstacle or
impediment when segregated from parking or drive aisles by a physical
barrier that prevents vehicles from overhanging the pedestrian sidewalk.
j. Noise. Public address systems shall not be audible at any property line.
Play of music or advertisement from the public address system is
prohibited. Noise control shall be required as regulated in Section 51.03,
Subd. D.5 of this Ordinance.
k. Outside Sales. Outside sales and service shall be allowed on a limited
basis, provided that:
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-2 District
21-6
1) Areas for outdoor sales and services shall be clearly indicated on
the site plan and reviewed at the time of application for a
conditional use permit. No outdoor sales or services shall be
allowed outside of those areas so designated on the approved site
plan without approval of an amended conditional use permit.
2) Limited to percent (15) percent or less of gross floor areas of
principal building.
3) Shall be located on a concrete or asphalt surface adjacent to the
principal building and shall meet the required setbacks for the
principal building.
6. Outdoor dining facilities accessory to a restaurant provided that:
a. The applicant submit a site plan and other pertinent information
demonstrating the location and type of all tables, refuse receptacles, and
wait stations.
b. Access to the dining area be provided only via the principal building if the
dining area is full service restaurant, including table waiting service.
c. The size of the dining area is restricted to thirty (30) percent of the total
customer floor area within the principal structure.
d. The dining area is screened from view from adjacent residential uses in
accordance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
e. All lighting be hooded and directed away from adjacent residential uses in
accordance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.2 of this Ordinance.
f. The applicant demonstrates that pedestrian circulation is not disrupted as
a result of the outdoor dining area by providing the following:
1) Outdoor dining area shall be segregated from through pedestrian
circulation by means of temporary fencing, bollards, ropes,
plantings, or other methods, and shall be subject to review and
approval by the City Council.
2) Minimum clear passage zone for pedestrians at the perimeter of the
restaurant shall be at least five (5) feet without interference from
parked motor vehicles, bollards, trees, tree gates, curbs, stairways,
trash receptacles, street lights, parking meters, or the like.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-2 District
21-7
3) Overstory canopy of trees, umbrellas or other structures extending
into the pedestrian clear passage zone or pedestrian aisle shall
have a minimum clearance of seven (7) feet above sidewalk.
g. The dining area is surfaced with concrete, bituminous or decorative pavers
or may consist of a deck with wood or other flooring material that provides
a clean, attractive, and functional surface.
h. A minimum width of thirty-six (36) inches shall be provided within aisles of
the outdoor dining area.
i. Storage of furniture shall not be permitted outdoors between November 1
and March 31. Outdoor furniture that is immovable or permanently fixed
or attached to the sidewalk shall not be subject to the storage prohibition
of this section. However, any immovable or permanently fixed or attached
furniture shall be approved as part of the administrative permit application.
j. Additional off-street parking may be required pursuant to the requirements
set forth in Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance based on the
additional seating area provided by the outdoor dining area.
k. Refuse containers are to be provided for self-service outdoor dining areas.
Such containers shall be placed in a manner which does not disrupt
pedestrian circulation, and 51.03, Subd. D.6 be designed to prevent
spillage and blowing litter.
7. Planned unit development (including shopping centers) as regulated by Section
51.02, Subd. J of this Ordinance.
8. Small engine and boat repair provided that:
a. At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not less than five (5)
feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Section 51.03,
Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
b. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through
traffic movement and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
c. Provisions are made to control and reduce noise.
d. No outside storage, repair or sales except in compliance with Section
51.21.C.6 of this Ordinance shall be allowed.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-2 District
21-8
e. All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the
Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the
general welfare and public betterment can be served as well or better by
modifying the conditions.
9. Veterinary clinics (with kennels) provided that:
a. All areas in which animals are confined are located indoors and are
properly soundproofed from adjacent properties.
b. Animal carcasses are properly disposed of in a manner not utilizing on-site
garbage facilities or incineration and the carcasses are properly
refrigerated during periods prior to disposal.
c. An animal kennel is permitted as a use accessory to the veterinary clinic
provided that:
1) The number of animals boarded shall not exceed twenty (20).
2) An indoor exercise area shall be provided to accommodate the
periodic exercising of animals boarded at the kennel. No outdoor
exercising of animals shall be permitted.
3) A ventilation system shall be designed so that no odors or
organisms will spread between wards or to the outside air and will
be capable of completely exchanging internal air at a rate of at least
twice per hour. Air temperature must be maintained between 60
and 75 degrees Fahrenheit.
4) A room separate from the kennel area shall be provided of
sufficient size to adequately separate animals that are sick or
injured from healthy animals.
5) Indoor animal kennel floors and walls shall be made of non-porous
materials or sealed concrete to make it non-porous.
6) Animal wastes shall be flushed down an existing sanitary sewer
system or enclosed in a container of sufficient construction to
eliminate odors and organisms and shall be properly disposed of at
least once a day.
d. The appropriate license is obtained from the City Clerk and the conditions
of Section 408.01 of the Delano City Code relating to kennels are
satisfactorily met.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-2 District
21-9
e. All State Health Department and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
requirements for such facilities are met.
Subd. E. Interim Uses. The following are interim uses in the B-2 District: (Requires
a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated in Section
51.02, Subd. C of this Ordinance.)
1. None.
Subd. F. Uses by Administrative Permit. The following are uses allowed by an
administrative permit in the B-2 District (based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. E of this Ordinance):
1. Personal wireless service antennas as secondary uses as regulated by Section
51.03, Subd. M of this Ordinance.
2. Temporary/seasonal outdoor promotional events and sales provided that:
a. Such activity is targeted toward the general public and includes grand
openings, warehouse sales, sidewalk sales, inventory reduction and
liquidation sales, and seasonal merchandise sales.
b. The maximum term of the event shall not exceed fourteen (14)
consecutive days, with a maximum of four (4) permits per calendar year
for each use. Consecutive permits may be issued.
c. No portion of the use shall take place within any public right-of-way or
landscaped green strip.
d. Parking and display areas associated with the use shall not distract or
interfere with existing business operations or traffic circulation patterns.
e. Display areas and parking spaces shall use those parking lot spaces that
are in excess of the minimum required parking for the primary use of that
property.
f. The site shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner and display of items
shall be as compact as possible so as to not interfere with existing
business, parking or driveway operations.
g. Sales products, trailers, temporary stands, etc. shall be located on an
asphalt or concrete surface as approved in the administrative permit.
h. Temporary outdoor seasonal sales uses (with a valid administrative
permit) may have one (1) on-site temporary sign not to exceed twenty-four
(24) square feet in area and not more than six (6) feet in height.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-2 District
21-10
i. A daily clean up program shall be presented as part of the administrative
permit application.
Subd. G. Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in the B-2 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Minimum Lot Area. Twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width. One hundred (100) feet.
3. Minimum Lot Depth. None.
4. Setbacks.
a. Principal Building Setbacks.
1) Front Yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
2) Side Yard. Not less than ten (10) feet, nor less than thirty (30) feet
on a side yard abutting a public right-of-way or residential district.
3) Rear Yard. Twenty (20) feet. Not less than forty (40) feet on a rear
yard abutting a single family residential or medium density
residential zoning district.
b. Accessory Building Setbacks.
1) Front Yard: Accessory building shall not be located forward of the
principal building.
2) Side Yard: Not less than ten (10) feet nor less than thirty (30) feet
on a side yard abutting a street.
3) Rear Yard: Not less than ten (10) feet nor less than twenty (20)
feet when abutting a residential zoning district.
Subd. H. Building Requirements.
1. Height. No structure shall exceed three (3) stories, or thirty-six (36) feet,
whichever is least, however, building heights in excess of the prescribed
standard may be permitted through a conditional use permit, provided that:
a. The site is capable of accommodating any increased intensity of use.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-2 District
21-11
b. Any increased intensity of use does not cause an increase in traffic
volumes beyond the capacity of the surrounding streets.
c. Public utilities and services are adequate.
d. The front and side yard setbacks shall be increased one (1) foot every
three (3) feet of height in excess of three (3) stories or thirty-six (36) feet,
whichever is least.
e. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. D.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily complied with.
2. Minimum Floor Area. Commercial buildings (principal structure) having less
than one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area may only be allowed upon
approval of a conditional use permit as provided for in Section 51.02, Subd. D of
this Ordinance.
3. Exterior Building Elevations.
a. Principal Buildings. Within the B-2 District, all exterior wall surfaces may
be a combination of materials including brick, dimensioned stone, rock
faced block, decorative concrete panel, architectural concrete block, castin-
place concrete, stone, stucco, wood, or glass. An average of said
materials shall constitute no less than ninety (90) percent of the exterior
wall façade (except as allowed in Section 51.03, Subd. E.3.f or Subd.
E.3.g of this Ordinance.
b. Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings shall be constructed of building
materials to match the principal structure and comply with the building
material requirements of this Ordinance.
c. In all zoning districts, mechanical equipment such as heating, ventilation,
or air conditioning units located anywhere on the property shall be
screened and painted to match the building exterior.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-2 District
21-12
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-2 District
21-13
SECTION 51.22. B-3, HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT
Subd. A. Purpose. The purpose of the B-3, Highway Business District is to provide
for and limit the establishment of motor vehicle oriented or dependent commercial and
service activities.
Subd. B. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses in the B-3 District:
1. Automobile accessory stores.
2. Automobile sales – indoor.
3. Financial institutions.
4. Governmental and public buildings, utilities and/or structures.
5. Hospitality businesses.
6. Liquor sales, on and off site.
7. Office business – clinical.
8. Office business – general.
9. Personal services.
10. Recreational businesses - indoor.
11. Restaurants.
12. Retail businesses.
13. Service businesses, on and off-site.
14. Sexually oriented uses – principal and accessory, as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. L of this Ordinance.
15. Theatres.
Subd. C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory uses
in the B-3 District:
1. Commercial accessory buildings not exceeding thirty (30) percent of the gross
floor space of the principal building.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-3 District
22-1
2. Drive-through service facilities:
a. Not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet of segregated automobile
stacking must be provided for the single service lane. Where multiple
service lanes are provided, the minimum automobile stacking may be
reduced to sixty (60) feet per lane.
b. The stacking lane and its access must be designed to control traffic in a
manner to protect the buildings and will not interfere with on-site traffic
circulation or access to the required parking space.
c. No part of the public street or boulevard may be used for stacking of
automobiles.
d. The stacking lane, order board intercom, and window placement shall be
designed and located in such a manner as to minimize glare to adjacent
premises, particularly residential premises, and to maximize
maneuverability of vehicles on the site.
e. The drive-through window and its stacking lanes shall be screened from
view of adjoining residential zoning districts and public street rights-ofway.
f. A lighting and photometric plan will be required that illustrates the drivethrough
service lane lighting and shall comply with Section 51.03, Subd.
D.2 of this Ordinance.
3. Fences, as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. D.11 of this Ordinance.
4. Off-street loading as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. F of this Ordinance.
5. Off-street parking as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance.
6. Outside services, sales, and equipment rental accessory to the principal use and
limited in area to fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area of the principal
building, or fifteen (15) percent of the tenant bay if it is a multiple tenant building.
7. Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs three (3)
meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those
necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers,
ham radio transmitters and television receivers as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. M of this Ordinance.
8. Signs as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. N of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-3 District
22-2
Subd. D. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses allowed in the B-3
District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.)
1. Automobile and truck repair - major and minor (including body shops) provided
that:
a. The entire area other than occupied by buildings or structures or planting
shall be surfaced with bituminous or concrete which will control dust and
drainage. The entire area shall have a perimeter curb barrier, a storm
water drainage system and is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
b. All painting shall be conducted in an approved paint booth. All paint
booths and all other activities of the operation shall thoroughly control the
emission of fumes, dust or other particulated matter so that the use shall
be in compliance with the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards,
Minnesota Regulation APC 1-15, as amended.
c. The emission of odor by a use shall be in compliance with and regulated
by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota
regulations APC, as amended.
d. All flammable materials, including liquids and rags, shall conform with the
applicable provisions of the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code.
e. All outside storage shall be prohibited except in accordance with Section
51.22, Subd. D.7 of this Ordinance.
f. All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the
Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the
general welfare and public betterment can be served by modifying the
conditions.
3. Commercial car washes (drive-through, mechanical and self-service) provided
that:
a. The architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site
shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or areas as to cause
impairment in property values or constitute a blighting influence.
b. Magazining or stacking space is constructed to accommodate that number
of vehicles which can be washed during a maximum thirty (30) minute
period and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-3 District
22-3
c. At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not less than five (5)
feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Section 51.03,
Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
d. Parking or car magazine storage space shall be screened from view of
abutting residential districts in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10
of this Ordinance.
e. The entire area other than occupied by the building or plantings shall be
surfaced with material which will control dust and drainage which is
subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
f. The entire area shall have a drainage system which is subject to the
approval of the City.
g. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source is not
visible from the public right-of-way or from an abutting residence and shall
be in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.2 of this Ordinance.
h. Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict
with through traffic movement and shall be subject to the approval of the
City Engineer.
i. Provisions are made to control and reduce noise.
4. Hospitals provided that:
a. Side yards are double the minimum requirements established for this
district and are screened in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of
this Ordinance.
b. The site shall be served by an arterial or collector street of sufficient
capacity to accommodate traffic which will be generated.
c. All State Statutes and regulations governing such use are strictly adhered
to and all required operating permits are secured.
5. Motor fuel stations provided that:
a. Installation is in accordance with State and City standards. Additionally,
adequate space shall be provided to access fuel pumps and allow
maneuverability around the pumps. Underground fuel storage tanks are
to be positioned to allow adequate access by motor fuel transports and
unloading operations which do not conflict with circulation, access and
other activities on the site. Fuel pumps shall be installed on pump islands.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-3 District
22-4
b. A minimum lot area of one (1) acre and minimum lot frontage of one
hundred fifty (150) feet. If the canopy is attached to the principal structure,
the minimum lot size may be reduced to one acre. The City Council may
exempt previously developed or previously platted property from this
requirement provided that the site is capable of adequately and safely
handling all activities and required facilities.
c. Architectural standards are compliant with the required commercial design
construction standards of Section 51.22, Subd. A.3 of this Ordinance.
d. A protective canopy structure may be located over the pump island(s) as
an accessory structure. The canopy shall meet the following performance
standards:
1) The edge of the canopy shall be twenty (20) feet or more from the
front and/or side lot line, provided that adequate visibility both onsite
and off-site is maintained.
2) The canopy shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height and must
provide fourteen (14) feet of clearance to accommodate a semitrailer
truck passing underneath.
3) The canopy fascia shall not exceed three (3) feet in vertical height.
4) Canopy lighting shall consist of canister spotlights recessed into the
canopy. No portion of the light source or fixture may extend below
the bottom face of the canopy. Total canopy illumination may not
exceed one hundred fifteen (115) foot candles below the canopy at
ground level. The fascia of the canopy shall not be illuminated.
5) The architectural design, colors, and character of the canopy shall
be consistent with the principal building on the site.
6) Signage may be allowed on a detached canopy in lieu of wall
signage on the principal structure, provided that:
a) The individual canopy sign does not exceed more than
twenty (20) percent of the canopy façade facing a public
right-of-way.
b) The canopy fascia shall not be illuminated except for
permitted canopy signage.
7) Canopy posts/sign posts shall not obstruct traffic or the safe
operation of the gas pumps.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-3 District
22-5
e. Pump islands must comply with the following performance standards:
1) Pump islands must be elevated six (6) inches above the traveled
surface of the site.
2) All pump islands must be set at least thirty (30) feet back from any
property line. Additionally, the setback between the pump islands
curb face must be at least twenty-four (24) feet.
f. Landscaping with the following standards:
1) Must comply with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
2) Where lots abut residentially zoned property, a buffer yard of not
less than twenty (20) feet wide shall be landscaped and screened
in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10.d.10).e) of this
Ordinance.
g. Lighting shall be in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.2 of this
Ordinance.
h. Circulation and Loading. The site design must accommodate adequate
turning radius and vertical clearance for a semi-trailer truck. Designated
loading areas must be exclusive of off-street parking stalls and drive
aisles. A site plan must be provided to illustrate adequate turning radius,
using appropriate engineering templates.
i. Pedestrian Traffic. An internal site pedestrian circulation system shall be
defined and appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from
encroachments by parked cars or moving vehicles. In front of the principal
structure, the pedestrian sidewalk must be a minimum of five (5) feet wide
and clear of any obstacle or impediment. The pedestrian sidewalk may be
reduced to a minimum of three (3) feet wide and clear of any obstacle or
impediment when segregated from parking or drive aisles by a physical
barrier that prevents vehicles from overhanging the pedestrian sidewalk.
j. Noise. Public address systems shall not be audible at any property line.
Play of music or advertisement from the public address system is
prohibited. Noise control shall be required as regulated in Section 51.03,
Subd. D.5 of this Ordinance.
k. Outside Sales. Outside sales and service shall be allowed on a limited
basis, provided that:
1) Areas for outdoor sales and services shall be clearly indicated on
the site plan and reviewed at the time of application for a
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-3 District
22-6
conditional use permit. No outdoor sales or services shall be
allowed outside of those areas so designated on the approved site
plan without approval of an amended conditional use permit.
2) Limited to fifteen (15) percent or less of gross floor areas of
principal building.
3) Shall be located on a concrete or asphalt surface adjacent to the
principal building and shall meet the required setbacks for the
principal building.
6. Open and outdoor storage as an accessory use provided that:
a. The area is fenced and screened from view of the neighboring residential
uses or if abutting a residential district in compliance with Section 51.03,
Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
b. Storage is screened from view from adjoining residential districts and/or
the public right-of-way in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of
this Ordinance.
c. Storage area is paved or surfaced to control dust or erosion.
d. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not
be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences and
shall be in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.2 of this Ordinance.
e. Does not take up parking space as required for conformity to this
Ordinance.
7. Open or outdoor service, sale and rental as an accessory use, provided that:
a. Outside services, sales and equipment rental connected with the principal
use is limited to thirty (30) percent of the gross floor area of the principal
use.
b. Outside sales areas are fenced or screened from view of neighboring
residential uses or an abutting residential district in compliance with
Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
c. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not
be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences and
shall be in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.2 of this Ordinance.
d. Sales area is located on an asphalt or concrete surface.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-3 District
22-7
e. The use does not take up parking space as required for conformity to this
Ordinance.
f. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
8. Outdoor recreation facilities provided that:
a. The facilities are an accessory use to a principal use allowed within the B-
3 District.
b. The facilities meet the principal building setbacks.
c. The facilities shall maintain a fifty (50) foot setback from residential
districts.
d. The facilities shall be screened from adjoining properties or public rightsof-
way.
e. The City may set limits on the hours of operation to avoid nuisance issues.
9. Outdoor sales or rental lots including but not limited to automobiles, trucks,
snowmobiles, tractors, recreational vehicles, boats, farming equipment,
construction equipment and trailers, provided that:
a. Outdoor sales or rental be associated with a principal building of at least
one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area.
b. Outdoor sales area shall be set at least five (5) feet back from all property
lines, and at least fifteen (15) feet back from any street surface.
c. Outdoor sales shall be physically defined on the site by surfacing,
landscaping, or a fence barrier.
d. The boulevard portion of the street right-of-way shall not be used for
parking, or storage or display of sale items.
e. Outdoor sales area shall not be utilized for storage of unlicensed or
inoperable vehicles (except trailer sales), scrap materials or trash handling
areas.
f. Outside sales areas are fenced or screened from view of neighboring
residential uses or an abutting residential district in compliance with
Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-3 District
22-8
g. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source is not
visible from the public right-of-way or from an abutting residence and shall
be in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.2 of this Ordinance.
h. All display/sales/storage areas shall be paved or control dust.
i. Required parking shall be segregated from the sales display. The use
shall not take up parking space as required for conformity to this
Ordinance.
j. Damaged vehicles or equipment awaiting repair shall be considered
outdoor storage and shall be subject to the conditions outlined in Section
51.22, Subd. D.6 of this Ordinance.
10. Planned unit development (including shopping centers) as regulated by Section
51.02, Subd. J of this Ordinance.
11. Outdoor dining facilities accessory to a restaurant, provided that:
a. The applicant must submit a site plan and other pertinent information
demonstrating the location and type of all tables, refuse receptacles, and
wait stations.
b. Access to the dining area be provided only via the principal building if the
dining area is full service restaurant, including table waiting service.
c. The size of the dining area is restricted to thirty (30) percent of the total
customer floor area within the principal structure.
d. The dining area is screened from view from adjacent residential uses in
accordance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
e. All lighting be hooded and directed away from adjacent residential uses in
accordance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.2 of this Ordinance.
f. The applicant demonstrates that pedestrian circulation is not disrupted as
a result of the outdoor dining area by providing the following:
1) Outdoor dining area shall be segregated from through pedestrian
circulation by means of temporary fencing, bollards, ropes,
plantings, or other methods, and shall be subject to review and
approval by the City Council.
2) Minimum clear passage zone for pedestrians at the perimeter of the
restaurant shall be at least five (5) feet without interference from
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-3 District
22-9
parked motor vehicles, bollards, trees, tree gates, curbs, stairways,
trash receptacles, street lights, parking meters, or the like.
3) Overstory canopy of trees, umbrellas or other structures extending
into the pedestrian clear passage zone or pedestrian aisle shall
have a minimum clearance of seven (7) feet above sidewalk.
g. The dining area is surfaced with concrete, bituminous or decorative pavers
or may consist of a deck with wood or other flooring material that provides
a clean, attractive, and functional surface.
h. A minimum width of thirty-six (36) inches shall be provided within aisles of
the outdoor dining area.
i. Storage of furniture shall not be permitted outdoors between November 1
and March 31. Outdoor furniture that is immovable or permanently fixed
or attached to the sidewalk shall not be subject to the storage prohibition
of this section. However, any immovable or permanently fixed or attached
furniture shall be approved as part of the administrative permit application.
j. Additional off-street parking shall be required pursuant to the requirements
set forth in Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance based on the
additional seating area provided by the outdoor dining area.
k. Refuse containers are provided for self-service outdoor dining areas.
Such containers shall be placed in a manner which does not disrupt
pedestrian circulation, and shall be designed to prevent spillage and
blowing litter.
12. Small engine and boat repair provided that:
a. The lighting shall be accomplished in such a way as to have no direct
source of light visible from adjacent land in residential use or from the
public right-of-way and shall be in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd.
D.2 of this Ordinance.
b. At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not less than five (5)
feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Section 51.03,
Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
c. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through
traffic movement and shall comply with Section 51.03, Subd. E.4 of this
Ordinance and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
d. Provisions are made to control and reduce noise.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-3 District
22-10
e. No outside storage, repair or sales except in compliance with Section
51.03, Subd. D.6 or Section 5103, Subd. D.7 of this Ordinance shall be
allowed.
f. All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the
Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the
general welfare and public betterment can be served as well or better by
modifying the conditions.
13. Veterinary clinics (with kennels) provided that:
a. All areas in which animals are confined are located indoors and are
properly soundproofed from adjacent properties.
b. Animal carcasses are properly disposed of in a manner not utilizing on-site
garbage facilities or incineration and the carcasses are properly
refrigerated during periods prior to disposal.
c. An animal kennel is permitted as a use accessory to the veterinary clinic
provided that:
1) The number of animals boarded shall not exceed twenty (20).
2) An indoor exercise area shall be provided to accommodate the
periodic exercising of animals boarded at the kennel. No outdoor
exercising of animals shall be permitted.
3) A ventilation system shall be designed so that no odors or
organisms will spread between wards or to the outside air and will
be capable of completely exchanging internal air at a rate of at least
twice per hour. Air temperature must be maintained between 60
and 75 degrees Fahrenheit.
4) A room separate from the kennel area shall be provided of
sufficient size to adequately separate animals that are sick or
injured from healthy animals.
5) Indoor animal kennel floors and walls shall be made of non-porous
materials or sealed concrete to make it non-porous.
6) Animal wastes shall be flushed down an existing sanitary sewer
system or enclosed in a container of sufficient construction to
eliminate odors and organisms and shall be properly disposed of at
least once a day.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-3 District
22-11
d. The appropriate license is obtained from the City Clerk and the conditions
of Section 408.1 of the Delano City Code relating to kennels are
satisfactorily met.
e. All State Health Department and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
requirements for such facilities are met.
Subd. E. Interim Uses. The following are interim uses in the B-3 District: (Requires
a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated in Section
51.02, Subd. C of this Ordinance.)
1. None.
Subd. F. Uses by Administrative Permit. The following are uses allowed by an
administrative permit in the B-3 District (based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. E of this Ordinance):
1. Personal wireless service antennas as secondary uses as regulated by Section
51.03, Subd. M of this Ordinance.
2. Temporary/seasonal outdoor promotional events and sales provided that:
a. Such activity is targeted toward the general public and includes grand
openings, warehouse sales, sidewalk sales, inventory reduction and
liquidation sales, and seasonal merchandise sales.
b. The maximum term of the event shall not exceed fourteen (14)
consecutive days, with a maximum of four (4) permits per calendar year
for each use. Consecutive permits may be issued.
c. No portion of the use shall take place within any public right-of-way or
landscaped green strip.
d. Parking and display areas associated with the use shall not distract or
interfere with existing business operations or traffic circulation patterns.
e. Display areas and parking spaces shall use those parking lot spaces that
are in excess of the minimum required parking for the primary use of that
property.
f. The site shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner and display of items
shall be as compact as possible so as to not interfere with existing
business, parking or driveway operations.
g. Sales products, trailers, temporary stands, etc. shall be located on an
asphalt or concrete surface as approved in the administrative permit.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-3 District
22-12
h. Temporary outdoor seasonal sales uses (with a valid administrative
permit) may have one (1) on-site temporary sign not to exceed twenty-four
(24) square feet in area and not more than six (6) feet in height.
i. A daily clean up program shall be presented as part of the administrative
permit application.
Subd. G. Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in the B-3 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Minimum Lot Area. Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width. One hundred (100) feet.
3. Minimum Lot Depth. One hundred twenty (120) feet.
4. Setbacks.
a. Front Yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
b. Side Yard. Not less than twenty (20) feet, nor less than thirty (30) feet on
a side yard abutting a public right-of-way or residential district.
c. Rear Yard. Twenty (20) feet. Not less than forty (40) feet in a rear yard
abutting a single family residential or medium density residential zoning
district.
Subd. H. Building Requirements.
1. Height. No structure shall exceed three (3) stories, or thirty-six (36) feet,
whichever is least.
2. Minimum Floor Area. Commercial buildings (principal structure) having less
than one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area may only be allowed upon
approval of a conditional use permit as provided for in Section 51.02, Subd. B of
this Ordinance.
3. Exterior Building Elevations.
a. Within the B-3 Zoning District, all exterior wall surfaces may be a
combination of materials including brick, dimensioned stone, rock face
block, decorative concrete panels, stone stucco, wood, glass, or metal
panels. Metal panels shall not encompass more than fifty (50) percent of
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-3 District
22-13
the building elevation abutting a public right-of-way or residentially zoned
property. Metal panels shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of all
other exterior wall surfaces, except as allowed in Section 51.03, Subd.
C.3.f of this Ordinance.
b. Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings shall be constructed of building
materials to match the principal structure and comply with the building
material requirements of this Ordinance.
c. In all zoning districts, mechanical equipment such as heating, ventilation,
or air conditioning units located anywhere on the property shall be
screened and painted to match the building exterior.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-3 District
22-14
SECTION 51.23. B-4, CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
Subd. A. Purpose. The purpose of the B-4, Central Business District is to provide for
the establishment of commercial and service activities which draw from and serve
customers from the entire community or region within an area designated as the Central
Business District (i.e., downtown).
Subd. B. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses in the B-4 District:
1. Auto accessory stores.
2. Financial institutions.
3. Governmental and public buildings, utilities and/or structures.
4. Hospitality businesses.
5. Liquor sales, on and off site.
6. Office business, clinical.
7. Office business, general.
8. Personal services.
9. Recreational businesses - indoor.
10. Restaurants.
11. Retail businesses.
12. Service businesses, on-site.
13. Specialty schools, such as music, dance, gymnastics, business or trade school.
14. Theatres.
Subd. C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory uses
in the B-4 District:
1. Commercial accessory buildings not exceeding thirty (30) percent of the gross
floor space of the principal building.
2. Fences, as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. D.11 of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-4 District
23-1
3. Off-street loading as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. F of this Ordinance.
4. Off-street parking as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance.
5. Outside services, sales, and equipment rental accessory to the principal use and
limited in area to fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area of the principal
building, or fifteen (15) percent of the tenant bay if it is a multiple tenant building.
6. Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs three (3)
meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those
necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers,
ham radio transmitters and television receivers as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. M of this Ordinance.
7. Signs as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. N of this Ordinance.
Subd. D. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses allowed in the B-4
District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.)
1. Residential and non-residential uses within one (1) structure, provided that:
a. Residential and non-residential uses shall not be contained on the same
floor and no residential use shall be located on the first floor.
b. Residential and non-residential uses shall have separate entrances and
exits.
c. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily met.
2. Minor auto repair provided that:
a. The entire area other than occupied by buildings or structures or planting
shall be surfaced with bituminous or concrete which will control dust and
drainage. The entire area shall have a perimeter curb barrier, a storm
water drainage system and is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
b. The emission of odor by a use shall be in compliance with and regulated
by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota
regulations APC, as amended.
d. All flammable materials, including liquids and rags, shall conform with the
applicable provisions of the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-4 District
23-2
c. All outside storage shall be prohibited except the storage of customer
vehicles waiting for repair.
d. All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the
Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the
general welfare and public betterment can be served by modifying the
conditions.
3. Outdoor dining facilities accessory to a restaurant provided that:
a. The applicant submit a site plan and other pertinent information
demonstrating the location and type of all tables, refuse receptacles, and
wait stations.
b. Access to the dining area be provided only via the principal building if the
dining area is full service restaurant, including table waiting service.
c. The size of the dining area is restricted to thirty (30) percent of the total
customer floor area within the principal structure.
d. The dining area is screened from view from adjacent residential uses in
accordance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
e. All lighting be hooded and directed away from adjacent residential uses in
accordance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.2 of this Ordinance.
f. The applicant demonstrates that pedestrian circulation is not disrupted as
a result of the outdoor dining area by providing the following:
1) Outdoor dining area shall be segregated from through pedestrian
circulation by means of temporary fencing, bollards, ropes,
plantings, or other methods, and shall be subject to review and
approval by the City Council.
2) Minimum clear passage zone for pedestrians at the perimeter of the
restaurant shall be at least five (5) feet without interference from
parked motor vehicles, bollards, trees, tree gates, curbs, stairways,
trash receptacles, street lights, parking meters, or the like.
3) Overstory canopy of trees, umbrellas or other structures extending
into the pedestrian clear passage zone or pedestrian aisle shall
have a minimum clearance of seven (7) feet above sidewalk.
g. The dining area is surfaced with concrete, bituminous or decorative pavers
or may consist of a deck with wood or other flooring material that provides
a clean, attractive, and functional surface.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-4 District
23-3
h. A minimum width of thirty-six (36) inches shall be provided within aisles of
the outdoor dining area.
i. Storage of furniture shall not be permitted outdoors between November 1
and March 31. Outdoor furniture that is immovable or permanently fixed
or attached to the sidewalk shall not be subject to the storage prohibition
of this section. However, any immovable or permanently fixed or attached
furniture shall be approved as part of the administrative permit application.
j. Additional off-street parking shall be required pursuant to the requirements
set forth in Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance based on the
additional seating area provided by the outdoor dining area.
k. Refuse containers are to be provided for self-service outdoor dining areas.
Such containers shall be placed in a manner which does not disrupt
pedestrian circulation, and 51.03, Subd. D.6 be designed to prevent
spillage and blowing litter.
4. Small engine and boat repair provided that:
a. At the boundaries of a residential district, a strip of not less than five (5)
feet shall be landscaped and screened in compliance with Section 51.03,
Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
b. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through
traffic movement and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
c. Provisions are made to control and reduce noise.
d. No outside storage, repair or sales except in compliance with Section
51.23.C.5 of this Ordinance shall be allowed.
e. All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the
Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the
general welfare and public betterment can be served as well or better by
modifying the conditions.
Subd. E. Interim Uses. The following are interim uses in the B-4 District: (Requires
a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated in Section
51.02, Subd. C of this Ordinance.)
1. None.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-4 District
23-4
Subd. F. Uses by Administrative Permit. The following are uses allowed by an
administrative permit in the B-4 District (based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. E of this Ordinance):
1. Personal wireless service antennas as secondary uses as regulated by Section
51.03, Subd. M of this Ordinance.
2. Temporary/seasonal outdoor promotional events and sales provided that:
a. Such activity is targeted toward the general public and includes grand
openings, warehouse sales, sidewalk sales, inventory reduction and
liquidation sales, and seasonal merchandise sales.
b. The maximum term of the event shall not exceed fourteen (14)
consecutive days, with a maximum of four (4) permits per calendar year
for each use. Consecutive permits may be issued.
c. No portion of the use shall take place within any public right-of-way or
landscaped green strip.
d. Parking and display areas associated with the use shall not distract or
interfere with existing business operations or traffic circulation patterns.
e. Display areas and parking spaces shall use those parking lot spaces that
are in excess of the minimum required parking for the primary use of that
property.
f. The site shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner and display of items
shall be as compact as possible so as to not interfere with existing
business, parking or driveway operations.
g. Sales products, trailers, temporary stands, etc. shall be located on an
asphalt or concrete surface as approved in the administrative permit.
h. Temporary outdoor seasonal sales uses (with a valid administrative
permit) may have one (1) on-site temporary sign not to exceed twenty-four
(24) square feet in area and not more than six (6) feet in height.
i. A daily clean up program shall be presented as part of the administrative
permit application.
Subd. G. Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in the B-4 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Minimum Lot Area. None.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-4 District
23-5
2. Minimum Lot Width. None.
3. Minimum Lot Depth. None.
4. Setbacks.
a. Front Yard. None.
b. Side Yard. None.
c. Rear Yard. None, except no building shall be located within twenty (20)
feet of a rear lot line abutting any residential district.
Subd. H. Building Requirements.
1. Height. No structure shall exceed three (3) stories, or thirty-six (36) feet,
whichever is least, except as provided for in Section 51.23, Subd. D.1 of this
Ordinance.
2. Exterior Building Elevations.
a. Within the B-4 Zoning District, all exterior wall surfaces may be a
combination of materials including brick, dimensioned stone, rock faced
brick, decorative concrete panels, architectural concrete block, cast in
place concrete, stone, or glass. Exterior wall surfaces shall be compatible
with the Delano Central Business District Architectural Guidelines.
b. Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings shall be constructed of building
materials to match the principal structure and comply with the building
material requirements of this Ordinance.
c. In all zoning districts, mechanical equipment such as heating, ventilation,
or air conditioning units located anywhere on the property shall be
screened and painted to match the building exterior.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-4 District
23-6
SECTION 51.24. B-W, BUSINESS/WAREHOUSING DISTRICT
Subd. A. Purpose. The purpose of the B-W, Business/Warehousing District is to
provide for the establishment of wholesale and retail trade of large volume or bulk
commercial items storage and warehousing. The overall character of the B-W District is
intended to be transitional in nature, thus industrial uses allowed within this District shall
be limited to those which can compatibly exist adjacent to commercial and lower
intensity activities.
Subd. B. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses in the B-W District:
1. Building materials sales.
2. Cartage and express facilities.
3. Commercial printing establishments.
4. Essential services.
5. Government and public utility buildings and structures.
6. Jewelry manufacturing.
7. Medical, dental, optical and research laboratories.
8. Office business, clinical and general.
9. Radio and television stations.
10. Recreation business – indoor.
11. Service business – off-site. Shops and offices for contractors including plumbing,
heating, glazing, painting, paper hanging, roofing, ventilating, electrical,
carpentry, welding, landscaping, excavating, and general contracting, including
contractor storage of equipment and building materials if enclosed within a
building, but not storage yards.
12. Sexually oriented use – principal, as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. L of this
Ordinance.
13. Trade schools.
14. Transportation terminals.
15. Warehousing and distribution facilities.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-W District
24-1
16. Wholesale business.
Subd. C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory uses
in the B-W District:
1. Commercial accessory buildings not exceeding thirty (30) percent of the gross
floor space of the principal building.
2. Fences, as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. D.11 of this Ordinance.
3. Off-street loading as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. F of this Ordinance.
4. Off-street parking as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance.
5. Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs three (3)
meters or less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, or those
necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers,
ham radio transmitters and television receivers as regulated by Section 51.03,
Subd. M of this Ordinance.
6. Signs as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. N of this Ordinance.
Subd. D. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses allowed in the B-W
District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.)
1. Accessory enclosed retail, rental or service activity other than that allowed as a
permitted use or conditional use within this Section, provided that:
a. Such use does not constitute more than fifty (50) percent of the gross floor
area of the principal use.
b. Adequate off-street parking and off-street loading in compliance with the
requirements of Section 51.03, Subd. F of this Ordinance is provided.
c. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. N of this Ordinance.
2. Open and outdoor storage as an accessory use provided that:
a. The area is fenced and screened from view of the neighboring residential
uses or if abutting a residential district in compliance with Section 51.03,
Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-W District
24-2
b. Storage is screened from view from the public right-of-way in compliance
with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
c. Storage area is paved or surfaced to control dust and erosion.
d. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not
be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences and
shall be in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.2 of this Ordinance.
e. The storage use does not take up parking space as required for
conformity to this Ordinance.
3. Outdoor sales or rental lots including but not limited to automobiles, trucks,
snowmobiles, tractors, recreational vehicles, boats, farming equipment,
construction equipment and trailers, provided that:
a. Outdoor sales or rental be associated with a principal building of at least
one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area.
b. Outdoor sales area shall be set at least five (5) feet back from all property
lines, and at least fifteen (15) feet back from any street surface.
c. Outdoor sales shall be physically defined on the site by surfacing,
landscaping, or a fence barrier.
d. The boulevard portion of the street right-of-way shall not be used for
parking, or storage or display of sale items.
e. Outdoor sales area shall not be utilized for storage of unlicensed or
inoperable vehicles (except trailer sales), scrap materials or trash handling
areas.
f. Outside sales areas are fenced or screened from view of neighboring
residential uses or an abutting residential district in compliance with
Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
g. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source is not
visible from the public right-of-way or from an abutting residence and shall
be in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.2 of this Ordinance.
h. All display/sales/storage areas shall be paved or surfaced to control dust.
i. The use does not take up parking space as required for conformity to this
Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-W District
24-3
j. Damaged vehicles or equipment awaiting repair shall be considered
outdoor storage and shall be subject to the conditions outlined in Section
51.22, Subd. D.6 of this Ordinance.
4. Planned unit developments as regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. J of this
Ordinance.
Subd. E. Interim Uses. The following are interim uses in the B-W District:
(Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated in
Section 51.02, Subd. C of this Ordinance.)
1. None.
Subd. F. Uses by Administrative Permit. The following are uses allowed by an
administrative permit in the B-W District (based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. E of this Ordinance):
1. Personal wireless service antennas as secondary uses as regulated by Section
51.03, Subd. M of this Ordinance.
2. Telecommunication towers as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. M of this
Ordinance.
3. Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. M of this
Ordinance.
Subd. G. Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in the B-W District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Minimum Lot Area. Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width. One hundred (100) feet.
3. Minimum Lot Depth. None.
4. Setbacks.
a. Front Yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
b. Side Yard. Not less than twenty (20) feet of any one side, nor less than
thirty (30) feet on a side yard abutting a street or any residential district.
c. Rear Yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
Subd. H. Building Requirements.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-W District
24-4
1. Height. No structure shall exceed three (3) stories, or thirty-six (36) feet,
whichever is least, however, building heights in excess of the prescribed
standard may be permitted through a conditional use permit provided that:
a. The site is capable of accommodating any increased intensity of use.
b. Any increased intensity of use does not cause an increase in traffic
volumes beyond the capacity of the surrounding streets.
c. Public utilities and services are adequate.
2. Minimum Floor Area. Commercial buildings (principal structure) having less
than one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area may only be allowed upon
approval of a conditional use permit as provided for in Section 51.02, Subd. D of
this Ordinance.
3. Exterior Building Elevations.
a. Principal Buildings. Within the B-W District, all exterior wall surfaces may
be a combination of materials including brick, dimensioned stone, rock
faced block, decorative concrete panel, architectural concrete block, castin-
place concrete, stone, stucco, wood, or glass. Metal panels shall not
encompass more than an average of seventy-five (75) percent of all
building elevations combined (except as allowed in Section 51.03, Subd.
E.3.f or Subd. E.3.g of this Ordinance).
b. Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings shall be constructed of building
materials to match the principal structure and comply with the building
material requirements of this Ordinance.
c. In all zoning districts, mechanical equipment such as heating, ventilation,
or air conditioning units located anywhere on the property shall be
screened and painted to match the building exterior.
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-W District
24-5
Delano Zoning Ordinance B-W District
24-6
SECTION 51.30. I-1, LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Subd. A. Purpose. The purpose of the I-1, Limited Industrial District is to provide for
the establishment of warehousing and light industry. The overall character of the I-1
District is intended to be transitional in nature, thus industrial uses allowed in this District
shall be limited to those which can compatibly exist adjacent to the B-W District or
commercial uses, but require isolation from residential uses.
Subd. B. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses in the I-1 District:
1. Bottling establishments to include beverages such as soft drinks, milk, etc., but
not including hazardous or toxic materials.
2. Building material sales.
3. Cartage and express facilities.
4. Commercial printing and publishing establishments.
5. Essential services.
6. Feed and seed sales.
7. Government and public utility buildings and structures.
8. Greenhouses, nurseries.
9. Laundry, dry cleaning or dying plants.
10. Machine shops and metal products manufacturing when not equipped with heavy
(exceeding fifty (50) ton pressure) punch presses, drop forges, riveting and
grinding machines or any equipment which may create noise, vibration, smoke,
odors, heat, or glare, etc., disturbing to adjacent property occupants.
11. Manufacturing or assembly of a wide variety of products that produces no
exterior noise, glare, fumes, obnoxious products, by-products, or wastes, or
creates other objectionable impact on the environment, including the generation
of large volumes of traffic. Examples of such uses are:
a. Fabrication or assembly of small products such as optical, electronic,
pharmaceutical, medical supplies, and equipment.
b. Product assembly.
12. Mass transit terminals.
Delano Zoning Ordinance I-1 District
30-1
13. Office businesses – clinical and general.
14. Radio and television stations.
15. Recreation business – indoor, private athletic clubs.
16. Research laboratories.
17. Service business, off-site. Shops and offices for contractors including plumbing,
heating, glazing, painting, paper hanging, roofing, ventilating, electrical,
carpentry, welding, landscaping, excavating, and general contracting, including
contractor storage of equipment and building materials if enclosed within a
building, but not storage yards.
18. Sexually oriented use – principal, as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. L of this
Ordinance.
19. Trade schools/specialty schools.
20. Warehousing and distribution facilities but not including truck freight trucking
terminal or mini self-storage facilities as defined by Section 51.01, Subd. B of this
Ordinance.
21. Wholesale businesses.
Subd. C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory
uses in the I-1 District:
1. Accessory buildings and structures not exceeding thirty (30) percent of the gross
floor area of the principal building.
2. Fences as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. D.11 of this Ordinance.
3. Off-street loading as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. F of this Ordinance.
4. Off-street parking as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance.
5. Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs three (3)
meters or less in diameter, short-wave dispatching antennas, or those necessary
for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers, ham radio
transmitters and television receivers as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. M of
this Ordinance.
6. Signs as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. N of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance I-1 District
30-2
Subd. D. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses allowed in the I-1
District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.)
1. Automobile and truck repair - major (including body shops) provided that:
a. The entire area other than occupied by buildings or structures or planting
shall be surfaced with bituminous or concrete which will control dust and
drainage. The entire area shall have a perimeter curb barrier, a storm
water drainage system and is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
b. All painting shall be conducted in an approved paint booth. All paint
booths and all other activities of the operation shall thoroughly control the
emission of fumes, dust or other particulated matter so that the use shall
be in compliance with the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards,
Minnesota Regulation APC 1-15, as amended.
c. The emission of odor by a use shall be in compliance with and regulated
by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota
regulations APC, as amended.
d. All flammable materials, including liquids and rags, shall conform with the
applicable provisions of the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code.
e. All outside storage shall be prohibited except allowed under Section 51.30,
Subd. D.3 of this Ordinance.
f. All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the
Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the
general welfare and public betterment can be served by modifying the
conditions.
2. Commercial and Public Radio and Television Transmitting Antennas, and Public
Utility Microwave Antennas greater than forty-five (45) feet in height and less
than two hundred (200) feet in height as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. M of
this Ordinance.
3. Open and outdoor storage (not outdoor sales lots) as an accessory use provided
that:
a. The storage area is landscaped and screened from view of neighboring
uses, residential zoning districts, and public rights-of-way per Section
51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
b. Storage area is fenced in a manner approved by the City.
Delano Zoning Ordinance I-1 District
30-3
c. Storage area is paved or surfaced to control dust and erosion.
d. All lighting shall be in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.3 of this
Ordinance or other lighting standards in place at the time of project
approval.
e. The storage area does not take up parking space or loading space as
required for conformity to this Ordinance and not in front yards.
f. The property shall not abut property zoned for residential, rural, or
business use, including land in a neighboring township or city. “Abutting”
includes across a street. “Abutting” does not include properties that touch
only corner to corner.
g. The storage area shall not abut a school or a public park.
h. The ratio of storage area to building footprint shall not exceed 3.5:1.
i. Storage shall not include material considered hazardous under Federal or
State Environmental Law.
4. Planned unit development (including shopping centers) as regulated by Section
51.02, Subd. J of this Ordinance.
5. Veterinary clinics (with kennels) provided that:
a. All areas in which animals are confined are located indoors and are
properly soundproofed from adjacent properties.
b. Animal carcasses are properly disposed of in a manner not utilizing on-site
garbage facilities or incineration and the carcasses are properly
refrigerated during periods prior to disposal.
c. An animal kennel is permitted as a use accessory to the veterinary clinic
provided that:
1) The number of animals boarded shall be determined by the City.
2) An enclosed exercise area shall be provided to accommodate the
periodic exercising of animals boarded at the kennel.
3) A ventilation system shall be designed so that no odors or
organisms will spread between wards or to the outside air and will
be capable of completely exchanging internal air at a rate of at least
twice per hour. Air temperature shall be maintained between 60
and 75 degrees Fahrenheit.
Delano Zoning Ordinance I-1 District
30-4
4) A room separate from the kennel area shall be provided of
sufficient size to adequately separate animals that are sick or
injured from healthy animals.
5) Indoor animal kennel floors and walls shall be made of non-porous
materials or sealed concrete to make it non-porous.
6) Animal wastes shall be flushed down an existing sanitary sewer
system or enclosed in a container of sufficient construction to
eliminate odors and organisms and shall be properly disposed of at
least once a day.
d. The appropriate license is obtained from the City Clerk and the conditions
of Section 408.1 of the Delano City Code relating to kennels are
satisfactorily met.
e. All State Health Department and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
requirements for such facilities are met.
Subd. E. Uses by Administrative Permit. The following are uses allowed by an
administrative permit in the I-1 District (based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. E of this Ordinance):
1. Personal wireless service antennas as secondary uses as regulated by Section
51.03, Subd. M of this Ordinance.
2. Telecommunication towers as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. M of this
Ordinance.
3. Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. M of this
Ordinance.
Subd. F. Interim Uses. The following are interim uses in the I-1 District: (Requires
a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated in Section
51.02, Subd. C of this Ordinance.)
1. Open and outdoor storage as a principal use provided that:
a. A minimum setback of seventy-five (75) feet is provided along abutting
residentially zoned properties.
b. The setback shall include a buffer yard not less than twenty (20) feet in
width provided along residentially zoned properties in compliance with
Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance I-1 District
30-5
c. All storage is screened from view of neighboring uses and public rights-ofway
via a fence or green belt planting strip or combination thereof in
compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
d. The storage area does not take up parking space or loading space as
required for conformity to this Ordinance.
e. All lighting be in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.3 of this
Ordinance.
f. The storage area is fenced and secured in an appropriate manner.
g. The storage area is paved or surfaced to control dust and erosion.
h. All parking, loading and truck staging activities shall occur on site. Onstreet
parking and loading associated with the use is prohibited.
i. Noises emanating from the use are in compliance with and regulated by
the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota
Regulations MPC 7030, as amended and City Code.
j. The use is terminated upon a specified date or the happening of an event
as determined by the City.
Subd. G. Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in the I-1 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Minimum Lot Area. Forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width. One hundred (100) feet.
3. Minimum Lot Depth. None.
4. Setbacks.
a. Front Yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
b. Side Yard. Not less than ten (10) feet, nor less than thirty (30) feet on a
side yard abutting a street, nor less than twenty (20) feet on a side yard
abutting any residential district.
c. Rear Yard. Not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the lot depth or thirty
(30) feet, whichever is least, nor less than forty (40) feet in a rear yard
abutting any residential zoning district.
Delano Zoning Ordinance I-1 District
30-6
Subd. H. Building Requirements.
1. Height. No structure shall exceed four (4) stories, or forty-eight (48) feet,
whichever is least, however, building heights in excess of the prescribed
standard may be permitted through a conditional use permit, provided that:
a. The site is capable of accommodating any increased intensity of use.
b. Any increased intensity of use does not cause an increase in traffic
volumes beyond the capacity of the surrounding streets.
c. Public utilities and services are adequate.
d. The front and side yard setbacks shall be increased one (1) foot for every
three (3) feet of height in excess of three (3) stories or thirty-six (36) feet,
whichever is least.
e. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily complied with.
2. Minimum Floor Area. Industrial buildings (principal structure) having less than
one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area may only be allowed upon
approval of a conditional use permit, as provided for in Section 51.02, Subd. B of
this Ordinance.
3. Exterior Building Elevations.
a. Within the I-1 Zoning District, all exterior wall surfaces may be a
combination of materials including brick, dimensioned stone, rock faced
block, decorative concrete panels, architectural concrete block, cast-inplace
concrete, stone, wood, glass, or metal panels. Metal panels shall
not encompass more than an average of twenty-five (25) percent of all
building elevations combined (except as may be allowed in Section 51.03,
Subd. C.3.g of this Ordinance).
b. Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings shall be constructed of building
materials to match the principal structure and comply with the building
material requirements of this Ordinance.
c. In all zoning districts, mechanical equipment such as heating, ventilation,
or air conditioning units located anywhere on the property shall be
screened and painted to match the building exterior.
Delano Zoning Ordinance I-1 District
30-7
SECTION 51.31. I-2, GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Subd. A. Purpose. The purpose of the I-2, General Industrial District is to provide for
the establishment of heavy industry and manufacturing development and use which
because of the nature of the product or character of activity, requires isolation from
residential or commercial uses.
Subd. B. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses in the I-2 District:
1. Bottling establishments to include beverages such as soft drinks, milk, etc., but
not including hazardous or toxic materials.
2. Building material sales.
3. Commercial printing and publishing establishments.
4. Essential services.
5. Feed and seed sales.
6. Government and public utility buildings and/or structures.
7. Laundry, dry cleaning or dying plant.
8. Machine shops and metal products manufacturing when equipped with heavy
(exceeding fifty (50) ton pressure) punch presses, drop forges, riveting and
grinding machines or any equipment which may create noise, vibration, smoke,
odors, heat, or glare, etc., disturbing to adjacent property occupants.
9. Manufacturing or assembly of a wide variety of products that produces no
exterior noise, glare, fumes, obnoxious products, by-products, or wastes, or
creates other objectionable impact on the environment, including the generation
of large volumes of traffic.
10. Office business – clinical and general.
11. Radio and television stations.
12. Recreational businesses – indoors.
13. Service businesses, off-site. Shops and offices for contractors including
plumbing, heating, glazing, painting, paper hanging, roofing, ventilating,
electrical, carpentry, welding, landscaping, excavating, and general contracting,
including contractor storage of equipment and building materials if enclosed
within a building, but not storage yards.
Delano Zoning Ordinance I-2 District
31-1
14. Sexually oriented use - principal, as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. L of this
Ordinance.
15. Shops and offices for contractors including plumbing, heating, glazing, painting,
paper hanging, roofing, ventilating, electrical, carpentry, welding, landscaping,
excavating, and general contracting, including contractor storage of equipment
and building materials if enclosed within a building, but not storage yards.
16. Warehousing and distribution facilities but not including truck freight trucking
terminal or mini self-storage facilities as defined by Section 51.01, Subd. B of this
Ordinance.
17. Wholesale businesses and offices.
Subd. C. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory
uses in the I-2 District:
1. Accessory buildings and structures not exceeding thirty (30) percent of the gross
floor area of the principal building.
2. Fences as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. D.11 of this Ordinance.
3. Off-street loading as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. F of this Ordinance.
4. Off-street parking as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. E of this Ordinance.
5. Radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs three (3)
meters or less in diameter, short-wave dispatching antennas, or those necessary
for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers, ham radio
transmitters and television receivers as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. M of
this Ordinance.
6. Signs as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. N of this Ordinance.
Subd. D. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses allowed in the I-2
District: (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. B of this Ordinance.)
1. Automobile and truck repair - major (including body shops) provided that:
a. The entire area other than occupied by buildings or structures or planting
shall be surfaced with bituminous or concrete which will control dust and
drainage. The entire area shall have a perimeter curb barrier, a storm
water drainage system and is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
Delano Zoning Ordinance I-2 District
31-2
b. All painting shall be conducted in an approved paint booth. All paint
booths and all other activities of the operation shall thoroughly control the
emission of fumes, dust or other particulated matter so that the use shall
be in compliance with the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards,
Minnesota Regulation APC 1-15, as amended.
c. The emission of odor by a use shall be in compliance with and regulated
by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota
regulations APC, as amended.
d. All flammable materials, including liquids and rags, shall conform with the
applicable provisions of the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code.
e. All outside storage shall be prohibited except the storage of customer
vehicles waiting for repair.
f. All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the
Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the
general welfare and public betterment can be served by modifying the
conditions.
2. Commercial and Public Radio and Television Transmitting Antennas, and Public
Utility Microwave Antennas greater than forty-five (45) feet in height and less
than two hundred (200) feet in height as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. M of
this Ordinance.
3. Concrete product plants, building materials production and similar uses provided
that:
a. All applicable Minnesota Pollution Control Agency requirements are
satisfactorily met.
b. A drainage system subject to the approval of the City Engineer shall be
installed.
c. Storage areas are landscaped, fenced and screened from view of
neighboring uses, abutting residential zoning districts and public rights-ofway
in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
d. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through
traffic movement and shall be subject to approval of the City Engineer.
e. Provisions shall be made to control and minimize noise, air and water
pollution.
Delano Zoning Ordinance I-2 District
31-3
f. All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the
Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the
general welfare or public betterment can be served as well or better by
modifying the conditions.
4. Crude oil, gasoline or other liquid storage tanks as an accessory use (not
including bulk propane at motor fuel stations for providing service to the general
public) provided that:
a. All applicable Minnesota Pollution Control Agency requirements are
satisfactorily met.
b. A drainage system subject to the approval of the City Engineer shall be
installed.
c. Storage areas are landscaped, fenced and screened from view of
neighboring uses, abutting residential zoning districts and public rights-ofway
in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10.
d. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through
traffic movement and shall be subject to approval of the City Engineer.
e. All crude oil, gasoline or other liquid storage tanks shall be located in the
rear yard not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any property boundary
lines and setback one hundred fifty (150) feet from any adjoining
residential zoning district. No tanks shall be permitted in the front yard or
side yard abutting public rights-of-way.
f. Storage tanks shall be surrounded by twenty-five (25) feet of open area.
Storage of any kind is prohibited in said open area, except equipment
incidental to the storage tank. Approved parking must be set back ten
(10) feet from any storage tank.
g. Storage tanks shall be set back from existing structures, as outlined in the
Fire Code, based on tank size.
h. Storage tanks shall not interfere with site circulation, including but not
limited to, parking, driveway, curb cuts and loading area.
i. A wire weave/chain link security fence shall be required around all storage
tanks. The location of said fence shall be as per the Uniform Fire Code.
j. Storage sites shall be accessible by service and emergency vehicles.
k. All filling values of the storage tanks shall be enclosed and have locking
devices.
Delano Zoning Ordinance I-2 District
31-4
l. A warning sign shall be required for every tank and shall be placed in a
conspicuous location, directly on the tank indicating a supplier’s name,
address, phone number, that highly flammable and dangerous material is
stored therein, and that no smoking requirements must be observed or a
sufficient warning to that effect. Said signage may not exceed four (4)
square feet nor may it be used for advertising purposes.
m. Provisions are made to control and minimize noise, air and water pollution.
n. All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the
Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the
general welfare or public betterment can be served as well or better by
modifying the conditions.
5. Manufacturing of materials, including but not limited to, rubber, corrosive acids,
petroleum and chemical products, which pose potential health and safety risks
and which when produced give off potentially noxious odors provided that:
a. All applicable Minnesota Pollution Control Agency requirements are
satisfactorily met.
b. A drainage system subject to the approval of the City Engineer shall be
installed.
c. Storage areas are landscaped, fenced and screened from view of
neighboring uses, abutting residential zoning districts and public rights-ofway
in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10.
d. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through
traffic movement and shall be subject to approval of the City Engineer.
e. Provisions are made to control and minimize noise, air and water pollution.
f. Exterior liquid storage tanks shall comply with the standards of Section
51.03, Subd. D.7 of this Ordinance.
g. All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the
Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the
general welfare or public betterment can be served as well or better by
modifying the conditions.
6. Mini self-storage facilities provided that:
Delano Zoning Ordinance I-2 District
31-5
a. At least twenty-five (25) percent of the site is open green space which is
sodded and intensely landscaped in accordance with a plan approved by
the City Council.
b. No buildings shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to each
other to allow for parking, loading, driveway and fire lanes.
c. No single building shall be greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet in
length.
d. Adequate space is provided for snow storage.
e. All structures are to be within two hundred (200) feet of a fire hydrant.
f. All storage buildings are to be equipped with an approved fire suppression
system which will be subject to review and approval of the City Building
Official and the Fire Department.
g. Every two thousand (2,000) square feet of the storage structure is to be
separated by a fire wall and a complete and comprehensive fire alarm
system with smoke detectors shall be initiated in each structure subject to
the review and approval of the Fire Department.
h. All driveways and parking areas are to be hard (blacktop or concrete)
surfaced and adequate turning radius for fire truck maneuverability is to be
maintained throughout the site. Designated snow storage space is to be
provided to insure adequate and safe access during winter months.
i. If an “on-premises” caretaker dwelling unit is provided on site, construction
of said dwelling unit shall conform to all design standard regulations for
multiple family dwelling units of the Minnesota State Building Code.
j. Any structures having exposure to an adjacent residential use or public
right-of-way, park, or similar public use areas shall be of brick, natural
stone, wood, or stucco facing material.
k. No retailing, wholesaling, manufacturing, repair, or other such activity
other than storage is to occur within the self storage, mini warehousing
facility.
7. Open and outdoor storage (not outdoor sales lots) as an accessory use provided
that:
Delano Zoning Ordinance I-2 District
31-6
a. The storage area is landscaped and screened from view of neighboring
uses, residential zoning districts, and public rights-of-way per Section
51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
b. Storage area is fenced in a manner approved by the City.
c. Storage area is paved or surfaced to control dust and erosion.
d. All lighting shall be in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.3 of this
Ordinance or other lighting standards in place at the time of project
approval.
e. The storage area does not take up parking space or loading space as
required for conformity to this Ordinance and not in front yards.
f. The property shall not abut property zoned for residential, rural, or
business use, including land in a neighboring township or city. “Abutting”
includes across a street. “Abutting” does not include properties that touch
only corner to corner.
g. The storage area shall not abut a school or a public park.
h. The ratio of storage area to building footprint shall not exceed 3.5:1.
i. Storage shall not include material considered hazardous under Federal or
State Environmental Law.
8. Refuse/garbage collection provided that:
a. No refuse or garbage shall be stored or in any way disposed of on the site.
b. The storage of refuse or garbage in the front yard shall be prohibited.
c. Vehicle parking and storage areas are screened from view of neighboring
uses, abutting residential zoning districts and public rights-of-way in
compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10 of this Ordinance.
d. Vehicle parking/storage areas shall be hard surfaced with a bituminous
material with curb and gutter to control dust and shall be screened from
view of neighboring uses and public rights-of-way.
e. The site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable
materials and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis.
Delano Zoning Ordinance I-2 District
31-7
f. One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each commercial
vehicle operated by the business. Parking requirements will otherwise be
as mandated by the provisions of Section 51.03, Subd. E of this
Ordinance.
g. All in bound and out bound trucks and equipment, excluding employees
personal vehicles, shall be restricted to designated routes established by
the City, except for times when providing collection service to customers
within the City limits.
h. The hours of operation shall be limited as necessary to minimize the
effects of nuisance factors such as traffic, noise, and glare upon any
existing neighboring residential uses, or residential zoning districts.
i. Provisions are made to control and minimize noise, air and water pollution.
j. All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the
Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the
general welfare or public betterment can be served as well or better by
modifying the conditions.
9. Trucking terminals provided that:
a. Vehicular access points shall be located along arterial streets and shall be
limited and designed and constructed to create a minimum of conflict with
through traffic movement.
b. A drainage system subject to the approval of the City Engineer shall be
installed.
c. Storage areas are landscaped, fenced and screened from view of
neighboring uses, abutting residential zoning districts and public rights-ofway
in compliance with Section 51.03, Subd. D.10.
d. Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through
traffic movement and shall be subject to approval of the City Engineer.
e. Provisions are made to control and minimize noise, air and water pollution.
f. All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the
Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the
general welfare or public betterment can be served as well or better by
modifying the conditions.
Delano Zoning Ordinance I-2 District
31-8
Subd. E. Uses by Administrative Permit. The following are uses allowed by an
administrative permit in the I-2 District (based upon procedures set forth in and
regulated by Section 51.02, Subd. E of this Ordinance):
1. Personal wireless service antennas as secondary uses as regulated by Section
51.03, Subd. M of this Ordinance.
2. Telecommunication towers as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. M of this
Ordinance.
3. Temporary mobile towers as regulated by Section 51.03, Subd. M of this
Ordinance.
Subd. F. Interim Uses. The following are interim uses in the I-2 District: (Requires
a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth and regulated in Section
51.02, Subd. C of this Ordinance.)
1. None.
Subd. G. Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in the I-2 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Ordinance.
1. Minimum Lot Area. Forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width. One hundred (100) feet.
3. Minimum Lot Depth. None.
4. Setbacks.
a. Front Yard. Not less than thirty (30) feet.
b. Side Yard. Not less than ten (10) feet, nor less than thirty (30) feet on a
side yard abutting a street, nor less than twenty (20) feet on a side yard
abutting any residential district.
c. Rear Yard. Not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the lot depth or thirty
(30) feet, whichever is least, nor less than forty (40) feet in a rear yard
abutting any residential zoning district.
Subd. H. Building Requirements.
Delano Zoning Ordinance I-2 District
31-9
1. Height. No structure shall exceed four (4) stories, or forty-eight (48) feet,
whichever is least, however, building heights in excess of the prescribed
standard may be permitted through a conditional use permit, provided that:
a. The site is capable of accommodating any increased intensity of use.
b. Any increased intensity of use does not cause an increase in traffic
volumes beyond the capacity of the surrounding streets.
c. Public utilities and services are adequate.
d. The front and side yard setbacks shall be increased one (1) foot for every
three (3) feet of height in excess of three (3) stories or thirty-six (36) feet,
whichever is least.
e. The provisions of Section 51.02, Subd. B.4 of this Ordinance are
considered and satisfactorily complied with.
2. Minimum Floor Area. Industrial buildings (principal structure) having less than
one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area may only be allowed upon
approval of a conditional use permit as provided for in Section 51.02, Subd. D of
this Ordinance.
3. Exterior Building Elevations.
a. Principal Buildings. Within the I-2 District, all exterior wall surfaces may
be a combination of materials including brick, dimensioned stone, rock
faced block, decorative concrete panel, architectural concrete block, castin-
place concrete, stone, stucco, wood, or glass. Metal panels shall not
encompass more than an average of seventy-five (75) percent of all
building elevations combined (except as allowed in Section 51.03, Subd.
E.3.f or Subd. E.3.g of this Ordinance).
b. Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings shall be constructed of building
materials to match the principal structure and comply with the building
material requirements of this Ordinance.
c. In all zoning districts, mechanical equipment such as heating, ventilation,
or air conditioning units located anywhere on the property shall be
screened and painted to match the building exterior.
Delano Zoning Ordinance I-2 District
31-10
Delano Zoning Ordinance I-2 District
31-11
SECTION 51.32. PUD, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
Subd. A. Purpose. The purpose of the PUD, Planned Unit Development District is
to provide for the integration and coordination of land parcels, as well as the
combination or mixture of varying types of residential, commercial and/or industrial land
uses.
Subd. B. Permitted Uses. All permitted, permitted accessory or conditional uses
contained in all zoning districts identified in Sections 51.05 through 51.31 of this
Ordinance shall be directed as permitted uses within the PUD District.
Subd. C. Special Procedures. The establishment of a Planned Unit Development
District shall be subject to the procedural and administrative requirements in Section
51.02, Subd. J of this Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance PUD District
32-1
Delano Zoning Ordinance PUD District
32-2
SECTION 51.51. S, SHORELAND DISTRICT
Subd. A. Purpose. The purpose of the S, Shoreland District is to manage the
effect of shoreland and water surface crowding, to prevent pollution of surface and
ground waters of the City, to provide ample space on lots for sewage treatment
systems, to minimize flood damages, to maintain property values, and to maintain
natural characteristics of shorelands and adjacent water areas via shoreland controls
which regulate lot sizes, placement of structures and alterations of shoreland areas.
Subd. B. District Authorization. The shorelands within the City of Delano are
hereby designated as shoreland districts and the requirements set forth in this
Ordinance shall govern development and other activities within these districts, pursuant
to authorization and policies contained in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 103F, Minnesota
Regulations, Parts 6120.2500-6120.3900. The classification of the shoreland areas
shall govern the use, alteration and development of these areas according to said
classification.
Subd. C. District Application. The S, Shoreland District shall be applied to and
superimposed (overlaid) upon all zoning districts of this Ordinance as existing or
amended by the text and map of this Ordinance. The regulations and requirements
imposed by the S, Shoreland District shall be in addition to those established for
districts which joint apply. Under the joint application of districts, the more restrictive
requirements shall apply.
Subd. D. District Boundaries. The boundaries of the S, Shoreland District are
established within the following distances from the ordinary high water mark of the
surface water depending on the size of the surface water as indicated on the Delano
Shoreland District Map.
Surface Water District (feet)1
Greater than ten (10) acres (Table 1) 1,000
Rivers and Streams (draining an area 3002
greater than two (2) square miles)
1 The practical distance may be less whenever the waters involved are
bounded by topographical divides which extend landward from the waters for
lesser distances and prevent flowage toward the surface water.
2 The distance requirement shall be increased to the limit of the floodplain
when the floodplain is greater than three hundred (300) feet.
Subd. E. Shoreland Classification. The surface waters affected by this section
and which require controlled development of their shoreland (Shoreland District) are
Delano Zoning Ordinance Shoreland District
51-1
shown on the map designed as the official “Shoreland Map of the City of Delano” which
is incorporated herein by this reference and filed with the City Clerk . Surface waters
generally greater than ten (10) acres and given an identification number by the State of
Minnesota as defined in this section and listed in Table 1, below. Other surface waters
affected by this Ordinance, generally having less than ten (10) acres, are classified as
wetland systems and thus regulated under the provisions of Section 10 of the Delano
Subdivision Ordinance.
TABLE 1
SURFACE WATER DISTRIBUTION
DNR Identification
Number
Name Classification
Crow River, South Fork GD
Subd. F. Allowable Land Uses. The land uses allowable for the S, Shoreland
District shall follow the “permitted”, “accessory”, and “conditional” use designations as
defined and outlined in the base zoning districts.
Subd. G. Minimum Lot and Setback Requirements.
1. The following chart sets forth the minimum area setbacks and other requirements
of each respective classification:
NE
Natural
Environment
RD
Recreational
Development
GD
General
Development
a. Minimum lot size above normal high
water mark
Non-sewered1
Sewered - abutting water
Sewered - non-abutting
2 acres
1 acre
20,000 SF
1 acre
20,000 SF
15,000 SF
15,000 SF
15,000 SF
b. Lot Width1
Non-sewered
Sewered
200 feet
125 feet
150 feet
80 feet
100 feet
80 feet
c. Setback from ordinary high water mark2
Non-sewered
Sewered
200 feet
150 feet
100 feet
75 feet
100 feet
50 feet
d. Setback from public streets
Abutting federal, state or county road
Abutting town or public road
50 feet
30 feet
50 feet
30 feet
50 feet
30 feet
e. Setback from top of bluff 30 feet 30 feet 30 feet
f. Maximum impervious surface to area
ratio 30% 30% 30%
g. Maximum building height 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet
h. Side yard setback3 30 feet 20 feet 20 feet
i. Ordinary setback of roads and parking
(impervious surface) areas from ordinary
Delano Zoning Ordinance Shoreland District
51-2
high water mark3 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet
j. Structure height (lowest floor) above
high water elevation4 3 feet 3 feet 3 feet
1 Lot size requirements in unsewered areas are also subject to Section 51.03.
2 Setback requirements from the ordinary high water mark shall not apply to boathouses, piers,
park buildings or structures, and docks. Boathouses may be permitted to be located up to the
ordinary high water mark provided they shall not be used for habitation and they shall not
contain sanitary facilities. Where development exists on both sides of a proposed building site,
building setbacks may be altered to more closely conform to adjacent building setbacks,
provided the proposed building site is not located in a shoreland impact zone or in a bluff impact
zone.
3 Where feasible and practical, all roads and parking area shall meet the setback requirements
established for structures in (c) above. Natural vegetation or other natural materials shall be
required in order to screen parking areas when viewed from the water. Parking areas of more
than four (4) spaces shall be screened in accordance with a landscaping plan submitted and
approved by the City Council.
4 Does not include boathouses, park buildings or structures, piers and docks.
2. Substandard Lot. Any lot of record filed in the office of the Wright County
Register of Deeds on the effective date of this Ordinance amendment which does
not meet the area requirements of this Ordinance may be allowed as a building
site subject to approval of a shoreland impact plan and provided:
a. The lot is serviced by municipal sewer and water.
b. Except for lot area, all other sanitary and dimensional requirements of the
Shoreland District are complied with insofar as practical (seventy (70)
percent width and setback requirements).
Subd. H. Development Regulations.
1. Applications. Landowners or developers desiring to develop land or construct a
dwelling, building, or any other artificial obstruction on land located within any
shoreland district within the City of Delano shall make one of the following
applications:
a. Single family dwelling, two family dwelling, or accessory buildings shall
submit an application for building permit.
b. Multiple family, townhomes, commercial, or industrial buildings shall
submit application for a site and building plan review as regulated by
Section 51.02, Subd. F of this Ordinance.
c. Subdivision request shall submit an application for preliminary and/or final
plat as required by the Delano Subdivision Ordinance.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Shoreland District
51-3
2. Shoreland Impact Plan. The aforementioned applications shall be accompanied
by plans for development referred to as a shoreland impact plan which shall set
forth proposed provisions for site grading, sediment control, water management,
maintenance of landscaped features, and any additional matters intended to
improve or maintain the quality of the environment. Such a plan shall set forth
proposed changes requested by the applicant and any changes that will be made
in the natural condition of the earth, including loss or change of earth ground
cover, destruction of trees, grading, and marshes. The plan shall minimize tree
removal, ground cover change, loss of natural vegetation, and grade changes as
much as possible, and shall provide for the relocation of replanting of trees which
are proposed to be removed. The purpose of the shoreland impact plan shall be
to eliminate as much as possible potential pollution, erosion and siltation.
3. Bluff Impact Zones. Structures and accessory facilities except stairways,
landings, and public utilities shall not be placed within bluff impact zones.
4. Stairways, Lifts, And Landings. Stairways and lifts, solely for the purpose of
pedestrian transportation, are the preferred alternative to major topographic
alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore
areas. Stairways and lifts must meet the following design requirements:
a. Stairways and lifts shall not exceed four feet (4') in width on residential
lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties, public openspace
recreational properties, and planned unit developments;
b. Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots shall not exceed thirty
two (32) square feet in area;
c. Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts, or landings;
d. Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above the ground
on posts or pilings, no higher than thirty inches (30") above grade at any
one point, or placed into the ground provided they are designed and built
in a manner that ensures control of soil erosions;
e. Stairways, lifts, and landings shall be located in the most visually
inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the public
water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical; and
f. Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for physically handicapped
persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas, provided
that the dimensional and performance standards of Section 51.51, Subd.
H.4 of this Ordinance are complied with in addition to the requirements of
Minnesota Regulations, chapter 1340.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Shoreland District
51-4
5. Steep Slopes: The City Engineer shall evaluate possible soil erosion impacts and
development visibility from public waters before issuing a permit for construction
of sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways, structures, or other
improvements on steep slopes. When determined necessary, conditions must be
attached to issued permits to prevent erosion and to preserve existing vegetation
screening of structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed from the surface
of public waters, assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation.
6. Sewage And Waste Disposal: Any premises used for human occupancy shall be
provided with an adequate method of sewage disposal to be maintained in
accordance with acceptable practices.
a. Public Safety Sewers: Public safety sewer collection and treatment
facilities shall be used where available, and where feasible.
b. Private Sewage Systems: All private sewage treatment systems must
meet or exceed the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's standards for
individual sewage treatment systems contained in the document
"Individual Sewage Treatment Systems Standards, Chapter 7080", the
rules and regulations of the Minnesota Department of Health, and Wright
County.
c. Drain Fields: A septic tank-drain field system shall be the only acceptable
system for installation unless it can be demonstrated that this system is
not feasible on the particular lot in question and it can be demonstrated
that the system being proposed as an alternate will not cause a pollution
problem.
d. Individual Systems:
1) Generally: All proposed sites for individual sewage treatment
systems shall be evaluated in accordance with the criteria in the
following Section 51.51. Subd. H.6.d.2, Subd H.6.f, and Subd.
H.6.g of this Ordinance. If the determination of a site's suitability
cannot be made with publicly available, existing information, it shall
then be the responsibility of the applicant to provide sufficient soil
borings and percolation tests from on-site field investigations.
2) Evaluation Criteria:
a) Depth to the highest known or calculated ground water table
or bedrock;
b) Soil conditions, properties, and permeability;
c) Slope;
Delano Zoning Ordinance Shoreland District
51-5
d) The existence of lowlands, local surface depressions, and
rock outcrops; and
e) Non-conforming sewage treatment systems shall be
regulated and upgraded.
e. Permit Required: No person may install, alter, repair or extend any
individual sewage disposal system without first obtaining a permit
therefore from the City for the specific installation alteration, repair or
extension.
f. Placement: Placement of septic tank soil absorption systems shall be
subject to the following setback requirements where soil conditions are
adequate:
1) On natural environment lakes, at least one hundred fifty feet (150')
from the normal high-water mark.
2) On recreational development lakes, at least seventy five feet (75')
from the normal high-water mark.
3) General development lakes and on tributary streams, at least fifty
feet (50') from the normal high-water mark.
g. Soil Absorption Systems: Soil absorption systems shall not be allowed in
the following areas for disposal of domestic sewage.
1) Low swampy areas or areas subject to recurrent flooding.
2) Areas where the highest known ground water table, bedrock or
impervious soils conditions are within three feet (3') of the bottom of
the system.
3) Areas of ground slope which create a danger of seepage of the
effluent onto the surface of the ground.
4) Areas lying within the 100-year flood plain.
7. Water Supply: Any private supply of water for domestic purposes shall conform
to Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, Dakota County, and Minnesota
Department of Health Standards for water quality. Private wells shall be placed in
areas not subject to flooding and up slope from any source of contamination.
Wells already existing in areas subject to flooding shall be flood proofed in
accordance with State Building Code standards. No private wells shall be located
closer than three feet (3') to the outside basement wall of a dwelling. The outside
Delano Zoning Ordinance Shoreland District
51-6
basement footing shall be continuous across the opening of the well alcove. No
well shall be located closer than ten feet (10') to a property line.
8. Stormwater Management: The following general and specific standards shall
apply in regard to stormwater management within any shoreland district within
the City:
a. When possible, existing natural drainage ways, wetlands, and vegetated
soil surfaces shall be used to convey, store, filter, and retain stormwater
runoff before discharge to public waters.
b. Development shall be planned and conducted in a manner that will
minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential,
and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas shall be stabilized
and protected as soon as possible, and no later than thirty (30) days after
completion of the project. All methods of stormwater management shall
comply with the Delano Comprehensive Storm Drainage Plan.
c. When development density, topographic features, and soil and vegetation
conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff using
natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities
such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, waterways,
and ponds may be used. Preference shall be given to designs using
surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and
manmade materials and facilities.
d. New constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters shall provide for
filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris
before discharge.
9. Placement And Design Of Roads, Driveways, And Parking Areas: The following
standards shall apply in regard to roadway, driveway and parking area placement
and design within any shoreland district within the City.
a. Public and private roads and parking areas shall be designed to take
advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum
screening from view from public waters. Documentation shall be provided
by the City Engineer that all roads and parking areas are designed and
constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent
with City standards.
b. Private roads, driveways, and parking areas shall meet structure setbacks
and shall not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when other
reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives
exist, they may be placed within these areas by conditional use permit,
and must be designed to minimize adverse impacts. Natural vegetation or
Delano Zoning Ordinance Shoreland District
51-7
other natural materials shall be required in order to screen parking areas
when viewed from the water. Parking areas of more than four (4) spaces
shall be screened in accordance with a landscape plan, submitted and
approved by the City Council.
c. Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and accessrelated
parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones provided
the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this subpart are
met.
d. Fences: Fences shall not exceed forty eight inches (48") in height and
shall be at least seventy five percent (75%) open space for passage of air
and light inside the ordinary high-water level setback. Fences shall not be
located within ten feet (10') from the ordinary high-water mark.
Subd. I. Shoreland Alterations: Alterations of vegetation and topography will be
regulated to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland
aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping, and protect fish and wildlife
habitat.
1. Vegetation Alterations: The removal of natural vegetation shall be restricted to
prevent erosion into public waters, to conserve nutrients in the soil, and to
preserve shoreland aesthetics.
a. During the site grading of new subdivision development and other
planning actions, any removal of significant trees shall require a tree
preservation plan in accordance with the City's subdivision regulations.
b. Natural vegetation shall be restored as soon as feasible after any
construction project, but not later than the start of the next growing
season.
c. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to vegetation alterations
necessary for the construction of structures, sewage treatment systems
and the construction of roads and parking areas subject to the following
standards:
1) In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, limited
clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning, and trimming of
trees is allowed to provide a view to the water from the principal
dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways and
landings, access paths, beach and watercraft access areas or
facilities, provided that:
Delano Zoning Ordinance Shoreland District
51-8
a) The screening of structures, vehicles, or other facilities as
viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on
conditions, is not substantially reduced.
b) Along rivers, existing shading of water surfaces is preserved.
c) The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of
trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose
safety hazards.
2. Grading And Filling Associated With Any Development Project Involving
Subdivisions, Commercial, Industrial, Or Multiple- Family Uses:
a. Grading and filling within shoreland districts, or any alterations of the
natural topography where the slope of the land is toward a public water or
watercourse leading to a public water shall be approved by the City
Engineer. A permit shall be obtained prior to the commencement of any
work thereon. The permit may be granted subject to the conditions that:
1) Temporary ground cover such as mulch shall be used and
permanent cover such as sod shall be planted as soon as possible.
2) Methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment shall be employed in
accordance with the Delano Subdivision Ordinance.
3) Fill shall not be placed in areas lower in elevation than the normal
high-water mark.
4) Fill shall be stabilized according to accepted engineering standards.
5) Fill shall not restrict a floodway or destroy the storage capacity of a
flood plain.
6) The maximum slope of the finished surface which slopes toward a
water body or a watercourse leading to such water body shall be
three (3) units horizontal to one vertical.
7) Fill or excavated material must not be placed in bluff impact zones.
8) Any alterations below the ordinary high-water level of public waters
must first be authorized by the Commissioner under Minnesota
Statutes section 103G.245.
b. Any work which will change or diminish the course, current, or cross
section of a public water shall require a permit from the City Engineer and
be approved by the Department of Natural Resources before the work is
Delano Zoning Ordinance Shoreland District
51-9
begun. This includes construction of boat slips, canals, channels and
ditches, lagooning, dredging of lake bottom for the removal of muck, silt or
weeds, and filling in the lake bed including low lying marsh areas.
Approval will be given only if the proposed work is consistent with
applicable State regulations for beds of public waters.
3. Special Provisions For Agricultural, Extractive, And Commercial Uses:
a. Agriculture Use Standards:
1) General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, truck
farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if
steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones are maintained in
permanent vegetation or operated under an approved conservation
plan (resource management systems) consistent with the field
office technical guides of the Wright County Soil and Water
Conservation District or the United States Soil Conservation
Service, as provided by a qualified individual or agency. The shore
impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land uses is
equal to a line parallel to and fifty feet (50') from the ordinary highwater
level.
2) Use of fertilizer, pesticides, or animal wastes within shorelands
must be done in such a way as to minimize impact on the shore
impact zone or public water by proper application or use of earth or
vegetation.
Subd. J. Planned Shoreland Development. Flexible application of the allowable
land uses, minimum lot area and setback requirements and development regulations of
this Ordinance may be used within a shoreland district, provided that the following
requirements are satisfactorily met:
1. Conditional Use Permit: Planned unit developments shall require a conditional
use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Section 51.02,
Subd. B of this Ordinance.
2. Sewer And Water: Planned unit developments shall be connected to Municipal
sewer and water.
3. Open Space: Residential planned unit developments shall contain open space
meeting all of the following criteria:
a. At least fifty percent (50%) of the total project area shall be preserved as
open space.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Shoreland District
51-10
b. Dwelling units or sites, road rights of way, or land covered by road
surfaces, parking areas, or structures, except water-oriented accessory
structures or facilities, are developed areas and shall not be included in
the computation of minimum open space.
c. Open space shall include areas with physical characteristics unsuitable for
development in their natural state.
d. Open space may include outdoor recreational facilities for use by owners
of dwelling units or sites.
e. The appearance of open space areas, including topography, vegetation,
and allowable uses, shall be preserved by use of restrictive deed
covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance, or
other equally effective and permanent means.
f. The shore impact zone, based on normal structure setbacks, shall be
included as open space. At least fifty percent (50%) of the shore impact
zone area of existing developments or at least seventy percent (70%) of
the shore impact zone area of new developments must be preserved in its
natural or existing state.
4. Residential PUD Density Evaluation:
a. Procedures And Standards: Proposed new or expansions to existing
planned unit developments shall be evaluated using the following
procedures and standards to determine the suitable area for the dwelling
unit/dwelling site density evaluation in Section 51.51, Subd. J.4.b of this
Ordinance.
1) The project parcel shall be divided into tiers by locating one
or more lines approximately parallel to a line that identifies
the ordinary high-water level at the following intervals,
proceeding landward:
SHORELAND TIER DIMENSIONS
Unsewered Sewered
(Feet) (Feet)
Recreational development lakes 267 267
Natural environment lakes 400 320
All rivers 300 300
Delano Zoning Ordinance Shoreland District
51-11
2) The suitable area within each tier is next calculated by excluding
from the tier area all wetlands, bluffs, or land below the ordinary
high-water level of public waters. This suitable area and the
proposed project are then subjected to the residential planned unit
development density evaluation steps to arrive at an allowable
number of dwelling units or sites.
b. Residential PUD Base Density Evaluation: The procedures for determining
the base density of a PUD and density increase multipliers are as follows.
Allowable densities may be transferred from any tier to any other tier
further from the water body, but must not be transferred to any other tier
closer.
1) Formula: The suitable area within each tier is divided by the single
residential lot size standard for lakes and rivers. Proposed locations
and numbers of dwelling units or sites for the residential planned
unit developments are then compared with the tier, density, and
suitability analysis herein and the design criteria of this section.
2) Increases: Increases to the dwelling unit or dwelling site base
densities previously determined are allowable if the dimensional
standards for the various base zoning districts are met or exceeded
and the design criteria in the Shoreland District are satisfied. The
allowable density increases in a Shoreland District will only be
allowed if structure setbacks from the ordinary high-water level are
increased to at least fifty percent (50%) greater than the minimum
setback, or the impact on the water body is reduced an equivalent
amount through vegetative management, topography, or additional
means acceptable to the local unit of government and the setback
is at least twenty five percent (25%) greater than the minimum
setback.
3) Allowable Dwelling Unit Or Dwelling Site Density Increases For
Residential Planned Unit Developments:
Density Evaluation Tiers Within Each Tier (%)
First 50
Second 100
Third 200
Fourth 200
Fifth 200
5. Erosion Control And Stormwater Management: Erosion control and stormwater
management plans shall be prepared for all planned unit developments and
approved by the City Engineer.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Shoreland District
51-12
6. Evaluation Of Factors: The following factors are carefully evaluated to ensure
that the increased density of development is consistent with the resource
limitations of the public water:
a. Suitability of the site for the proposed use.
b. Physical and aesthetic impact of increased density.
c. Level of current development.
d. Amount of ownership of undeveloped shoreland.
e. Levels and types of water surface use and public access.
f. Possible effects on overall public use.
7. Facilities: Any recreational or community facility allowed as part of the planned
unit development conforms to all applicable Federal and State regulations
including, but not limited to, the following:
a. Waste disposal regulations.
b. Water supply regulations.
c. Building codes.
d. Safety regulations.
e. Regulations concerning the appropriate use of "public waters" as defined
in Minnesota Statutes section 103G.
f. Applicable regulations of the Minnesota Environment Quality Council.
g. Storm sewer.
8. Alteration Approval: The final PUD shall not be modified or altered in any way
without written approval from the Department of Natural Resources.
9. Central Shoreline Facilities: PUDs incorporating shoreline recreational facilities
such as beaches, docks, or boat launching facilities, etc., shall be designed such
that said facilities are centralized for common utilization.
Subd. K. Variances. Variances may be granted by the City Council upon
application as required in Section 51.02, Subd. D.1.a of this Ordinance in extraordinary
Delano Zoning Ordinance Shoreland District
51-13
cases, but only when the proposed use is determined to be in the public interest and no
variance shall be granted which the Council determines will or has a tendency to:
1. Result in the placement of an artificial obstruction which will restrict the passage
of storm and flood water in such a manner as to increase the height of flooding,
except obstructions approved by the watershed districts in conjunction with
sound flood plain management.
2. Result in incompatible land uses or which would be detrimental to the protection
of surface and ground water supplies.
3. Be not in keeping with land use plans and planning objectives for the City or
which will increase or cause damage to life or property.
4. Be inconsistent with the objectives of encouraging land uses compatible with the
preservation of the natural land forms, vegetation and the marshes and wetlands
within the City.
5. No permit or variance shall be issued unless the applicant has submitted a
shoreland impact plan as required and set forth in this Chapter. In granting any
variance, the Council may attach such conditions as they deem necessary to
ensure compliance with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance.
Subd. L. Conditional Uses. Conditional uses allowable within shoreland areas
shall be subject to the review and approval procedures set forth in Section 51.02, Subd.
B of this Ordinance. The following additional evaluation criteria and conditions apply
within shoreland areas:
1. Evaluation Criteria: A thorough evaluation of the water body and the topographic,
vegetation, and soils conditions on the site must be made to ensure:
a. The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of public waters,
both during and after construction.
b. The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed from public waters
is limited.
Subd. M. Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources.
1. Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances, amendments,
or conditional uses under local shoreland management controls must be sent to
the commissioner or the commissioner's designated representative and
postmarked at least ten (10) days before the hearings. Notices of hearings to
consider proposed subdivisions/plans must include copies of the subdivision/plat.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Shoreland District
51-14
2. A copy of approved amendment and subdivisions/plats, and final decisions
granting variances or conditional uses under local shoreland management
controls must be sent to the commissioner or the commissioner's designated
representative and postmarked within ten (10) days of final action.
Subd. N. Effect of Permit. The granting of any permit, variance, or subdivision
approval under provisions of this Chapter shall in no way affect the owner's capability to
obtain the approval required by any other statute, ordinance or legislation of any State
agency or subdivision thereof. Approval may be expressly given in conjunction with
other permits applied for, but no approval shall be implied from the grant of such permits
nor from the necessity to apply for a permit as described herein.
Delano Zoning Ordinance Shoreland District
51-15
Delano Zoning Ordinance Shoreland District
51-16
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Title and Application
1.1
SECTION 1: TITLE AND APPLICATION
1-1 TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as the Delano Subdivision Ordinance, and will be referred to
herein as the Ordinance.
1-2 PURPOSE
The Council being aware of the responsibility which they have for the adoption of ordinances,
rules and regulations designed for the protection of health, safety and general welfare of this
community, deem it necessary to provide regulations for platting and subdividing of property
within the City which will prevent, as far as possible:
A. The uses of land which are not feasible.
B. The location of streets where such location does not fit the overall pattern of the City.
C. The general design of the proposed building lots in any platted area which might prevent
compliance with the Building Code, Zoning Ordinance, or other regulations of the City in
the future.
D. To make all subdivisions of property conform as nearly as possible with a future overall
plan.
Does hereby order that all subdivisions hereafter planned within the limits of the City shall, in all
respects, fully comply with the regulations hereinafter set forth.
1-3 JURISDICTION
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all lands within the incorporated boundaries of
Delano.
1-4 PLATTING AUTHORITY
The Delano City Council shall serve as the platting authority of the incorporated areas of the City
in accordance with Minnesota Statute Chapters 462.358, as may be amended. No plat or replat
shall be filed or accepted for filing by the Office of the Wright County Recorder unless adopted
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Title and Application
1.2
by the affirmative vote of the majority of the members of the City Council approving such plat or
replat.
1-5 ADMINISTRATION
This Ordinance shall be administered by the Zoning Administrator who is appointed by the City
Council.
1-6 AMENDMENTS
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be amended by the City following a legally advertised
public hearing before the Planning Commission and in accordance with the law, including the
rules and regulations of any applicable state or federal agency.
1-7 CONDITIONS FOR RECORDING
No plat or subdivision shall be entitled to record in the Wright County Recorder’s Office or have
any validity until the plat thereof has been prepared, approved and acknowledged in the manner
prescribed by this Ordinance.
1-8 BUILDING PERMITS
Except for Model Homes or other special circumstances approved by the City Council, no
building permits shall be considered for issuance by the City for the construction of any building,
structure or improvement to the land or to any lot in a subdivision as defined herein, until all
requirements of this Ordinance have been fully complied with.
1-9 SEPARABILITY
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is for any reason found to
be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance.
1-10 POLICY
A. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to consider the subdivision of land and
the subsequent development of the plat as subject to the control of the City pursuant to
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Title and Application
1.3
the Delano Comprehensive Plan for the orderly, planned, efficient and economical
development of the City.
B. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building
purposes without danger to health from fire, flood, or other menace. Land shall not be
subdivided unless proper provisions have been made for drainage, stormwater
management, wetland protection, potable water, domestic waste water, streets, and
capital improvements such as parks, trails, sidewalks, recreation facilities, transportation
facilities, stormwater improvements, and any other necessary improvements.
C. The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related
to the Comprehensive Plan, Comprehensive Sanitary Sewer Plan, Master Water Study,
Storm Water Management Plan, Comprehensive Trail Plan, and the Capital Improvement
Plan of the City.
D. The provisions of this Chapter are in addition to and not in replacement of provisions of
all Building Codes and the zoning regulations. Any provision of the Building Code and
zoning regulations shall remain in full force and effect except as may be contradictory to
the provisions hereof. Where any provision conflicts with other provision, the most
restrictive provision shall be applied.
1-11 APPLICATION OF RULES
The language contained in this Ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with the following
rules of construction as applicable:
A. The singular includes the plural and the plural the singular.
B. The present includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense includes the present
tense.
C. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
D. Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in this Ordinance, its meaning shall
be construed as set forth in such definition.
E. In the event of conflicting provisions, the more restrictive shall apply.
F. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be
the minimum requirement for the promotion of health, safety, and welfare.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Title and Application
1.4
1-12 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Ordinance the following definitions have the meaning given them solely
for the purposes of implementation of this Ordinance:
Alley - A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting
property.
Applicant – The owner, their agent or person having legal control in land for which the
provisions of this Ordinance are being considered or reviewed.
Attorney – The City Attorney.
Best Management Practices (BMPs) – Best management practices as described in current
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s manual and other sources for Stormwater
Management as approved by the City.
Block – That property abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two nearest
intersecting or intercepting streets or railroad right-of-way or unsubdivided acreage.
Boulevard - That portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line or edge of
pavement and the property line.
Boundary Lines – Lines indicating the bounds or limits of any tract or parcel of land.
Buffer Yard – A strip of land utilized to screen or partially screen a use or property from
another use or property or to shield or mitigate noise, lights, or other impacts.
Buffer Strip – A linear strip of land along a lake, wetland, river, creek, or stormwater
ponding area where vegetation is established and maintained as a means to slow the
velocity of stormwater drainage and to filter sediment and pollutants from the
stormwater.
Build Out Plan (Ghost Plat) – A subdivision or resubdivision concept plan illustrating
possible future lot layout, street networks, and utility systems for oversized lots, outlots,
or undeveloped land within or adjoining a preliminary plat.
Buildable Land – Contiguous land area occurring within the property lines of a parcel of
lot excluding drainageways, wetlands, water courses, park land, road rights-of-way, and
slopes in excess of eighteen (18) percent.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Title and Application
1.5
Building – Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or
occupancy.
Building Line – Also referred to as a setback line, the line beyond which property owners
or others have no legal or vested right to extend a building or any part thereof without
special permission and approval of the proper authorities.
Capital Improvement Plan - An itemized program setting forth the schedule and details of
specific contemplated public improvements by fiscal year, together with their estimated
cost, the justification for each improvement, the impact that such improvements will have
on the current operating expense of the government, and such other information on
capital improvements as may be pertinent.
Certificate of Survey – A land survey prepared by a land surveyor registered in the State
of Minnesota with a certification that the information on the land survey is accurate.
Common Interest Community or CIC. Contiguous or non-contiguous real estate within
Minnesota that is subject to an instrument which obligates persons owning a separately
described parcel of the real estate, or occupying a part of the real estate pursuant to a
proprietary lease, by reason of their ownership or occupancy, to pay for (1) real estate
taxes levied against; (2) insurance premiums payable with respect to; (3) maintenance of;
or (4) construction, maintenance, repair or replacement of improvements located on one
or more parcels or parts of the real estate other than the parcel or part that the person
owns or occupies. Real estate subject to a master association, regardless of when the
master association was formed, shall not collectively constitute a separate common
interest community unless so stated in the master declaration recorded against the real
estate pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Section 515B.2-121 (f)(1), as amended from time to
time.
Common Open Space - Any open space including private parks, nature areas,
playgrounds, trails and recreational buildings and structures owned in common by a
group of property owners.
Comprehensive Plan - The Delano Comprehensive Plan.
Condominium - A form of individual ownership within a multi-unit building with joint
responsibility for maintenance and repairs. In a condominium, each unit is under
separate ownership, along with an undivided share of common buildings and land.
Conservation Development - The development pattern and technique whereby lots are
arranged in closely related groups to preserve the natural amenities of the land through
the creation of common open space.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Title and Application
1.6
Contour Map – A map on which irregularities of land surface are shown by lines
connecting points of equal elevations. Contour interval is the vertical height between
contour lines.
Critical Root Zone (CRZ) – An imaginary circle surrounding the tree trunk with a radius
distance of one (1) foot per one (1) inch of tree diameter, e.g., a twenty (20) inch
diameter tree has a CRZ with a radius of twenty (20) feet.
Cul-de-sac - (See Street)
Design Standards – The specifications for the preparation of sketch plans, preliminary
plats, and final plats indicating, among other things, the optimum minimum or maximum
dimensions of such features as rights-of-way and blocks, as set forth in this Chapter.
Developer - A person who submits an application for the purpose of land subdivision as
defined herein. The developer may be the owner or authorized agent of the owner of the
land to be subdivided.
Diameter – The diameter of a tree measured at diameter breast height (four and one-half
(4.5) feet from the uphill side of the existing ground level).
Drainageway -
1. Any natural, altered or artificial water course which has definable beds and banks
capable of conducting confined runoff from adjacent lands. Water course beds
not clearly defined shall be delineated to include that area which would be
inundated by runoff resulting from a twenty-four (24) hour rainfall having a
recurrence interval of once in five (5) years.
2. An altered water course is that which has been affected by man-made changes in
straightening, deepening, narrowing, or widening the original channel.
3. An artificial water course is that which has been artificially constructed by man
where there was no previous natural water course. The limits of the water course
bed are confined to that area, which would be inundated by runoff resulting from
a twenty-four (24) hour rainfall having a recurrence interval of once in five (5)
years.
Drip Line – The farthest distance away from the trunk that rain or dew will fall directly to
the ground from the leaves or branches of the tree.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Title and Application
1.7
Easement – A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the general
public, a corporation, or a certain person or person, for a specific purpose or purposes.
Engineer - An engineer employed by the City.
Escrow - The deposition of funds in an account maintained by the governmental unit
specifically for the purpose of ensuring fulfillment of certain obligations pursuant to this
Ordinance.
Financial Guarantee – A financial security consistent with Section 10 of this Ordinance,
posted with the City with the approval of a final plat, guaranteeing compliance with the
approved final plat, construction plans, and conditions of approval set forth by the City.
Floodplain – The areas adjoining a watercourse which have been or hereafter may be
covered by the regional flood.
Frontage – The width of a lot or building site measured on the line separating it from a
public street right-of-way.
Grade, Percentage of – The rise or fall of a street in feet and tenths of a foot for each one
hundred (100) feet of horizontal distance measured at the center line of the street.
High Water Level – The water level in a watercourse which could be predicted to occur
as a result of the critical 100-year runoff event using U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service methodology, as approved by the City.
Improvement, Public - Any drainage facility, street, parkway, park, lot improvement or
other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for
maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which City
responsibility is established.
Land Disturbance – Any area in which movement of earth, alteration in topography, soil
compaction, disruption of vegetation, change in soil chemistry, or any other change in the
natural character of the land occurs as a result of the site preparation, grading, building
construction or any other construction activity.
Lot – A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for building
development or for transfer of ownership under a single legal description and single tax
parcel identification number.
Lot, Base – Lots meeting all the specifications in the zoning district prior to being
subdivided into a two family dwelling, quadraminium, or townhome subdivision.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Title and Application
1.8
Lot, Corner – A lot or lots within a plat and situated at the corners thereof so that they are
bounded on two sides by streets. This term applies to any lot within the plat at street
intersections and bounded on two sides by streets.
Lot, Double Frontage - A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two (2)
substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot.
Lot, Flag – A lot whose public right-of-way does not meet the minimum required width.
Access is provided by a narrow strip of land or private right-of-way.
Lot, Unit – Lots created from the subdivisions of a two family dwelling, quadraminium,
or townhome having different minimum lot size requirements than the conventional base
lots within the zoning district.
Lot Depth - The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line
of a lot.
Lot Line - A property line bounding a lot except that where any portion of a lot extends
into the public right-of-way, the lot line shall be deemed to be the boundary of said public
right-of-way.
Lot Width - The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured at the
front building setback line, and, if applicable, at the setback line from the ordinary high
water level of a lake or tributary.
Metes and Bounds - A method of property description by means of their direction and
distance from an identifiable point of beginning.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Title and
Application
1.9
Outlot - A parcel of land shown on a subdivision plat as an outlot, and designated
alphanumerically, (for example - Outlot A.) Outlots are used to designate one of
the following: land that is part of the subdivision but is to be subdivided into lots
and blocks at a later date; land that is to be used for a specific purpose as
designated in a developer's agreement or other agreement between the City and
the developer.
Owner - Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any
other legal entity having proprietary interest in the land.
Pedestrian and/or Bicycle Trail – An easement or land dedication given to the
City for the purpose of providing public walking and/or bicycling trails to City
residents. The trails shall provide recreational opportunity and also access to
parks, natural areas, and public land in accordance with the City’s adopted trail
plan.
Plat - The drawing or map of a subdivision prepared for filing of record pursuant
to Minnesota Statute 505, as may be amended.
Plat, Final - The final map or drawing, consistent with the standards of Section 5
of this Ordinance, on which the developer's plan or subdivision is presented to the
City Council for approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to the Office
of the County Recorder or Registrar of Titles.
Plat, Preliminary - The preliminary map or drawing, consistent with the standards
of Section 4 of this Ordinance, indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision
to be submitted to the City for their consideration for compliance with the
Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Ordinance, and these regulations along with
required supporting data.
Protective Covenant - A restriction of the use placed upon the property by a
present or former owner and recorded in the Office of the County Recorder or the
Registrar of Titles. The City will not be responsible to enforce private protective
covenants.
Registered Land Survey - A survey map of registered land designed to simplify a
complicated metes and bounds description, designating the same into a tract or
tracts of Registered Land Survey Number.
Registered Land Surveyor - A land surveyor licensed and registered in the State
of Minnesota.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Title and
Application
1.10
Resubdivision - A change in an approved or recorded subdivision plat if such
change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved for public use, or
any lot line or if it affects any map, or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption
of any regulations controlling subdivisions.
Right-of-Way - A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street,
railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary
or storm sewer main, or for another special use. The usage of the term
right-of-way for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way
hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from
the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the
dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Right-of-way intended for streets,
water main, sanitary sewers, storm drains, or any other use involving maintenance
by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the recording of the plat on
which such right-of-way is established.
Road Right-of-Way Width - The horizontal distance between the outside edges of
a road right-of-way.
Setback - The minimum horizontal distance between a structure, individual
sewage treatment system, or other facility, and an ordinary high water level,
sewage treatment system, top of bluff, road, highway, property line, or other
facility.
Shoreland - Land located within the following distances from public waters: one
thousand (1000) feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond or
flowage and three hundred (300) feet from a river or stream or the landward
extent of a floodplain designated in Chapter 51.21 of the City Code on a river or
stream, whichever is greater. The limits of shorelands may be reduced whenever
the waters involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend landward
from the waters for lesser distances and when approved by the Commissioner of
Natural Resources.
Significant Tree – See definition of Tree.
Significant Tree Stand – See definition of Tree.
Specimen Tree – See definition of Tree.
Street - A right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians and vehicles to
abutting properties, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare,
parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, court, way, trail or however
otherwise designated. Private, ingress and egress easements shall not be
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Title and
Application
1.11
considered streets. City streets shall be categorized by functional classification,
as defined by the Delano Comprehensive Plan.
Street, Cul-de-sac – A local street with only one outlot and having an appropriate
terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
Street, Private – A private street is one which is not maintained by the City and
for which the City is not under obligation to carry our repairs, even though it may
be a named street and serve a number of properties.
Street Width – The width of the improved surface of the street as measured at
right angles or radially to the centerline of the street from curb face to curb face,
or on a street without curbs from the outside edge of the improved shoulder to
outside edge of improved shoulder.
Subdivision - The separation of an area, parcel, or tract of land under single
ownership into two (2) or more parcels, tracts, lots, or long term leasehold
interests where the creation of the leasehold interest necessitates the creation of
streets, roads, or alleys for residential, commercial, industrial or other use or any
combination thereof, except those separations:
1. Where all the resulting parcels, tracts, lots or interests will be twenty (20)
acres or larger in size and five hundred (500) feet in width for residential
uses and five (5) acres or larger in size for commercial and industrial uses;
2. Creating cemetery lots;
3. Resulting from court orders, or the adjustment of a lot line by the
relocation of a common boundary.
Subdivision, Administrative – A subdivision which results in two (2) or fewer
parcels, tracts, or lots from one (1) or two (2) existing parcels, tracts, or lots.
Tree – Any of the following type of trees, as each is defined herein:
1. Coniferous Tree. A woody plant which, at maturity, is at least twelve (12)
feet or more in height, having foliage on the outermost portion of the
branches year round.
2. Deciduous Tree. A woody plant which, at maturity, is at least fifteen (15)
feet or more in height, having a defined crown, and which sheds leaves
annually.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Title and
Application
1.12
3. Significant Tree. A healthy tree measuring a minimum of six (6) inches in
diameter for deciduous trees, or a minimum of twelve (12) feet in height
for coniferous trees.
4. Significant Tree Stand. A grouping or cluster of coniferous and/or
deciduous trees with contiguous crown cover, occupying five hundred
(500) or more square feet of property, which are comprised of deciduous
trees between four (4) inches and twelve (12) inches or larger in diameter
or coniferous trees between four (4) feet and twelve (12) feet or higher in
height.
5. Specimen Tree. A healthy hardwood tree measuring equal to or greater
than thirty (30) inches in diameter and/or a coniferous tree measuring fifty
(50) feet or greater in height.
Vegetation, Native – The pre-settlement group of plant species native to the local
region, that were not introduced as a result of settlement or subsequent human
activity.
Watercourses – Any natural or man-made passageway on the surface of the earth
so situated and having such a topographical nature that surface water stands or
flows through it from other areas. The term includes ponding areas, drainage
channels, swales, waterways, creeks, rivers, lakes, streams, wetland areas, and any
other open surface water flow which is the result of storm water or ground water
discharge. This term does not include man-made piping systems commonly
referred to as storm sewers.
Wetland – Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, where
the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow
water. Consistent with the WCA, wetlands are to be identified and delineated
using the methodology set forth in the Federal Manual for Identifying and
Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands (Interagency Task Force on Wetland
Delineation, 1987). For purposes of this definition, wetlands must have three (3)
of the following attributes:
1. A predominance of hydric soils;
2. Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions;
3. Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such vegetation.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Title and
Application
1.13
This definition does not include wetlands created from uplands either for
stormwater storage and management purposes, or by actions not intended to
create the wetland and approved, permitted, funded or overseen by a public entity.
Wetland Alteration – Human-induced actions that adversely impact the existing
condition of a wetland or wetland buffer area, including grading, filling, dredging,
dumping, cutting, pruning, topping, clearing native vegetation, and discharging
pollutants (except stormwater). Alteration does not include walking, passive
recreation, fishing, farming, planting that enhances native vegetation, or other
similar activities allowed under the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act.
Wetland Buffer Strip – An unknown, undisturbed, or re-established vegetated area
in the upland area around the perimeter of a wetland. It is an integral part of
protecting the wetland ecosystem through filtering pollutants and providing
adjacent habitat.
Wetland Buffer Strip Width Average – The average width of a buffer strip around
an individual wetland.
Wetland Community – In reference to plants, an interacting assemblage of plant
populations sharing a given habitat.
Wetland Edge – The line delineating the outer edge of a wetland. This line shall
be established by using the 1987 Corps of Engineers (COE) Wetland Delineation
Manual (Environmental Laboratory, 1987).
Wetland Enhance – To improve the value of wetlands or wetland buffers with
respect to the purposes of this Ordinance.
Wetland Functions – The natural processes performed by wetlands, including
functions that are important in providing wildlife and fisheries habitat, facilitating
food chain production, providing habitat for nesting, rearing, and resting for
aquatic, terrestrial or avian species, maintaining the availability and quality of
water, such as purifying water, acting as a recharge and discharge area for ground
water aquifers and moderating surface water and storm water flows, improving
stormwater quality, providing aesthetic benefits, as well as performing other
functions, including but not limited to those set out in U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers regulations at 33 C.F.R. Section 320.4(b)(2)(1988).
Wetland Manage – To control the use of wetland resources consistent with the
purposes of this section. Management of wetlands includes conservation,
maintenance, and enhancement.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Title and
Application
1.14
Wetlands, Manage 1 – These wetlands exist in a largely unaltered state and have
special and unusual qualities that call for a high level of protection. These
wetlands may provide habitat for rare, threatened and/or endangered plant and
animal species present; and/or have moderate to exceptional floral
diversity/integrity.
Wetlands, Manage 2 – These wetlands have plant communities that are in a
largely unaltered state. The vegetative communities of these wetlands are
characterized by moderate floral diversity.
Wetlands, Manage 3 – These wetlands have usually been altered by human
activities. These wetlands have low to medium floral diversity and wildlife
habitat components.
Zoning Administrator – The person duly appointed by the City Council as the
individual charged with the responsibility of administering and enforcing this
Ordinance.
Zoning Ordinance - The Delano Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 51 of the City Code,
as may be amended, regulating the use of land within the incorporated boundaries
of Delano.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance General Provisions
2.1
SECTION 2: GENERAL PROVISIONS
2-1 COMPLIANCE WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, ZONING ORDINANCE, AND
OFFICIAL MAP
No subdivision of land shall conflict with the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning
Ordinance, or Official Maps.
2-2 FEES
A subdivision application shall be accompanied by a fee established by City ordinance to pay for
costs associated with the application processing and review. Said fee ordinance will be annually
reviewed and updated. Any and all expenses incurred by the City for engineering, planning,
legal or other services related to the review and processing of the subdivision application that
exceeds the established application fee shall be collected from the applicant.
The acceptance of all applications, issuance of permits, or recording of any plat shall not occur
until a complete application has been filed and the appropriate fees have been paid.
2-3 BUILDING PERMITS
Except for model homes or other special circumstances approved by the City Council, no
building permit shall be issued by the City with respect to any land, parcel or lot until the
provisions of this Ordinance in regard to the subdividing of property have been met. No building
permit shall be issued for a platted outlot.
2-4 VARIANCES
The City may grant a variance from the minimum standards of this Ordinance (not procedural
provisions) when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting
any variance, the City shall prescribe any conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for
the public interest. In granting a variance, the City shall take into account the nature of the
proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside
or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon
traffic conditions in the vicinity. A variance shall only be granted when the City finds that there
are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property such that the strict application of
the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land.
Also, that the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and
welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which property is situated. Also, that the
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance General Provisions
2.2
variance is to correct inequities resulting from an extreme physical hardship such as topography,
etc.
2-5 PREMATURE SUBDIVISION
Any sketch plan, preliminary plat, final plat deemed premature pursuant to the following criteria
shall be denied by the City Council:
A. Conditions for Establishing a Premature Subdivision
A subdivision may be deemed premature should any of the following conditions not be met:
1. Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan including any of the following:
a. Delano Comprehensive Plan.
b. Comprehensive Sanitary Sewer Plan.
c. Master Water Study.
d. Stormwater Management Plan.
e. Comprehensive Trail Plan.
f. Capital Improvement Plan.
2. Consistent with Growth Policies. A proposed urban subdivision shall meet the
City’s infill policies:
a. The urban subdivision must be located within the staged growth area as
established by the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
b. The cost of utilities and street extensions must be covered by one or more
of the following and approved by the City Council:
(1) An immediate assessment to the proposed subdivision.
(2) One hundred (100) percent of the street and utility costs are
privately financed by the developer.
(3) The cost of regional and/or oversized trunk utility lines can be
financed with available City trunk funds.
(4) The cost and timing of the expenditure of City funds are consistent
with the City’s capital improvement plan.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance General Provisions
2.3
c. The cost, operation and maintenance of the utility system are consistent
with the normal costs as projected within the City’s water, sewer, and
stormwater utility rates.
d. The developer payments will offset additional costs of utility installation
or future operation and maintenance.
3. Roads or Highways to Serve the Subdivision. A proposed subdivision shall have
adequate roads or highways when:
a. Roads or highways providing access to a subdivision are functioning at a
level of service (LOS) D or better, as defined by the 2000 Highway
Capacity Manual, as amended from time to time.
b. Traffic generated by a proposed subdivision will maintain the levels of
service (LOS) of any street providing access to the subdivision to a LOS D
or better, as defined by the 2000 Highway Capacity Manual, as amended
from time to time.
c. Existing roads providing access to the subdivision have the structural
capacity to accommodate projected traffic from the proposed subdivision
or the developer will pay to correct any structural deficiencies.
d. The traffic generated from a proposed subdivision shall not require City
street improvements that are inconsistent with the Delano Capital
Improvement Plan or the developer shall pay to correct any street
deficiencies.
e. The developer will finance any street improvements or upgrades required
by the City’s Comprehensive Plan or County Highway Department to
insure proper traffic flow and traffic safety.
4. Water Supply. A proposed subdivision shall be deemed to have an adequate
water supply when:
a. The City water system has adequate wells, storage, or pipe capacity to
serve the subdivision.
b. The water utility extension is consistent with the Delano Master Water
Study and offers the opportunity for water main looping to serve the urban
subdivision.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance General Provisions
2.4
c. The extension of water mains will provide adequate water pressure for
personal use and fire protection.
d. Adequate well head protection measures have been implemented for all
abandoned wells.
5. Waste Disposal Systems. A proposed subdivision shall be served with adequate
waste disposal systems when:
a. The City has sufficient waste treatment plant and pipe capacity to serve
the subdivision if developed to its maximum density.
b. The subdivision will result in a sewer extension consistent with Delano’s
Comprehensive Sanitary Sewer Plan and Capital Improvement Plan.
6. Lack of Adequate Drainage. A condition of inadequate drainage shall be deemed
to exist if:
a. Surface or subsurface water retention and runoff are such that it
constitutes a danger to the structural security of existing or proposed
structures.
b. The proposed subdivision will cause pollution of water sources or damage
from erosion and siltation on downhill or downstream land.
c. The proposed site grading and development will cause harmful and
irreparable damage from erosion and siltation on downhill or downstream
land.
d. Factors to be considered in making these determinations may include:
average rainfall for the area; the relation of the land to floodplains; the
nature of soils and subsoils and their ability to adequately support surface
water runoff and waste disposal systems; the slope of the land and its
effect on effluents; and the presence of streams as related to effluent
disposal.
B. Burden of Establishing
The burden shall be upon the applicant to show that the proposed subdivision is not premature.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance General Provisions
2.5
2-6 DENIAL OF PLAT
The Planning Commission may recommend denial and the City Council may deny the
subdivision if it makes any one or more of the following findings:
A. That the proposed subdivision is in conflict with adopted applicable general and specific
comprehensive plans of the City.
B. That the physical characteristics of this site, including but not limited to topography,
percolation rate, soil conditions, susceptibility to erosion and siltation, susceptibility to
flooding, water storage, drainage and retention, are such that the site is not suitable for
the type of development, design, or use contemplated.
C. That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development.
D. That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause
environmental damage.
E. That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements are likely to cause public
health problems.
F. That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with
easements of record or with easements established by judgment of a court.
G. That the proposed subdivision, its site, or its design adversely affects the flood-carrying
capacity of the floodway, increases flood stages and velocities, or increases flood hazards
within the floodway fringe or within other areas of the City.
H. The proposed subdivision is inconsistent with the policies and standards of the State
defined shoreland, floodplain, and wetland regulations.
I. The City Council deems the subdivision to be premature.
J. The design of the subdivision does not conform to minimum City development standards.
K. The time period for review of the plat has reached expiration without resolution of design
features or conformance with City development regulations that would allow for City
approval.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance General
Provisions
2.6
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Sketch Plan
3.1
SECTION 3: SKETCH PLAN
While not mandatory, it is suggested that subdividers prepare a sketch plan depicting the
subdivision proposal for informal review prior to filing a formal application. A sketch plan may
be required with all annexation petitions. On the basis of the sketch plan, the City shall
informally advise the subdivider as promptly as possible of the extent to which the proposed
subdivision generally conforms to the design standards of this section and to other sections of
this Ordinance. Sketch plan review does not convey any legal development rights to the
applicants.
3-1 INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR SKETCH PLAN
The sketch plan shall include seven (7) large scale copies and one (1) reduced scale (11” by 17”)
copy of detailed written materials, plans and specifications to include the following information:
NOTE: One/two additional large scale copies shall be provided for each of the following, if
applicable:
• Project is adjacent to a county road or county state aid highway (1)
• Project is adjacent to a state highway (1)
• Project lies within a Shoreland or Flood Plain Overlay Districts (1)
A. General Location and Site Description
1. Name and address of developer/owner.
2. Date of plan preparation and dates of revision.
3. Scale of plan (engineering scale only – one (1) inch equals one hundred (100)
feet).
4. North arrow indication.
5. Legal description.
6. Property location map illustrating the site location relative to adjoining properties
and streets.
7. Scaled drawing (engineering scale only) illustrating property boundaries.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Sketch Plan
3.2
8. Proof that the person is a qualified applicant pursuant to Section 1-12.
9. Current and proposed land use and zoning.
10. Evaluation by the applicant that the subdivision would not be determined to be
premature pursuant to the criteria outlined by the Comprehensive Plan and
Subdivision Ordinance.
11. Additional information as required by the Zoning Administrator.
B. Resource Inventory
A resource inventory, mapped at a scale of one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet or less shall
include:
1. Topographic contours at two (2) foot intervals showing rock slopes of more than
fifteen (15) percent.
2. Soil type locations and identification of soil type characteristics such as hydric
soils, depth to bedrock, depth to water table and suitability for wastewater
disposal systems, if applicable (Wright County Soil Survey information).
3. Hydrologic characteristics including surface water courses, floodplains,
delineated wetlands, natural swales, and drainageways.
4. Site vegetation including:
a. Cover type (pasture, woodland, etc.).
b. Woodland area boundaries.
c. Individual trees having a diameter at breast height of eighteen (18) or
more inches.
d. Vegetative type descriptions (deciduous, coniferous or mixed) by plant
community, relative age, and condition.
5. Current land use and land cover (cultivated areas, paved areas, etc.), all buildings
and structures on the land, and all encumbrances, such as easements or covenants.
6. Transportation systems including:
a. Adjoining streets.
b. Functional classifications.
c. Current and projected traffic volumes.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Sketch Plan
3.3
d. General conditions.
7. Neighborhood context. General outlines of existing neighborhoods, land uses,
buildings, streets, and natural features such as water bodies or wooded areas,
roads, driveways and property boundaries within three hundred (300) feet of the
tract. This information shall be presented on an aerial photograph at a scale of no
less than one (1) inch to two hundred (200) feet.
C. Sketch Subdivision Plan. One (1) or more of the subdivision sketch plans meeting the
intent of this Ordinance and including at least the following information:
1. Open space areas indicating which areas are to be protected and defined by the
purpose of the open space.
2. Boundaries of areas to be developed and proposed general street and lot layout.
3. Number and type of housing units and/or approximate size and location of
commercial and industrial buildings as may be applicable.
4. Areas proposed for stormwater management.
5. Street system that interconnects neighborhoods that is consistent with the Delano
Comprehensive Plan.
6. Location of utility trunks intended to serve the site.
7. Said plans shall be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet or
less.
8. Total area of wetlands and uplands on site.
D. Application fee and deposit or escrow security to pay for review costs of the City staff
and consultants.
3-2 FILING AND REVIEW OF APPLICATION
A. Procedure
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Sketch
Plan
3.4
1. Pre-Application Meeting. An applicant may meet with City staff to
discuss a proposed development and investigate the City requirements for
pursuing a development application.
2. Neighborhood Meeting. The City strongly recommends the property
owner/applicant hold a neighborhood meeting for informal comment and
feedback prior to submitting a formal sketch application.
3. An application for sketch plan along with the associated information and
fee established by the City Council shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator.
4. The Zoning Administrator shall submit copies of the sketch plan and
associated information to other staff, committees, consultants, or agencies
as appropriate.
5. The Zoning Administrator shall forward the sketch plan submission to the
City’s advisory boards and City Council for their consideration at
regularly scheduled meetings to solicit informal review and comment on
the project’s acceptability in relation to the City’s Comprehensive Plan
and development regulations. Such meetings should be attended by the
applicant.
6. Sketch plan review does not convey any legal development rights to the
applicants.
3-3 DETERMINATION OF REQUIREMENT FOR ENVIRONMENTAL
REVIEW
DOCUMENTS
The Zoning Administrator may review the sketch plan and may determine if an
Environmental Assessment Worksheet (EAW), Environmental Impact Statement (EIS),
or Alternative Urban Area-Wide Review (AUAR) is required pursuant to Minnesota
Rules. If such documents are required, the Zoning Administrator may notify the
developer of the requirement.
An escrow deposit in addition to the standard requirements shall be submitted by the
applicant to cover City costs reviewing and administering an EAW.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Preliminary Plat
4.1
SECTION 4: PRELIMINARY PLAT
After the completion of the sketch plan process, if submitted, the owner or developer shall file
with the City an application for preliminary plat. The preliminary plat stage is the point in the
process that all information pertinent to the proposed development is furnished by the developer
for review by the City staff and consultants, City advisory committees, the City Council, any
other applicable agencies, and the public. The information provides a basis for approval or
denial of the application. The information submitted in the application shall address both
existing conditions and changes that will occur during and after development. The preliminary
plat is a plan of how property will be subdivided and developed.
Additional information or modifications may be required by the Zoning Administrator, City staff
and consultants, City advisory committees, or City Council and additional information may be
requested during the review process. In certain cases, some information required by these
standards may not be appropriate or may need to be modified in order to provide an adequate
basis for making a decision.
4-1 INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR PRELIMINARY PLAT
Preliminary plat information is typically furnished on plan sheets. However, some information is
more appropriately submitted in other forms. The plat, and associated information, shall be
submitted in a form that is legible, organized and understandable. The preliminary plat
application shall consist of maps and accompanying documents. An owner or applicant shall
submit twelve (12) large scale copies (one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet or less) and
one (1) reduced scale copy (11” by 17”) and one digital electronic copy in a format compatible
with the City’s computer system of detailed graphic materials, plans and specifications along
with any written materials, including the following information:
Plans:
A. Certificate of survey.
B. Resource inventory.
C. Preliminary plat.
D. Preliminary grading, drainage and erosion control plan.
E. Preliminary utility plan.
F. Wetland mitigation plan (if determined necessary).
G. Environmental evaluations (if determined necessary).
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Preliminary Plat
4.2
NOTE: One or two additional large scale copies shall be provided for each of the following, if
applicable:
• Project is adjacent to a county road or county state aid highway (1)
• Project is adjacent to a state highway (2)
• Project lies within a Shoreland or Floodplain Overlay District (1)
A. Certificate of Survey
Prepared by a licensed land surveyor identifying the following:
1. Scale (engineering only) at one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet or less.
2. North arrow indication.
3. Existing parcel boundaries to be platted with dimensions and area.
4. Existing legal description.
5. Easements of record.
6. Delineated wetland boundary, to include the ordinary high water level (OHWL)
of any lakes or Department of Natural Resources (DNR) waters. Floodplain as
shown on Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) FIRM map.
7. All encroachments.
8. Existing buildings structures and improvements within the parcel to be platted and
those three hundred fifty (350) feet outside the boundaries of the subject parcel.
9. Location, widths and names of all public streets, rights-of-way or railroad rightsof-
way showing type, width and condition of the improvements, if any, which
pass through and/or are within three hundred fifty (350) feet.
10. The outside boundary of the subject property is to be clearly marked with survey
monuments.
B. Resource Inventory
1. Topographic contours at two (2) foot intervals showing rock outcrops slopes of
more than fifteen (15) percent.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Preliminary Plat
4.3
2. Soil type locations and identification of soil type characteristics such as hydric
soils, agricultural capability, depth to bedrock, depth of water table and suitability
for wastewater disposal systems, if applicable (Wright County Soil Survey
information).
3. Hydrologic characteristics, including surface water courses, floodplains,
delineated wetlands, natural swales, and drainageways. Ordinary high water level
and 100 year storm elevations of adjoining water courses, lakes, wetlands,
streams, etc. at the date of the survey and approximate high and low water
elevations. An applicant that is proposing any new development will be required
to submit a Minnesota Routine Assessment Method for Evaluating Wetland
Functions (MNRAM) form filled out for each wetland if located on the subject
property. This MNRAM form will need to be filled out by a consultant trained in
wetland science.
4. Tree inventory identifying vegetation of the site, according to general cover type
(pasture, woodland, etc.), defining boundaries of significant tree stands and
individual significant trees as defined by Section 1-12 of this Ordinance .
Vegetative types shall be classified as generally deciduous, coniferous or mixed
and described by plant community, relative age and condition.
5. Neighborhood Context. General outlines of existing buildings, land use, and
natural features such as waterbodies or wooded areas, roads, driveways, and
property boundaries within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the tract. This
information may be presented on an aerial photograph at a scale of no less than
one (1) inch to two hundred (200) feet.
C. Preliminary Plat
1. The proposed name of the plat which name shall not duplicate the name of any
plat theretofore recorded in the County.
2. Date of application, name, address, phone number and applicable license or
registration number of the owner, developer, agent, applicant, engineer, surveyor,
planner, attorney or other principle involved in the development of the plat.
3. Proof that the person is a qualified applicant pursuant to Section 1-12.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance
Preliminary Plat
4.4
4. Existing Comprehensive Plan guiding and zoning designation within or
abutting the proposed plat. Any zoning changes needed, or reference to
any zoning or similar land use actions that are pertinent to the proposed
development.
5. Total acreage of the land to be subdivided and total upland area.
6. Boundary line survey and legal description.
7. North arrow and graphic engineering scale of one (1) inch equals one
hundred (100) feet.
8. Existing covenants, liens, or encumbrances.
9. Proposed lot lines, dimensions, and the gross and buildable acreage of all
lots. When lots are located on a curve in a road or cul-de-sac, the lot
width at the building setback line shall be shown. Proposed lot and block
numbers.
10. Building pad, minimum building setbacks shown on each lot indicating
dimensions of the setbacks. Location and width of buffer yards where the
subdivision adjoins a collector or arterial street.
11. Layout of streets, showing right-of-way widths, centerline street grades
and approximate radii of all curbs, proposed contours within the entire
plat, and names of streets. The name of any street heretofore used in the
City or its environs shall not be used, unless the proposed street is an
extension of an already named street, in which event the name shall be
used. Street names shall follow City policy and be approved by the City
Street Superintendent.
12. Access, right-of-way widths, driveways, and street classifications shall be
consistent with the Delano Comprehensive Plan.
13. Parks, trails, or other areas intended for public use or common ownership.
14. Any additional information as requested by the Zoning Administrator.
15. Dates of plan preparation and revision dates.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance
Preliminary Plat
4.5
D. Preliminary Grading, Drainage and Erosion Control Plan
The developer shall submit a preliminary grading, drainage and erosion control plan
utilizing a copy of the current certificate of survey as a base for the site in question,
prepared by a licensed engineer, depicting the following information:
1. Scale (engineering only) one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet or
less.
2. North point indication.
3. Location of natural features including, but not limited to, tree lines,
delineated wetlands, water courses, ponds, lakes, streams, drainage
channels, ordinary high water level (OHWL) and 100 year storm
elevations, bluffs, steep slopes, slope in excess of fifteen (15) percent, etc.
4. The delineation of all wetlands in accordance with criteria established by
the Wetlands Conservation Act 1991, as may be amended, the Army
Corps of Engineers, and/or Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
5. Wetland mitigation plan consistent with the criteria established by the
Wetland Conservation Act 1991, as may be amended.
6. Existing contours at two (2) foot intervals shown as dashed lines for the
subject property and extending one hundred (100) feet beyond the outside
boundary of the proposed plat.
7. Proposed grade elevations at two (2) foot intervals shown as solid lines.
8. Proposed plan for surface water management, ponding, drainage and flood
control consistent with the recommendations and standards of the Delano
Storm Water Management Plan.
9. Provision for groundwater management including sub-surface drains,
disposals, ponding, and flood controls.
10. Location of all existing storm sewer facilities including pipes, manholes,
catch basins, ponds, swales and drainage channels within one hundred
(100) feet of the subject property. Existing pipe grades, rim and invert
elevations and normal and high water elevations must be included.
11. If the subject property is within or adjacent to a 100 year floodplain, flood
elevation and locations must be shown. Proposed fill, levees, channel
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance
Preliminary Plat
4.6
modifications, and other methods to overcome flood or erosion hazard
areas in accordance with the Delano Floodplain Ordinance and by use of
the 100 year flood profile and other supporting technical data in the Flood
Insurance Study.
12. Spot elevations at drainage break points and directional arrows indicating
site, swale and lot drainage.
13. Lot and block numbers, building style, building pad location and
elevations at the lowest floor and garage slab for each lot.
14. Locations, grades, rim and invert elevations of all proposed storm water
facilities, including ponds, proposed to serve the subject property.
15. Phasing of grading.
16. The location and purpose of all oversize, non-typical easements.
17. All soil erosion and sediment control measures to be incorporated during
and after construction must be shown. Locations and standard detail
plates for each measure shall be in accordance with City standards and
included on the plan.
18. All re-vegetation measures proposed for the subject property must be
included on the plan, including seed and mulch types and application
rates.
19. Drainage plan, including the configuration of drainage areas and
calculations for two (2) year, ten (10) year, and one hundred (100) year
storm events.
20. Layout of proposed streets showing centerline gradients, section widths,
and typical cross sections.
21. Date of plan preparation and dates of all revisions.
22. For subdivisions which shall disturb five (5) or more acres of land, the
subdivider shall submit a Notice of Intent (NOI) to the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) for a storm water program permit.
E. Preliminary Utility Plan
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance
Preliminary Plat
4.7
The developer shall submit a preliminary utility plan utilizing a copy of the current
certificate of survey as a base for the site in question, prepared by a licensed engineer,
depicting the following information:
1. Scale (engineering only) one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet or
less.
2. The location, dimensions, and purpose of all easements of record.
3. Location and size of existing sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains,
culverts, or other underground facilities within the subject property and to
a distance of one hundred (100) feet beyond the outside boundary of the
proposed plat. Data such as grades, invert elevations, and location of
catch basins, manholes and hydrants shall also be shown.
4. Locations and routing of proposed sanitary sewer lines, stormwater lines,
and water mains. Identification of gravity, force main, and alternative
service lines.
5. Water mains shall be provided to serve the subdivision by extension of an
existing community system. Service connections shall be stubbed ten (10)
feet into each lot and all necessary fire hydrants shall also be provided.
Extensions of the public water supply system shall be designed so as to
provide public water in accordance with the standards of the City.
6. Sanitary sewer trunk, laterals, and service connections shall be illustrated
in accordance with the standards of the City with regard to location, size,
and service type, subject to final review and approval of the City Council.
7. The location of hydrants and valves for all proposed water mains.
8. All other utilities shall be located and designed in accordance with the
requirements of the City Engineer.
9. Submit storm sewer design flow calculations with the utility plans.
10. Date of plan preparation and dates of all revisions.
F. Determination of Requirement for Environmental Review Documents
The Zoning Administrator may review the preliminary plat and may determine if an
Environmental Assessment Workshop (EAW), Environmental Impact Statement (EIS), or
Alternative Urban Area-Wide Review (AUAR) is required pursuant to Minnesota Rules.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance
Preliminary Plat
4.8
If such documents are required, the Zoning Administrator may notify the developer of the
requirement.
An escrow deposit in addition to the standard requirements shall be submitted by the
applicant to cover City costs reviewing and administering an EAW.
G. Additional Information Required
1. Evaluation by the applicant that the subdivision would not be determined
to be premature pursuant to the criteria outlined by the Comprehensive
Plan and Subdivision Ordinance.
2. Phasing Plan. All preliminary plats shall include a phasing plan that
includes:
a. A phasing plan identifying the sequence of development and
approximate areas, number of lots in each phase, total area and
buildable area per phase, serially numbered with a description of
each phase. Information shall be provided regarding the number of
dwelling units, proposed improvements, and common facilities for
each. Each phase of a preliminary plat shall be consistent with
growth management criteria of the City.
b. Any trail/sidewalks within the approved phase of the preliminary
plat shall be constructed along with streets and utilities and shall be
clearly marked on a site map which shall be an attachment to all
sales agreements for individual lots.
c. Site grading shall be coordinated with the phasing plan to avoid
premature disruption of land or long term storage of excess
materials.
d. Each phase of developer improvements as specified in the final
plat and development agreement shall be completed prior to
initiating any subsequent phase. Developer improvements shall be
limited to those specifically illustrated and/or enumerated in the
final plat and development agreement.
3. Documents outlining the content of proposed conservation easements,
restrictive covenants, deed restrictions, and establishment of homeowners
associations for review. Where the plat is intended to include common
open spaces, these documents shall address ownership and long term
maintenance of these open spaces areas.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance
Preliminary Plat
4.9
4. Information or easements showing how public and/or private utilities,
drainage, and roads can be extended to serve adjacent property.
5. Landscape and screening plans showing landscape plantings for street
boulevards, subdivision entrances, and buffer yards, and specifying plant
locations, varieties, sizes, ownership, maintenance responsibilities, and
monument signs.
6. Traffic study for the subdivision including pre and post development
information regarding traffic generation, traffic distribution, capacity of
existing streets, and level of service (LOS) on existing streets.
7. Examples of Housing Product. Illustration of building footprint, floor
plans, and building elevations proposed within the subdivision.
8. Other information deemed necessary for a complete application.
4-2 FILING AND REVIEW OF APPLICATION
A. Procedure
1. Pre-Application Meeting. The property owner/ applicant shall meet with
the Zoning Administrator/City staff to discuss the preliminary plat
application. Through this meeting, the Zoning Administrator/City staff
may summarize the City’s review comments and offer suggestions
pertaining to additional information or design changes that may assist in
expediting the preliminary plat review.
2. Neighborhood Meeting. The City strongly recommends the property
owner/applicant hold a neighborhood meeting for informal comment and
feedback prior to preliminary plat application.
3. The person applying for preliminary plat approval shall submit to the
Zoning Administrator a complete application and all other information
required according to the deadline and meeting schedule established by
the City. The application shall address the informational requirements of
Section 4-1 of this Ordinance and issues identified through the sketch plan
review procedure.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance
Preliminary Plat
4.10
4. A complete preliminary plat application shall include:
a. A graphic and written description of the information requirements
outlined in Section 4-1 of this Ordinance.
b. Applications shall be accompanied by a fee and processing escrow
established by the City Council.
5. The Zoning Administrator shall refer copies of the preliminary plat to
other staff, committees, consultants, or agencies as appropriate.
6. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall
have a report prepared and refer the application to the City advisory
committees, the Planning Commission, and City Council.
7. The application shall be reviewed by City advisory committees. The
advisory committees recommendations will be forwarded to the Planning
Commission for their consideration of the application at a public hearing.
8. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
preliminary plat. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the
official newspaper designated by the City Council at least ten (10) days
prior to the hearing. Written notification of the hearing shall be mailed at
least ten (10) days prior to the hearing to all owners of land within three
hundred fifty (350) feet of the boundary of the property in question.
Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any
such proceedings as set forth within this Ordinance, provided a bona fide
attempt has been made to comply with the notice requirements of this
Ordinance.
9. The Planning Commission shall take public testimony at their public
hearing and evaluate the requested preliminary plat against the premature
subdivision criteria of Section 2-5 of this Ordinance, the performance
standards of this Ordinance, the performance standards of the Delano
Zoning Ordinance, and other City requirements. The Planning
Commission shall make findings and offer a recommendation for either
preliminary plat approval or denial. The Planning Commission may offer
a recommendation of approval with conditions necessary to satisfy City
regulations.
10. The Zoning Administrator shall prepare a staff report of the findings and
recommendations of the Planning Commission. The findings may include
specific conditions of approval or findings related to denial of the plat.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance
Preliminary Plat
4.11
11. The City Council shall take action on the application within one hundred
twenty (120) days following delivery of an application completed in
accordance with the regulations of this Ordinance, unless an extension is
agreed to by the applicant. If the City Council approves the preliminary
plat, it may impose conditions it considers necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare. If the City Council denies the preliminary plat,
it must state in writing the reasons for the denial at the time it denies the
request.
12. The City Council shall take action on the application which shall include
findings of fact, and shall be entered in the proceedings of the City
Council and transmitted to the applicant in writing. The lack of a majority
Council vote to affirmatively approve a preliminary plat shall be a denial
of the requested application.
13. If the preliminary plat is approved by the City Council, the subdivider
shall submit a complete application for final plat in accordance with the
approved phasing plan but no later than one (1) year, after said approval or
approval of the preliminary plat shall be considered void, unless a request
for time extension is submitted in writing by the applicant and approved
by the City Council.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Final Plat
5.1
SECTION 5: FINAL PLAT
5-1 INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR FINAL PLAT
Approval of a preliminary plat by the City Council is an acceptance of the general layout, as
submitted, and indicates that the developer may proceed toward final plat approval in accordance
with the City Council approval of the preliminary plat, including conditions and the City growth
management standards.
A complete application for final plat shall be submitted no later than one (1) year after the date of
approval of the preliminary plat, or a time as provided in the developers agreement. Otherwise,
the preliminary plat approval shall be considered void, unless an extension is requested in
writing, and for good cause, is granted by the City Council.
The final plat application shall have incorporated all the conditions of City Council approval of
the preliminary plat. In all other respects, the final plat shall substantially conform to the
preliminary plat. It may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the
developer proposes to record and develop at that time, provided that such portion conforms with
all the requirements of this Ordinance.
Approval of the engineering specifications required by this Ordinance pertaining to water supply,
drainage, domestic waste water, potable water, street lighting, gas and electric service, grading,
roadway standards, widths, and surfacing of streets, shall be completed by the Zoning
Administrator and appropriate development contracts prepared prior to approval of the final plat
by the City Council.
A. Revised Preliminary Plat
1. The City may require seven (7) large scale copies (22” by 34”), one (1)
reproducible reduction at 11” by 17”, and one digital electronic copy in a format
compatible with the City’s computer system of the preliminary plat and of
supporting documents illustrating all changes and conditions that were required as
part of preliminary plat approval. This revised preliminary plat will provide the
historical record of the subdivision approval by which subsequent final plats shall
be considered.
B. Title Restrictions
The City may require one (1) copy of any title declaration, conservation easements, deed
restriction, restrictive covenant, or homeowner’s association documents.
C. Final Plat General Information
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Final Plat
5.2
Twelve (12) large scale (22” X 34”) copies and one digital electronic copy in a format
compatible with the City’s computer system of the final plat and supporting documents, plus any
additional copies deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator plus one (1) reproducible copy
reduced to 11” x 17”.
1 Name of the subdivision.
2 Location by section, township, range, county, and state as well as descriptive
boundaries of the subdivision based upon an accurate traverse, giving angular and
linear dimensions.
3 Scale (engineering only) one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet or less.
4 North point indication.
5 The location of monuments shall be shown and described. Pipe or steel rod shall
be at the corners of each lot and at each intersection of street centerlines.
6. Location and accurate dimensions of all lots, outlots, streets, and other features.
Lots and blocks shall be numbered.
7. A listing of the total area of each lot measured in gross square feet per lot and
total area of the plat.
8. The exact location, widths and names of all proposed streets to be dedicated.
9. The location and width of all easements to be dedicated.
10. Accurate outlines and legal description of land to be dedicated as parks, trails,
ponds, or other public use shall be illustrated on the final plat and dedicated with
the final plat.
11. Name and address of the registered surveyor of the plat with certification by in the
form required by Minnesota Statutes 505.03, as may be amended.
12. Statement dedicating all easements as follows: easements for installation and
maintenance of trails, utilities and drainage facilities are reserved over, under, and
along the areas designated as drainage and utility easements.
13. Statement dedicating all streets or other public rights-of-way as follows: streets
and other public areas shown on this plat and not heretofore dedicated to public
use are hereby so dedicated.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Final Plat
5.3
14. Final grading, construction plans shall be prepared and submitted in accordance
with City standards.
D. Development Contracts
1. The developer shall meet with the City staff to finalize the terms of the
development contract.
2. Upon finalization of the development contract, the City Clerk shall have the final
copy of the contract signed by all appropriate parties.
3. Financial guarantees shall be posted with the City as outlined in the development
contract.
4. Final grading and utility plans shall be approved by the City Engineer and made a
part of the development contract – NO GRADING ALLOWED UNTIL FINAL
PLAT AND DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT IS APPROVED AND THE
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT IS SIGNED AND A FINANCIAL
SECURITY IS IN PLACE WITH THE CITY.
5. When the City has agreed to install improvements in a development, the
developer shall furnish the City a financial statement satisfactory to the City.
When the City has not undertaken improvement installation, it may, at its option,
require the developer to furnish a financial statement satisfactory to the City.
E. Additional Final Plat Information
1. Certification by a registered land surveyor, to the effect that the plat represents a
survey made by him and that monuments and markers shown thereof exist as
located and that all dimensional and geodetic details are correct.
2. Notarized certification by owner, and by any mortgage holder of record, of the
adoption of the plat, and the dedication of streets and other public areas.
3. Approval by signature of City and County officials concerned with the approval
of the plat.
4. Form for approval of the Council as follows: Approved by the Council of the
City of Delano, this _______ day of ___________________, 20_____.
Signed __________________________ (Mayor)
Attest ___________________________ (City Clerk)
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Final Plat
5.4
5-2 FILING AND REVIEW OF APPLICATION
A. The final plat application shall be considered to be officially filed when City staff has
received and examined the application and has determined that the application is
complete.
B. The Planning Commission shall consider the final plat and the Zoning Administrator
shall forward the Planning Commission recommendations to the City Council.
C. The following requirements shall be met before City Council consideration of the final
plat:
1. The final plat shall substantially conform to the approved preliminary plat and
phasing plan.
2. Completed development contract including all required financial securities and
timeframe for final plat and final grading.
3. Conditions attached to approval of the preliminary plat shall be fulfilled or
secured by the development agreement, as appropriate.
4. All fees, charges, and escrow related to the preliminary or final plat shall be paid
in full.
D. The City Council shall act on the final plat by motion. The motion shall include findings
of fact supporting the approval or denial, and shall be entered in the proceedings of the
City Council. The lack of a majority Council vote to affirmatively approve the final plat
shall be a denial of the requested application.
E. Within sixty (60) days upon receiving a complete final plat application, the City Council
shall certify final plat approval or denial. If the City Council approves the final plat, it
may impose conditions it considers necessary to protect the public health, safety and
welfare. If the City Council denies the final plat, it must state in writing the reasons for
the denial at the time it denies the request.
F. No site work, including grading, shall be allowed until final plat approval and recording.
5-3 FORM AND CONTENT
The final plat shall be of the form and content as prescribed in the Minnesota Land Surveyors
Association Plat Manual of Minnesota Guidelines, as may be amended.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Final Plat
5.5
5-4 RECORDING
If the final plat and development contract are approved by the City Council, the developer shall
record the plat within ninety (90) days after the date of approval. Otherwise, the approval of the
final plat shall be considered void, unless the developer requests and receives an extension from
the City Council. The City may record the development contract immediately upon receipt of
signatures.
5-5 RECORD PLANS
The developer shall submit for review and approval all proposals to change the original plans
regarding road construction, drainage, and stormwater management. The developer shall obtain
written approval by the City prior to changes to the plans. The developer shall submit the
following:
A. One (1) mylar copy of the final plat.
B. Seven (7) sets and one digital electronic copy in a format compatible with the City’s
computer system of record plans indicating all changes in the work, including accurate
as-built locations, dimensions, elevations, grades, slopes and all other pertinent
information concerning the completed work.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Administrative Subdivisions
6.1
SECTION 6: ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISIONS
The provisions of this section shall apply only to those subdivisions classified as administrative
subdivisions.
6-1 QUALIFICATION
The following shall be considered an administrative subdivision:
A. Lot Boundary Line Adjustment. Divisions of land where the division is to permit the
adding of a parcel of land to an abutting lot or the combination of recorded lots to form
no more than two (2) lots. Newly created lots shall conform to the design and
performance standards of the Delano Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances.
B. Lot Split. The simple division of a single parcel, tract or lot to create no more than two
(2) lots and the newly created property line will not cause the remaining portion of the lot
or any structure to be in violation with this Ordinance or the Delano Zoning Ordinance.
C. Base Lot Subdivision. In the case of a request to divide a base lot upon which a two
family dwelling, townhouse or a quadraminium, which is a part of a recorded plat where
the division is to permit individual private ownership of a single dwelling unit within
such a structure and the newly created property lines will not cause any of the unit lots or
the structure to be in violation of this Ordinance or the Delano Zoning Ordinance.
6-2 INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISIONS
Whenever any subdivision of land as outlined in Section 6-1 is proposed, before any contract is
made for the sale of any part thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a structure on
such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdividing owner or his authorized agent, shall
file an application and secure approval of an administrative subdivision.
The administrative subdivision application shall be considered to be officially filed when the
Zoning Administrator has received the application and has determined that the application is
complete. Administrative subdivisions shall consist of maps and accompanying written
documents. An owner or applicant shall submit twelve (12) large scale copies (one (1) inches
equal one hundred (100) feet or less) and one (1) reduced scale copy (11 inches by 17 inches) of
detailed graphic materials to include the following information:
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Administrative
Subdivisions
6.2
A. Certificate of survey prepared by a licensed land surveyor identifying the
following:
1. Scale (engineering only) one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet or
less.
2. Name and address, including telephone number, of legal owner and/or
agent of property.
3. North point indication.
4. Existing boundaries of parcel to be platted with dimensions and area and
proposed new property lines with dimensions noted.
5. Existing legal description/proposed legal description of new lots.
6. Easements of record.
7. Delineated wetland boundary, to include the ordinary high water level
(OHWL) of any lakes or Department of Natural Resources (DNR) waters,
100 year flood elevations.
8. All encroachments, easements, or rights-of-way encumbering the property.
9. Existing buildings, structures, and improvements within the parcel to be
platted and those one hundred (100) feet outside the boundaries of the
subject parcel.
10. Locations, widths and names of all public streets, rights-of-way or railroad
rights-of-way showing type, width and condition of the improvements, if
any, which pass through and/or are within one hundred (100) feet.
11. Proposed driveway locations and locations of existing driveways on the
same side of the road.
12. Location of any existing tile lines, abandoned wells, drainageways,
waterways, water courses, lakes, and wetlands.
13. Additional preliminary plat data requirements determined appropriate by
the Zoning Administrator.
6-3 FILING AND REVIEW OF APPLICATION
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Administrative
Subdivisions
6.3
A. Applicant shall file an administrative subdivision application with all required
information and accompanying fee with a schedule established by the City.
B. Upon receipt of an application, the Zoning Administrator shall refer copies of the
complete administrative subdivision application to City staff and consultants for
review and the preparation of a report.
C. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to request additional
information pertinent to the administrative subdivision. Failure to provide the
necessary supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request.
D. Decision. The Zoning Administrator shall reach a decision on the requested
administrative subdivision within one hundred twenty (120) days of complete
application, unless the applicant agrees to an extension of the review period.
1. The Zoning Administrator may approve the administrative subdivision
with conditions that must be met to insure the administrative subdivision
is compliant with the regulations of the Delano Subdivision and Zoning
Ordinances, as may be amended, and other applicable requirements.
2. The Zoning Administrator shall prepare findings and deny a subdivision if
the administrative subdivision is found to be premature as defined by the
criteria of Section 2.5 of this Ordinance or fails to comply with regulations
of the Delano Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances, as may be amended, or
other applicable requirements.
E. Decision Appeal. The applicant may appeal a administrative subdivision denial
following the procedures outlined in Section 51.24, Subd. C of the Delano Zoning
Ordinance, as amended from time to time.
6-4 RECORDING
If the administrative subdivision is approved by the City Council, the applicant shall
record the deed, and the accompanying survey, in the Office of the City Recorder or
County Registrar of Titles within ninety (90) days after the date of approval, otherwise
the approval of the administrative subdivision shall be considered void.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Design Standards
7.1
SECTION 7: DESIGN STANDARDS
7-1 CONFORMITY WITH THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND ZONING
ORDINANCE
A proposed subdivision shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan, to related policies adopted by
the City, and to the Delano Zoning Ordinance, as may be amended.
7-2 LAND REQUIREMENTS
A. Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided. No plan shall be
approved if the site is not suitable for the purposes proposed by reason of potential
flooding, topography, adverse soil conditions, rock formations, or wetlands.
B. Land subject to hazards to life, health, or property shall not be subdivided until all such
hazards have been eliminated or unless adequate safeguards against such hazards are
provided by the subdivision plan.
C. Proposed subdivisions shall be coordinated with surrounding properties and/or
neighborhoods, so that the City as a whole may develop efficiently and harmoniously.
7-3 BLOCKS
A. Length. The maximum length of blocks shall be one thousand three hundred twenty-five
(1,325) feet and the minimum length four hundred (400) feet. Blocks over eight hundred
(800) feet long may require pedestrianways at least ten (10) feet wide at their
approximate center. The use of additional pedestrianways to schools, parks, and other
destinations may be required.
B. Arrangement. A block shall be so designed as to provide two (2) tiers of lots unless it
adjoins a major collector or an arterial street or where topographic wetland or other
conditions render the block arrangement unreasonable.
C. Block Width. The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to allow two (2) tiers of
lots of appropriate depth, except where topography or other conditions render the block
depth unreasonable.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Design Standards
7.2
7-4 LOTS
A. Area. The minimum lot area, width and depth shall not be less than that established by
the Delano Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time of adoption of the final plat. Minimum
lot area for urban lots shall consist of buildable land and be exclusive of utility
transmission easements that encumber lot development.
B. Corner Lots. Corner lots for residential use shall have additional width to permit
appropriate building setback from both streets and a side yard buffer yard where the side
yard abuts a collector or arterial street as required in the Delano Zoning Ordinance.
C. Side Lot Lines. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to street lines or
radial to curved street lines.
D. Width. Every lot must have the minimum width measured at the minimum front yard
setback and at the setback from the OHWL of an abutting lake or stream and extending to
the location of the principal building. All lots shall have frontage on a public street.
E. Lot Frontage. All lots shall have frontage on a public street that provides the required lot
width at the minimum front yard setback. Flag lots are prohibited.
F. Building Sites. Each lot shall provide an adequate building site at least eighteen (18)
inches above the top of the adjacent curb unless approved by the City Engineer upon the
basis of plans submitted showing alternative, acceptable surface drainage measures.
G. Urban Single and Two Family Lot Access. All new single and two family urban lots
shall be designed to receive access from a local street.
H. Access to Arterial Streets and Major Collector Streets. In the case where a proposed plat
is adjacent to a major collector or arterial street, said streets to be defined by the City’s
Comprehensive Plan, there shall be no direct vehicular access from individual urban
single family or two family lots to such streets and roads. In the platting of small tracts
of land fronting on limited access highways, arterial, or major collector streets where
there is no other alternative, a temporary entrance may be granted, subject to terms and
conditions defined by the City Council and application County or State agencies. As
neighboring land becomes subdivided and more preferable access arrangements become
possible, such temporary access permits shall become void. In such cases where direct
lot access to major collector or arterial streets is allowed, special traffic safety measures
including, but not limited, provisions for on-site vehicle turn around shall be required. In
cases where a proposed plat is adjacent to the County or State highway, the plat shall be
subject to County and/or State approval.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Design Standards
7.3
I. New commercial, industrial, and multiple family lots fronting on an arterial or major
collector street shall be designed to minimize the number of direct access points through
the following methods listed in preferential order. If the highest preference is not
possible, the next preference shall be utilized until an access method is possible.
1. Access from a local street.
2. Frontage road serving multiple properties.
3. Frontage driveway or connected parking lot with cross easements serving multiple
properties.
4. Shared driveways.
5. One driveway access, no closer than two hundred (200) feet to another driveway
and that meets the City’s minimum spacing standards from a street intersection.
All driveways shall be reviewed for consistency with the policies of the Delano
Comprehensive Plan.
J. Setback Lines. Setback or building lines shall be shown on all lots intended for
residential use and shall not be less than the setback required by the Delano Zoning
Ordinance, as may be amended.
K. Water Courses. Water courses may be contained within abutting lots. Water courses
shall be protected by easement that will include a buffer strip extending outward from the
delineated wetland boundary or the water course ordinary high water level as defined by
Section 1-12 of this Ordinance. Lots with easements protecting water courses shall have
sufficient dimensions and contiguous area outside the water course easement to meet or
exceed the minimum lot area and width specified in the zoning chapter for the district in
which the lots are located.
L. Grading for drainage. Lots shall be graded so as to provide drainage away from building
locations and shall conform to the approved final grading plan. Storm water drainage
from an improved subdivision or lot shall not be directed at an adjoining property at a
rate above a predevelopment condition except where drainage is directed to a designed
drainage easement.
M. Features. In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown for all natural
features, such as tree growth, water courses, historic places or similar conditions which, if
preserved, will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Design Standards
7.4
N. Frontage on Two Streets. Double frontage, or lots with frontage on two (2) parallel
streets shall not be permitted except where lots back on major collector or arterial streets,
County or State highways, or where topographic or other conditions render subdividing
otherwise unreasonable. Additional lot depth and a twenty (20) foot wide landscaped
buffer yard shall be provided where a lot backs onto a major collector or arterial streets
O. Irregular Shaped Lots. On single family residential lots determined to be irregular in
shape (e.g., triangular), the developer shall demonstrate to the City an ability to properly
place principal buildings and accessory structures upon the site which are compatible in
size and character to the surrounding area.
P. Building Expansion. All single family residential lots shall be designed in consideration
of potentials for buildings accommodating three (3) garages, porches and decks, etc.
without need for setback variance. Said buildings and structures are to be compatible in
size and character with the surrounding area.
Q. Lot Remnants/Outlots. All remnants of lots below minimum lot size left over after
subdividing a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots rather than allowed to remain as
unusable parcels. Outlots may be platted within a subdivision to delineate future
development phases or commonly owned open spaces. The outlet shall be sized in a
manner to accommodate its intended use. An outlot shall be platted into a lot and block
prior to issuance of a building permit. No building permits shall be issued for an outlot
except for open air structures allowed as a recreational component in an open space area.
7-5 STREETS AND ALLEYS
A. Alleys. Alleys shall be allowed within the City in accordance with Section 7-5-13 of this
Ordinance.
B. Streets, Continuous. Except for cul-de-sacs, streets shall connect with streets already
dedicated in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions, or provide for future connections to
adjoining unsubdivided tracts, or shall be a reasonable projection of streets in the nearest
subdivided tracts. The arrangement of major collector and arterial streets shall be
considered in their relation to the reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographic
conditions, to runoff of storm water, to public convenience and safety, and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the area to be served in compliance with the
Delano Comprehensive Plan.
C. Local Streets and Dead End Streets. Local streets should be so planned as to discourage
their use by non-local traffic. Dead end streets are prohibited, but cul-de-sacs shall be
permitted where topography or other physical conditions justify their use. Cul-de-sacs
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Design Standards
7.5
shall not be longer than five hundred (500) feet, including a terminal turn around which
shall be provided at the closed end, with a right-of-way radius of not less than sixty (60)
feet. A forty-five (45) foot street radius will be required on all cul-de-sacs.
D. Street Plans for Future Subdivisions. Where the plat application includes only part of the
tract owned or intended for development by the subdivider, or abuts an undeveloped
tract, a build out plan (ghost plat) illustrating a proposed future street system for the
unsubdivided tract, prepared and submitted by the subdivider, may be required by the
City.
E. Temporary Cul-de-Sac. In those instances where a street is terminated pending future
extension in conjunction with future subdivision and the street segment is more than two
hundred (200) feet between the dead-end and the nearest intersection, a temporary turn
around facility shall be provided at the closed end, in conformance with cul-de-sac
requirements. This temporary cul-de-sac must be placed inside a temporary roadway
easement if it is located outside street right-of-way. Financial guarantee will be required
for removal or restoration as determined by the City Engineer.
F. Provisions for Resubdivision of Large Lots and Parcels. When a tract is subdivided into
larger than normal building lots or parcels, such lots or parcels shall be so arranged as to
permit the logical location and openings of future streets and appropriate resubdivision,
with provision for adequate utility connections for such resubdivision.
G. Subdivisions Abutting Major Rights-of-Way. Wherever the proposed subdivision
contains or is adjacent to the right-of-way of a U.S. or State highway, County road, local
major collector, or local arterial street, provision may be made for a service street
approximately parallel and adjacent to the boundary of such right-of-way; provided that
due consideration is given to proper circulation design, setbacks from an intersection on
the major rights-of-way, or for a street at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of
land between such street and right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due
consideration of the minimum distance required for approach connections to future grade
separations, or for lot depths.
H. Compliance with the Delano Comprehensive Plan. All subdivisions incorporating streets
which are identified in the City Comprehensive Plan, as amended, shall comply with the
minimum right-of-way, surface width, and design standards as outlined in this Ordinance,
and must be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer.
I. Half Streets. Half streets shall be prohibited except where it will be practical to require
the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided, in which case
the dedication of a half street may be permitted. The probable length of time elapsing
before dedication of the remainder shall be considered in this decision. No permanent
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Design Standards
7.6
street improvement shall be permitted within a half street right-of-way. All lots having
frontage or access solely from a half street are prohibited from being eligible for building
permits.
J. Dedication. All proposed streets shown on the plat shall be in conformity to City,
County, and State plans and standards and be offered for dedication as public streets
unless otherwise determined by the City Council.
K. Additional Right-of-Way. Additional right-of-way and roadway widths may be required
by the Council to promote public safety and convenience when special conditions require
it. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of inadequate width,
sufficient additional width shall be provided to meet the standards of this Ordinance.
L. Restriction of Access. Access of local streets onto arterial and collector streets shall be
discouraged at intervals of less than five hundred (500) feet.
M. Street Design. Design of street rights-of-way shall conform to the following minimum
standards:
Road Type ADT Width % Grade
R/W Street1
Number
Traffic
Lanes
Number
Park
Lanes
Min Max
Local Access:
Alley 150 20 feet 16 feet 2 0 .5 8
Cul-De-Sac 150 60 feet 32 feet 2 2 .5 8
Low Density 300 60 feet 32 feet 2 2 .5 10
Medium 300 –
1,000
60 feet 36 feet 2 2 .5 9
High 1,000 60 feet 36 feet 2 2 .5 8
Minor Collector 1,000-
1,500
66 feet 36 feet 2 1 .5 8
Major Collector:
Low 1,500 80 feet
70 feet
44 feet
36 feet
2
2
2
1
.5
.5
8
8
Medium 1,500-
5,000
80 feet 44 feet 2 2 .5 7
High 5,000 86 feet 48 feet 4 0 .5 6
Arterial:
Low 10,000 86 feet3 48 feet 4 0 .5 6
Medium 10,000-
15,000
100 feet3 52 feet 4 0 .5 5
High2 15,000 110 feet3 2 @ 28
feet
4 0 .5 4
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Design Standards
7.7
1 Face of curb to face of curb
2 Parkway design (optional for medium arterial)
3 At major intersections increase to 120 feet
NOTE: The actual right-of-way width will be determined by the City Council after
considering all characteristics of the adjacent development.
N. Curb Radius. The minimum curb radii for thoroughfares, collector streets, local streets,
and alleys shall be as follows:
a. Arterial Streets and Collector Streets. Twenty-five (25) feet.
b. Local Streets. Ten (10) feet.
c. Alleys: Ten (10) feet.
O. Reverse Curves. Minimum design standards for collector and arterial streets shall
comply with Minnesota Department of Transportation State Aid standards.
P. Street Intersections. Insofar as practical, streets shall intersect at right angles. In no
case shall the angle formed by the intersection of two (2) streets be less than seventy-five
(75) degrees. Intersections having more than four (4) corners shall be prohibited.
Adequate land for future intersection construction needs shall be dedicated.
Q. Tangents. A tangent of at least one hundred (100) feet shall be introduced between
reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
R. Deflections. When connection street lines deflect from each other at one point by more
than ten (10) degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to ensure
a sight distance of not less than five hundred (500) feet for arterials, three hundred (300)
feet for collectors, and two hundred (200) feet for all other streets. The City Council may
allow greater or lesser sight distances.
S. Street Intersection Offsets. Street intersection jogs with centerline offsets of less than
one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be prohibited.
T. Centerline Curvature. The minimum horizontal curvature of streets shall be in
accordance with the MnDOT Highway Design Manual for the type of street and design
speed. The minimum curvature shall be two hundred fifty (250) feet radius.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Design Standards
7.8
U. Streets in Flood Hazard Area. No street shall be approved if its final surface is at a lower
elevation than two (2) feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation. The City
Council shall require profiles and elevations of finished streets for areas subject to
flooding. Fill may be used for streets, provided such fill does not unduly increase flood
heights and provided any such fill would not result in a stage increase violating the
requirements of the Delano Floodplain Ordinance, as may be amended.
V. Reserve Strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except
under conditions accepted by the City Council.
W. Private Streets. Private Streets, except in the case of planned unit developments, shall be
prohibited and no public improvements shall be approved for any private street. All
streets shall be dedicated for public use. All Private Streets shall meet the construction
design standards for City streets.
X. Curb and Gutter. All urban streets, and all streets in commercial and industrial areas,
shall have concrete curb and gutter in compliance with established City standard design
detail plates.
7-6 SIDEWALKS AND TRAILS
A. Except as otherwise determined by the City Council, concrete sidewalks not less than five
(5) feet in width and/or bituminous trails not less than eight (8) feet in width shall be
provided in accordance with the following:
Street Type Sidewalk/Trail Requirements
Arterial and Major Collector Sidewalk on one side of street and trail
Streets on opposite side of the street or trails on
both sides of the street*
Minor Collector and
Local Streets, excepting Sidewalk on one side of street*
Cul-de-sacs
Cul-de-sacs No requirements
*All sidewalks and trails shall be placed back from the street wherever possible to
provide a green strip for tree planting and to promote pedestrian safety and
reassurance.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Design Standards
7.9
7-7 EASEMENTS
A. Width and Location. An easement for utilities at least ten (10) feet wide along front and
rear lot lines and five (5) feet wide along all abutting side lot lines shall be provided. An
easement for utilities not less than ten (10) feet wide shall be provided adjacent to all plat
boundaries. If necessary for the extension of main water or sewer lines or similar
utilities, easements of greater width may be required along lot lines or across lots.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Design Standards
7.10
B. Drainage. Easements shall be provided along each side of the centerline of any waterway
or drainage channel of a sufficient width to provide proper maintenance and protection,
and to provide for stormwater runoff and installation and maintenance of drainage
systems. Where necessary, drainage easements corresponding with lot lines shall be
provided. Such easements for drainage purposes shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in
width.
C. Continuous Utility Easement Locations. Utility easements shall connect with easements
established in adjoining properties. These easements, when approved, shall not thereafter
be changed without the approval of the City Council after a public hearing.
D. Guy Wires. Additional easements for pole guys should be provided, when appropriate,
at the outside of turns. Where possible, lot lines shall be arranged to bisect the exterior
angle so that pole guys fall along side lot lines.
7-8 PUBLIC UTILITIES
A. Sanitary sewer and municipal water plans shall be consistent with the Delano
Comprehensive Sanitary Sewer Plan and the Master Water Study.
B. Final sanitary sewer and municipal water plans shall conform with the City’s Design
Guidelines and shall be approved by the City and/or municipal utility with the final plat.
C. Telephone, electric, cable, gas service lines and/or other public utilities are to be placed
underground in accordance with City standards.
1. Developers shall apply for City permits to install underground utilities in public
rights-of-way.
2. The City shall approve all utilities prior to installation.
3. Public utilities shall be installed in a joint trench in accordance with City
standards.
4. Conduit shall be installed for all road crossings.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Design Standards
7.11
5. Public utility installation shall not occur until one (1) week after all curb has been
backfilled.
6. Any utility not installed in a joint trench shall not be allowed installation for five
(5) years following the joint trench installation.
7-9 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND SEDIMENT
CONTROL
A. Drainage. The natural drainage shall be used as far as is feasible for the storage and flow
of runoff. The design of a drainage system shall conform to any overall storm water
drainage plan for the area. The following requirements shall also apply:
1. Storm water drainage shall be consistent with policies and standards of the Delano
Storm Water Management Plan, as may be amended.
2. No existing ditch, stream, drain or drainage channel shall be deepened, widened,
re-routed or filled without written permission from the City and other
governmental agencies.
3. Where drainage channels must be constructed to augment the natural drainage
system, such channels, as well as the natural drainageways, may be planned as a
part of a recreational trail system. When this is done, channels shall be designed
to be aesthetically compatible for recreational trail use.
B. The City shall approve all subdivision grading, drainage, and wetland mitigation plans.
All individual lots shall be graded after construction to conform with the approved final
grading and drainage plans.
C. Erosion and Sediment Control.
1. Erosion and siltation control measures shall be coordinated with the different
stages of construction. Appropriate control measures shall be installed prior to
grading when necessary to control erosion.
2. Land shall be developed in increments of workable sizes such that adequate
erosion and siltation controls can be provided as construction progresses. The
smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one period of time.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Design Standards
7.12
3. When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest feasible period of
time, as specified in the development agreement.
4. Where the top soil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall be set aside for respreading
over the developed area. Top soil shall be restored or provided to a
depth of three (3) inches and shall be of a quality at least equal to the soil quality
prior to development.
5. Natural vegetation shall be protected wherever practical.
6. Based upon the review and recommendation of the City Engineer, it may be
necessary to divert runoff water to a sedimentation basin before being allowed to
enter the natural drainage system.
7. For subdivisions which shall disturb five (5) or more acres of land, the subdivider
shall submit a Notice of Intent (NOI) to the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
(MPCA) for a storm water program permit.
7-10 PROTECTED AREAS
Where land proposed for subdivision is deemed environmentally sensitive by the City, due to the
existence of wetlands, drainageways, watercourses, floodable areas or steep slopes, the design of
said subdivision shall clearly reflect all necessary measures of protection to insure against
adverse environmental impact.
Based upon the necessity to control and maintain certain sensitive areas, the City shall determine
whether said protection will be accomplished through lot enlargement and redesign or dedication
of those sensitive areas in the form of outlots.
In general, measures of protection shall include design solutions which allow for construction
and grading involving a minimum of alteration to sensitive areas. Where these areas are to be
incorporated into lots within the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to
demonstrate that the proposed design will not require construction on slopes over eighteen (18)
percent, or result in significant alteration to the wetlands, floodplains, or natural drainage
systems, such that adverse impacts cannot be contained within the plat boundary.
7-11 SIGNS
As part of preliminary plat application, the subdivider shall identify all signs associated with the
proposed plat including, but not limited to, neighborhood identification signs, street signs, traffic
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Design Standards
7.13
control signs, wetland demarcation signs, or other signs related to the proposed subdivision. The
type, size and location of signs shall be subject to approval of the City. Installation shall be at
the expense of the developer.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Public Land Dedication
8.1
SECTION 8: PUBLIC LAND DEDICATION
8-1 PROPERTY DEDICATION
A. A portion of any subdivision shall dedicate to the City a reasonable portion of the
proposed subdivision for public streets, roads, utility easements, water facilities, storm
water drainage and holding areas or ponds and other similar utilities and improvements.
B. As a prerequisite to any subdivision approval, and at the sole determination by the City,
applicants and/or developers shall dedicate land for parks, playgrounds, public open
spaces or trails and/or shall make a cash contribution to the City’s park dedication fund
roughly related to the anticipated effect of the subdivision on the park and trail system.
The amounts listed in this Section are the City’s best estimate of the dedication or cash
contribution needed to offset the effect of the subdivision on the park and trail system.
The requirement may also be met with a combination of land and cash if approved by the
City Council.
C. Land shall be reasonably suitable for its intended use and shall be at a location
convenient to the people to be served. Factors used in evaluating the adequacy of
proposed park and recreation areas shall include size, shape, topography, geology,
hydrology, tree cover, access and location, and future park needs pursuant to the
Comprehensive Park Plan. Wetlands, ponding areas, and drainage ways shall not be
eligible for park dedication credit. Park land to be dedicated shall be above the ordinary
high water level. Grades exceeding twelve (12) percent or areas unsuitable for park
development shall not be considered for dedication. Land with trash, junk, pollutants
and/or unwanted structures is not acceptable.
D. The applicant shall confer with City Staff and the Park Board at the time the preliminary
plat is under consideration, to secure a recommendation as to the location of any property
that should be dedicated to the public, such as parks, playgrounds or other public
property. The preliminary plat shall show the location and dimensions of all areas to be
dedicated in this manner. Such contribution requirement recommendation(s) will be sent
to the Planning Commission for review and comment and subsequently to the City
Council for their approval.
E. When a proposed park, playground, recreation area or other public ground has been
indicated in the City’s official map or Comprehensive Park Plan and is located in whole
or in part within a proposed plat, it shall be dedicated to the appropriate governmental
unit. If the applicant elects not to dedicate an area in excess of the land required
hereunder for such proposed public site, the City may consider acquiring the excess land
through purchase or condemnation.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Public Land Dedication
8.2
F. Where private open space for park and recreation purposes is provided in a proposed
subdivision, such areas may be used for credit, at the discretion of the City Council,
against the land or cash dedication requirement for park and recreation purposes,
provided the City Council finds it is in the public interest to do so.
G. The City, upon consideration of the particular type of development, may require that a
lesser parcel of land should be dedicated due to particular features of the development. In
such cases, a cash contribution shall be required above the land dedication to ensure that
compensation is received for the full amount of the impact on the City’s park and trail
system.
H. In all new residential, commercial and industrial subdivisions, ten (10) percent of the area
subdivided shall be dedicated for public park land as established by City Council
resolution. A different percentage may be applied as the City Council shall determine to
be reasonably necessary as a result of the subdivision approval. This ten (10) percent
shall be calculated on the net buildable area, as defined in Section 1-12. The land
dedicated for public recreation shall be in addition to property dedicated for streets,
alleys, easements, or other public ways. No areas may be dedicated for public use until
such areas have been approved by the City Council as suitable and necessary for the
health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the City.
I. When a subdivision is proposed, the developer shall make a dedication of land for public
park and trail use, as provided for in Subdivision 8, of this Section, or shall pay a fee in
lieu of such land dedication as established by City Council ordinance. Said amount is the
City’s best estimate of the effect of the subdivision on the City’s park system.
J. The City may elect at its sole discretion to receive a combination of cash, land, and
development of the land for park and/or trail use. Combined park land and cash
dedications shall be calculated based upon the following:
1. At the time of subdivision, a yield plan will be prepared demonstrating the total
number of units/lots possible within the development without a park. This figure
is then multiplied by the per unit or per lot park dedication charge (established by
City Council ordinance). The result of this calculation is equal to the total cash
value of the park dedication for the residential project. The formula is outlined as
follows:
a. Buildable Acres (less wetlands, right-of-way, natural waterbodies etc.,) x
Average Density = Number of Units/Lots.
b. Number of Units/Lots x Residential Unit Cash Charge = Total Cash
Contribution for the Subdivision.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Public Land Dedication
8.3
2. Land Value Determination. The value of the land dedication is determined based
upon the following formula:
a. Total Land Dedication Acres x Land Value = Total Land Value
3. To determine the combined land and cash dedication requirement, the following
formula should be used:
a. Total Cash Contribution for Subdivision – Land Value for Park Land =
Balance of Cash Contribution.
K. Planned unit developments with mixed land uses shall make cash and/or land
contributions in accordance with this Section based upon the percentage of land devoted
to the various uses.
L. Park cash contributions are to be calculated and established based on land value at time
of final plat. Cash dedications shall be included in the development agreement and paid
prior to the City’s signature of and release of the final plat. For subdivisions that do not
require a development agreement, the cash dedication shall be paid before the City
releases the signed approval of the subdivision for recording.
M. Cash contributions for parks shall be deposited in the City’s Park Fund and shall only be
used for park acquisition or development, and trail acquisition or development as
determined by the City.
N. Property being replatted with the same number of lots or same number of dwelling units
shall be exempt from all park land dedication requirements. If the number of lots or the
number of dwelling units is increased, or if land outside of the previously recorded plat is
added, then the park land dedication and/or park cash contributions shall be based on the
additional units/lots and on the additional land being added to the plat.
O. If the applicant or developer does not believe that the estimates contained in this Section
fairly and accurately represent the effect of the subdivision on the park or trail system of
the City, the applicant or developer may request that the City prepare an in-depth study of
the effect of the subdivision on the park and trail system and an estimate of that effect in
money and/or land. All costs of such study shall be paid by the developer or applicant. If
the developer requests the preparation of such a study, no application for the development
shall be deemed complete until the study has been completed and a determination is made
as to the appropriate amount of land or money necessary to offset the effects of the
subdivision.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Tree Preservation
9.1
SECTION 9: TREE PRESERVATION
9-1 PURPOSE
The City finds it is in the best interest of the public to protect, preserve, and enhance the natural
environment and to encourage a resourceful and prudent approach to the development and
alteration of wooded areas. In the interest of achieving these objectives, the City has established
the tree preservation regulations herein.
9-2 SCOPE OF APPLICATION
A tree preservation plan shall be submitted to and approved by the City and implemented in
accordance with all subdivisions of five (5) or more lots. If no significant trees or woodlands are
present on the site, a tree preservation plan will not be required.
9-3 TREE PRESERVATION FOR SUBDIVISIONS
A. Required Actions
Applicants shall:
1. Incorporate the preservation of trees into the overall design of the plat.
2. Prepare a tree preservation plan superimposed on the grading plan, as described
below.
3. Ensure the tree preservation plan is followed during the plan development (mass
grading).
4. Provide a financial guarantee as part of the development agreement to guarantee
the preparation and implementation of the preservation plan and the replacement
of all significant trees which were to be saved but were actually destroyed or
damaged. The financial security in an amount determined by the City Council
and adopted by ordinance shall be provided for:
a. each mass graded lot with at least one (1) significant tree to be saved, and
b. each custom graded lot with at least one (1) significant tree on the lot, and
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Tree Preservation
9.2
c. each outlot with at least one (1) significant tree.
5. Install snow fencing or polyethylene laminar safety netting at the drip line or
critical root zones of trees to be saved.
6. Install signage at all tree protection areas that instructs workers to stay out.
7. Install erosion control measures.
8. Keep tree protection measures in place and in good condition until all grading and
construction activity is terminated.
9. Prevent change in soil chemistry due to concrete wash out and leakage or spillage
of toxic materials such as fuels or paints.
B. Prohibited Actions
1. No soil disturbance shall occur within the subdivision until the tree preservation
plan is approved, financial securities have been submitted and development
agreement approved, and tree protection measures are in place on site.
2. Construction staging areas and areas for the storage of equipment and stockpiling
of materials shall not be within tree protection areas.
3. Fill shall not be placed against tree trunks, under the drip line, or in critical root
zones of trees to be saved.
4. Pruning of oak trees shall not take place from April 1st through July 15th. If
wounding of oak trees occurs, a non-toxic tree wound dressing must be applied
immediately. Excavators shall have a non-toxic tree wound dressing with them
on the development site.
C. Tree Preservation Plan
The tree preservation plan shall be submitted by a forester or landscape architect retained by the
applicant and shall consist of the following items:
1. Tree inventory that includes the size, species, tag numbers, and locations of all
significant trees, specimen trees, and significant tree stands on the property being
platted.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Tree Preservation
9.3
2. Mass graded areas and proposed grades. Changes in grades should be well
planned with the objective of preserving significant trees.
3. Custom graded lots.
4. All significant trees proposed to be saved and significant trees proposed to be
removed in soil disturbance areas
5. The plan shall designate tree save zones for:
a. areas not in soil disturbance areas or within 50 feet of such areas, and
b. all specimen trees to be saved, and
c. all significant tree stands to be saved.
6. Measures proposed to protect significant trees including, but not limited to:
a. Tree removal procedures including directional felling away from existing
trees to be saved and trenching to separate root systems prior to bulldozing
trees or stumps.
b. Installation of signage at all tree protection areas that instructs workers to
stay out.
c. Installation of snow fencing or polyethylene laminar safety netting at the
drip line or critical root zones of trees to be saved.
d. Installation of erosion control measures.
e. Designation of a construction staging area along with a designated area for
the storage of equipment and stockpiling of materials that is not within
tree save zones.
f. Construction access locations.
g. Overlay of the subdivision utility plan on the tree preservation plan to
strategically lay out utility locations and trenches in a manner that protects
trees to be saved. Individual utility stubs to home sites shall be reviewed
for compliance with tree preservation plans.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Tree Preservation
9.4
D. Certification of Plan Implementation
After mass grading has been completed and streets and utilities installed, the subdivider’s
forester or landscape architect shall:
1. Certify in writing to the City the status of all trees indicated as trees to be saved in
the approved plan.
2. Certify in writing to the City whether tree protection measures were installed.
3. Certify the status of any remove-designated trees that were saved.
E. Damaged Trees
If a significant tree indicated to be saved on the tree preservation plan is destroyed or damaged,
the applicant shall be replaced in accordance with the tree replacement requirements of Section
9-5.
F. Release of Financial Security
The financial security will be released upon:
1. Certification in writing by the forester or landscape architect indicating that the
tree protection measures were installed on mass graded lots and tree replacement
is completed, if necessary. These must be confirmed by the City.
2. The home builders having posted a security for the custom graded lots.
9-4 CUSTOM GRADED LOTS/HOME BUILDERS REQUIREMENTS
A. Required Actions
Home builders shall:
1. Home builders shall furnish the following items for tree preservation at the time
the building permit application is submitted for all lots with at least one (1)
significant tree identified for preservation in a subdivision tree preservation plan.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Tree Preservation
9.5
a. A tree preservation plan with the elements described in Section 9-4-3.
The individual lot tree preservation plan shall be certified by a forester or
landscape architect and signed by the homebuilder or homeowner.
b. A financial security in an amount determined by the City Council, and
adopted by ordinance, shall be required for tree protection requirements
for each lot or outlot with at least one (1) significant tree to be saved and
each lot that is a custom graded lot.
2. Builders shall be liable for their subcontractors that destroy or damage significant
trees that were indicated to be saved on the individual lot tree preservation plan.
3. Tree protection measures shall remain in place until all grading and construction
ability is terminated.
4. Site grading for individual lots shall comply with the final grading plan of the plat
and shall not result in the flooding of tree preservation areas.
B. Prohibited Actions
1. No soil disturbance shall occur within the lot until the tree preservation plan is
approved and tree protection measures are in place.
2. Pruning of oak trees shall not take place from April 15 through July 1. If
wounding of oak trees occurs, a non-toxic tree wound dressing must be applied
immediately. Excavators shall have a non-toxic tree wound dressing with them
on the development site.
3. Builders, contractors, or others working on site shall not fill, stockpile materials,
or store equipment or vehicles against the trunk of the tree, in the critical root
zone, or under the drip line of a tree to be saved.
C. Tree Preservation Plan
1. On mass graded lots with at least one (1) significant tree to be saved, home
builders are required to follow the tree preservation plan for the plat.
2. For each custom graded lot with at least one (1) significant tree, the home builder
shall submit an individual lot tree preservation plan. The plan shall be consistent
with the original tree preservation plan for the plat. The homeowner and/or home
builder, forester or landscape architect shall meet with City staff prior to the
development of the individual lot tree preservation plan to determine the
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Tree Preservation
9.6
placement of the home where the fewest significant trees would be destroyed or
damaged. The home builder shall be responsible for ensuring the tree
preservation plan is followed during building construction.
3. The tree preservation plan shall be prepared and incorporated on the certificate of
survey for a building permit and shall include the following:
a. Size, species, and location of all significant trees, specimen trees, and
significant tree stands including significant trees with drip lines or critical
root zones extending over the lot line of an adjoining lot.
b. Identification of all significant trees proposed to be saved and significant
trees proposed to be removed, including significant trees with drip lines or
critical root zones extending over the lot line of an adjoining lot.
c. Location of snow fencing or polyethylene laminar safety netting placed at
the drip line or critical root zones.
d. Installation of signage at all tree protection areas that instructs workers to
stay out.
e. Erosion control methods.
f. Measures proposed to protect significant trees including but not limited to:
(1) Tree removal procedures including directional felling away from
existing trees to be saved and trenching to separate root system
prior to bulldozing trees or stumps.
(2) Coordination of utility planning with tree preservation plan to
strategically extend utility connections from the street to the house
in a manner that protects trees intended to be saved.
(3) Measures for preventing changes in soil chemistry due to concrete
wash out and leakage or spillage of toxic materials such as fuels or
paints.
g. Creation of a temporary access road when temporary site access through a
significant tree stand or a critical root zone of a significant tree to be saved
is necessary that meets the following standards:
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Tree Preservation
9.7
(1) The temporary access road shall be routed in a manner that is least
disruptive to the significant tree stand per the approval of the
Zoning Administrator.
(2) Temporary access roads shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in
width and shall be delineated by snow fencing or safety fencing.
(3) An eight (8) inch deep cover of wood chip mulch shall be placed
over the temporary access road to cushion the critical root zones
from compaction.
10. The Zoning Administrator shall monitor the tree protection measures at the time
of routing inspections.
11. If tree replacement is required on the individual lot because the builder destroyed
or damaged a tree which was to be saved, the forester or landscape architect in
conjunction with the property owner shall determine where the replacement trees
shall be installed. Tree replacement shall be consistent with Section 9-5 of this
Ordinance.
12. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and release of tree preservation
security, the forester or landscape architect shall certify to the City in writing the
final disposition of saved trees on the lot and that all the tree protection measures
identified on the tree preservation plan were installed from the start of
construction to the end of construction and tree replacement is completed, if
necessary.
9-5 TREE REPLACEMENT
A. Subdividers and/or home builders shall be required to replace significant trees which
were indicated on the tree preservation plan to be saved but ultimately were destroyed or
damaged. The subdivider and home builder shall be required to replace each significant
tree destroyed or damaged with two (2) replacement trees.
B. Replacement trees shall consist of nursery stock and be no less than the following sizes:
1. Deciduous Trees: No less than two and one-half (2.5) inches in diameter.
2. Coniferous Trees: No less than six (6) feet high.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Tree Preservation
9.8
C. Replacement trees shall be species similar to the trees which were destroyed or damaged
and can include those species shown on the following table:
1. Deciduous Trees:
Maple Oak
Linden Ash
Honeylocust Birch
Hackberry
2. Coniferous Trees:
Fir Red Pine
White spruce Eastern red cedar
Black Hills spruce White pine
Austrian pine Northern white cedar
D. Unacceptable Trees: The following trees are unacceptable because of structural
instability, susceptibility to disease, or because they are invasive species.
1. Deciduous :
Silver maple Siberian Elm
Amur maple Cottonwood (seed producing)
2. Coniferous:
Colorado spruce
E. Replacement trees shall not be placed on easements or street rights-of-way. The Zoning
Administrator shall determine the locations of tree replacement for subdividers’ tree
plans.
F. Any replacement tree which is not alive or healthy, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator, or which subsequently dies due to construction activity within one (1)
year after the date of project closure, shall be removed by the applicant and replaced with
a new healthy tree meeting the same minimum size requirements within eight (8) months
of removal.
9-6 REVIEW PROCESS
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Tree Preservation
9.9
The tree preservation plan shall be reviewed by City staff to assess the best possible layout to
preserve significant trees and significant woodlands and to enhance the efforts to minimize
damage to significant trees and significant woodlands. The applicant shall meet with the City
prior to submittal of the subdivision application or prior to application for the grading permit,
whichever is sooner, to determine the most feasible and practical placement of buildings,
parking, driveways, streets, storage and other physical features, in order that the fewest
significant trees and significant tree stands are destroyed or damaged. The subdivision tree
preservation plan shall follow the preliminary plat/final plat review process. Individual lot tree
preservation plans shall be processed with the building permit.
9-7 REMOVAL OF DISEASED TREES REQUIRED
Prior to any grading, all diseased and hazardous trees on the subject property shall be removed
from the property.
9-8 COMPLIANCE WITH PLAN
The applicant shall implement the tree preservation plan prior to and during any construction.
The tree protection measures of the plan shall remain in place until all grading and construction
activity is terminated, or until a request is made to and approved by the City. The City shall have
the right to inspect the development and/or building site in order to determine compliance with
the approved tree preservation plan. The City shall determine whether compliance with the tree
preservation plan has been met.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Wetlands Protection
10.1
SECTION 10: WETLANDS PROTECTION
10-1 INTENT AND PURPOSE
A. Intent
1. The City finds that wetlands serve a variety of beneficial functions. Wetlands
maintain water quality, reduce flooding and erosion, provide food and habitat for
wildlife, provide open space, and are an integral part of the City’s environment.
Wetlands are important physical, educational, ecological, aesthetic, recreational
and economic assets to the City. They are critical to the City’s stormwater
management and other aspects of health, safety, and general welfare. Regulating
wetlands and the land uses around them is therefore in the public interest.
2. In order to protect wetlands, this Ordinance incorporates by reference the
Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act of 1991 (hereinafter referred to as the
WCA) and any future amendments adopted by the legislature. The City has
determined that some activities are exempted from the provisions of the WCA.
Any activities exempted from the provisions of the WCA are also exempted from
the requirements of this Ordinance, insofar as they relate to the WCA. The
provisions of this Ordinance cover all wetlands, including those governed by the
Department of Natural Resources.
3. In addition to having regulations that affect the physical impacts within wetland
areas, the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency has required the City to address
potential non-point source impacts from future development with the
establishment of buffer strip standards to complement the existing stormwater
standards. A buffer strip is an upland area left in its (or restored to its) natural
(non-turf grass) state that surrounds a wetland and reduces negative impacts to
wetlands from adjacent development.
Catch basins and storm sewers typically collect street and front yard drainage and
direct the drainage to an appropriately sized pond for pre-treatment prior to
discharge to a wetland or waterbody. Back yard drainage typically reaches
wetlands or waterbodies without any pre-treatment, thereby allowing lawn and
garden chemicals, sediments, pet wastes, fertilizer and other types of contaminants
to directly impact the receiving waterbody.
4. The City has found that wetlands vary significantly in the degree that they have
been altered. Wetlands exhibit great variations in their overall quality. Therefore,
the City has determined that it is necessary and beneficial to protect wetlands
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Wetlands Protection
10.2
based on their needs for their existing quality.
B. Purpose
1. Through the adoption and enforcement of this Ordinance, the City shall promote
the general health, safety, and wetland of its residents by both conserving and
protecting wetlands, and requiring sound management practices and mitigation
when development occurs in the vicinity of wetlands. Through the
implementation of this Ordinance, the City seeks to accomplish the following:
a. To satisfy the requirements of the WCA as it may be amended and,
thereby, achieve no net loss of wetlands within the City.
b. To satisfy the requirements of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency by
treating non-point source pollution that currently is not treated by ponds
(primarily back yard drainage) and to limit disturbance from adjacent
development by utilizing the appropriately sized buffer strip.
c. To balance the needs to preserve and protect natural resources and systems
with both the rights of private property owners and the need to support the
efficient use of developable land within the City.
d. To promote water quality by maintaining the ability of wetlands to
recharge groundwater and receive the discharge of groundwater, to retain
sediment and toxins, and to filter nutrients from surface water runoff
before it discharges into the Crow River, thus avoiding the contamination
and eutrophication of these water features.
e. To provide wildlife habitat and thereby support the maintenance of
diversity of both plant and animal species within the City.
f. To prevent property damage and the losses associated with flood
conditions, and reduce erosion problems.
g. To preserve the natural character of the landscape through the restoration
of wetland ecosystems.
10-2 SCOPE OF APPLICATION
A. Applicants that have preliminary plat approvals previously obtained or have subdivision
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Wetlands Protection
10.3
approvals within sixty (60) days after Council’s approval of this Ordinance are exempt
from this Ordinance. Any subdivisions submitted for approval sixty (60) days or more
after the Council formally approves this Ordinance shall be subject to this Ordinance.
B. This section shall apply to any applicant for a subdivision approval, or a grading,
excavation, or mining permit to allow wetland disturbing activities. No subdivision
approval, or grading permit to allow wetland disturbing activities shall be issued until
approval of the wetland replacement plan application or a certificate of exemption has
been obtained in strict conformance with the provisions of this section and the Minnesota
Wetland Conservation Act. This section applies to all land, public or private, located
within the City of Delano.
C. This section shall apply to all land containing wetlands, rivers, lakes or streams and land
within the setback and buffer areas required by this section. Wetlands, rivers, lakes or
streams shall be subject to the requirements established herein, as well as restrictions and
requirements established by other applicable Federal, State, and City ordinances and
regulations. These wetland protection regulations shall not be construed to allow
anything that is otherwise prohibited in the zoning district where the wetland area is
located.
D. A wetland is land that meets the definition of “wetlands” set forth in the Minnesota
Wetland Conservation Act. The Westland Management Classification will be established
at the time of development and will be incorporated onto the City maps. The official
maps shall be maintained by the Wetland Conservation Act Agent for Delano. It will be
the responsibility of an applicant to have wetland(s) that are located on their property
delineate by approved methods as stated in the Wetland Conservation Act and assessed
utilizing the Minnesota Routine Assessment Method (Version 2.0 or updated version).
All delineations and MNRAM evaluations must be reviewed by the City’s Wetland
Conservation Act Agent for approval. The City will classify wetlands based on the
criteria discussed under Section 10-3 of this Ordinance. The applicant shall get final
delineation and MNRAM approval from the Wetland Conservation Act Agent. As with
the Wetland Conservation Act, this section allows the convening of a WCA TEP if
requested by the applicant or local government unit. The WCA TEP may be utilized to
review MNRAM and provide recommendations to the local government unit for wetland
classification based on Section 10-3 of this Ordinance. The Wetland Conservation Act
Agent or City Council will make the final classification determination taking into
consideration the recommendation of the WCA TEP and information provided by the
applicant. The decisions regarding wetland classifications cannot be appealed to the
Board of Water and Soil Resources. This section is applicable to wetlands that are
delineated to be jurisdictional wetlands, based on delineation procedures of the Wetland
Conservation Act.
E. This section establishes three wetland classifications as defined in Section 10-3 of this
Ordinance: Manage 1, Manage 2, Manage 3.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Wetlands Protection
10.4
10-3 WETLAND MANAGEMENT CLASSIFICATION DETERMINATION
In the provisions that follow, the methodology and criteria required for evaluation of floral
diversity/integrity are based on those detailed in the Minnesota Routine Assessment Method for
Evaluating Wetland Functions (Version 2.0), Minnesota Board of Water and Soil Resources,
September, 1998. The functional value for Floral Diversity/Integrity will be determined from
MNRAM which divides wetlands into wetland communities (i.e., wet meadow, shallow marsh,
floodplain forest, etc.) and provides a ranking of exceptional, high, moderate, and low to all
major wetland communities within a wetland.
An applicant that is proposing any new development will be required to submit a MNRAM form
filled out for each wetland if located on the subject property. This MNRAM form will need to
be filled out by a consultant trained in wetland science. This ordinance provides the criteria to
place wetlands into appropriate classifications.
A functional value index, which is based on a scale of 0.1 to 1.0 with 0.1 being the lowest
ranking and 1.0 being the highest ranking, will be utilized to determine an overall functional
value index for the wetland.
Floral Diversity/Integrity Functional
Value Index
Exceptional Quality 1.0
High Quality .075
Moderate Quality 0.5
Low Quality 0.1
Each wetland will be given a ranking based on the functional value for each of the major wetland
communities or community within the wetlands. The overall ranking for the wetland will be
based on a weighted average that incorporates the area of the wetland community (percent) and
the functional value index (0.0 to 1.0) for the wetland community within the wetland.
The overall wetland functional index range for floral diversity/integrity and the associated
wetland management classifications are shown in Table 1. Table 2 shows how management
classifications are determined for an example wetland.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Wetlands Protection
10.5
Table 1. Overall Wetland Functional Index Range for
Floral Diversity/Integrity and Stormwater Susceptibility
and the Associated Wetland Management Classification
Floral Diversity/Integrity * Wetland Management
Classification
1.0 – 0.60 Manage 1
0.59 – 0.5 Manage 2
Less than 0.5 Manage 3**
* Wetlands located within 300 feet of the Crow River will be raised one
management classification from that determined in the method above due to the
direct relation of these wetlands in protecting the river from water quality and
quantity impacts. Example: Manage 3 basin within three hundred (300) feet of
river will have a final classification of Manage 2.
** Wetlands that fall under the Manage 3 classification, as described above, but are
less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in size will not receive a wetland
management classification.
Table 2. Example Showing How Final Wetland Management Classifications
Will Be Determined
Wetland
ID
Community Floral
Diversity/
Integrity
Percent
Community
Floral
Diversity/
Integrity
% Community
* Floral Diversity/
Integrity Value
AV-W7.2 Deep Marsh Moderate 0.3 0.75 0.225
AV-W7.2 Shallow Marsh Moderate 0.6 0.75 0.45
AV-W7.2 Wet Meadow Low 0.1 0.10 0.01
TOTAL 0.685
Floral diversity/integrity has a functional index of 0.685. This overall functional value index
falls within the Manage 1 classification (see Table 1 above).
10-4 GENERAL STANDARDS
The following standards apply to all lands within and/or abutting a wetland:
A. Building elevation standards shall conform with the standards of the Delano Surface
Water Management Plan.
B. Structures intended to provide access across a wetland shall be prohibited unless a permit
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Wetlands Protection
10.6
is obtained in conformance with State regulations.
C. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s Best Management Practices shall be followed
to avoid erosion and sedimentation during construction processes.
10-5 WETLAND ALTERATION
This section follows the requirements of the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act with the
following exception:
A. A wetland alteration permit will not be issued for dredging, excavating or grading in all
wetlands (including those not regulated by WCA) unless the following standards are
followed:
1. The dredging will not have a net adverse effect on the ecological and hydrological
characteristics of the wetland.
2. It shall be located as to minimize the impact on vegetation. Exceptions may be
allowed in basins dominated by invasive exotic species such as reed canary grass
(Phalaris arundinacea).
3. It shall not adversely change water flow.
4. The size of the dredged area shall be limited to the minimum required for the
proposed action.
5. Disposal of the dredged material is prohibited within the wetland area unless it is
part of an approved wetland replacement plan.
6. Disposal of any dredged material shall include proper erosion control and nutrient
retention measures.
7. Dredging in any wetland area is prohibited during waterfowl breeding season or
fish spawning season, unless it is determined by the City that the wetland is not
used for waterfowl breeding or fish spawning.
8. For wetlands currently not regulated by the WCA, but regulated by this section of
the ordinance, special exceptions to excavation, dredging and grading within
wetlands will be allowed if the work within the wetland is determined to be
valuable for flood storage attenuation by the City Engineer.
10-6 WETLAND BUFFER STRIPS
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Wetlands Protection
10.7
For subdivisions approved sixty (60) days after this ordinance was passed by the City Council on
December 17, 2002, a buffer strip shall be maintained abutting all wetlands.
A. Design Standards
1. Buffer strip vegetation shall be considered adequate when the buffer has a
continuous, dense layer of perennial grasses, flowers, trees and/or shrubs that
have been undisturbed for at least ten (10) consecutive years. Vegetation shall be
considered unacceptable if:
a. It is composed of twenty (20) percent or greater noxious weeds; or
b. Topography or sparse vegetation tends to channelize the flow of surface
water; or
c. For some other reason, the vegetation is unlikely to retain nutrients and
sediment.
2. Where buffer strips or a portion thereof are not vegetated or have been cultivated
or otherwise disturbed within ten (10) years of the permit application, such areas
shall be replanted and maintained according to each of the following standards:
a. Buffer strips shall be planted with a seed mix containing one hundred
(100) percent perennial native plant species, except for a one time planting
of annual nurse or cover crop such as oats or rye.
b. Native seed shall be of local ecotype and be from stock originating within
three hundred (300) miles of the site, and shall represent species that were
historically part of the native vegetation of the Wright County region.
Seeding rates shall follow 2000 MnDOT Standard Specification for
Construction.
c. Native shrubs or trees may be substituted for forbs. Shrubs and/or trees
shall be planted at a rate of sixty (60) plants per acre. Shrubs and/or trees
shall be distributed so as to provide a natural appearance and shall not be
planted in rows. Plants shall be of local ecotype, and represent species
that were historically part of the native vegetation of Wright County.
d. Native grasses, forbs, trees and shrubs shall be planted by a qualified
contractor utilizing methods described in the 2000 MnDOT Standard
Specifications for Construction.
e. No fertilizer shall be used in establishing new buffer areas.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Wetlands Protection
10.8
f. Buffer strips (both natural and created) shall be protected by erosion
control measures as determined by the City. These must be employed
during construction until permanent ground cover is established to prevent
siltation of the buffer area and wetland.
g. A walking trail may be established within a wetland buffer area. The trail
should be constructed to minimize erosion. An undisturbed area of
vegetative buffer at least ten (10) feet in width should remain between the
trail and the wetland edge.
h. A wetland strip landscaping plan will need to be submitted to the Local
Government Unit WCA Agent for approval. At a minimum, this plan shall
include the following:
(1) A plan sheet that shows the location of the buffers within the
subdivision. This sheet should also show buffers that are
considered acceptable in their current state and identify them as
areas that shall not be disturbed during grading.
(2) For buffer areas that are not acceptable, a plan shall be developed
that provides species and planting and/or seeding locations.
(3) The following maintenance will be required for seeded areas.
(a) Establishment (spring seeding):
i. Prepare site – late April – May.
ii. Seed – May 1 – July 1.
(b) Maintenance:
i. Mow (6-10 inches) – July 15 – August 15.
ii. Mow – September 1 (optional).
iii. Weed control – mowing should keep annual weeds
down. Spot spray thistles, etc.
(c) Establishment (fall seeding):
i. Prepare site – late August – early September.
ii. Seed – late September to freeze up.
(d) Maintenance (following season):
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Wetlands Protection
10.9
i. Mow (6-10 inches) – June 15 – August 15.
ii. Mow – September 1 (optional)
iii. Weed control – mowing should keep annual weeds
down. Spot spray thistles, etc.
i. Applicants may obtain from the City a set of standard seeding and planting
specifications for buffer areas which meet all the City requirements.
B. Buffer Strip Maintenance
1. The clearing and removal of vegetation in the buffer area is prohibited, except for
selective clearing and pruning of individual trees and shrubs which are dead,
diseased, noxious weeds, or hazards.
2. Where acceptable to adjacent properties, owners are encouraged to leave dead
trees and branches in the buffer area, because they are part of the native natural
environment and provide necessary habitat to many birds and native wildlife.
3. All buffer areas are measured from the wetland edge as marked in the field.
C. Buffer Strip Width
1. Table 3 provides the wetland buffer average required for each classification. The
total acres of buffer required should be determined based on the average width.
The buffer width can be adjusted along the wetland boundary as long as the width
does not fall below the minimum and the average acres requirements are met.
The Wetland Conservation Act agent or City Council will approve the final
buffers variations and taken into considerations guidance as provided in Exhibit
A.
Table 3. Wetland Buffer Strip Widths
Wetland
Classification
Permanent Buffer
Zone Average
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Permanent
Buffer Zone
(feet)
Minimum Building
Setback from Outer
Edge of Buffer
(feet)
Manage 1 40 25 25
Manage 2 25 16 25
Manage 3 16 16 25
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Wetlands Protection
10.10
DNR Protected Waters 50 30 25
Exhibit A provides guidance for buffer strip widths that are presented in this table.
2. Any wetland restored, relocated, replaced or enhanced because of wetland
alterations should have at least the minimum buffer area required for the class of
wetland involved.
3. For roadways, trails, and driveways, or portions thereof, that are routed across
wetlands and are subject to WCA replacement requirements, buffer will be
required on the fill slope but fill should not be expanded to accommodate
additional wetland buffer.
4. If the area of the buffer has a pre-construction slope of twelve (12) percent or
greater, the buffer shall be at the maximum width for the applicant’s wetland
classification. The use of a meandering buffer area to maintain a natural
appearance is encouraged but not required in areas of flat topography.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Wetlands Protection
10.11
5. For all lots adjacent to wetlands, the maximum easement on the property shall be
sixteen (16) feet. The remainder of the upland buffer and the wetland area will
become an outlot to the development. The establishment of the buffer area will be
the responsibility of the developer.
10-7 WETLAND AND BUFFER STRIP MITIGATION
Where wetland alteration is approved and mitigation is required, mitigation must result in equal
or improved wetland function and value. Mitigation plans must address water quality
improvement and maintenance of pre-existing hydrological balance and wildlife habitat. The
wetland function and value will include improvement of water quality, maintaining hydrological
balance, and provision of wildlife habitat. Mitigation will be performed at ratios required by the
Wetland Conservation Act to achieve replacement of the wetland function and value.
A. Mitigation Standards
The following criteria shall be required for wetland or buffer area mitigation:
1. Wetland mitigation will be performed at a ratio required by the Wetland
Conservation Act. Buffers will be required to be replaced on the fill slope. When
a wetland is completely filled, the buffer area requirement associated with the
classification of the wetland that was filled will be required for the replacement
wetlands unless replacement is occurring adjacent to a wetland with a higher
classification. In this case, the buffer area requirement for the higher wetland
classification will apply.
2. Mitigation should always result in equal or improved wetland function and value.
The wetland function and value will include improvement of water quality,
maintaining hydrological balance, and provision of wildlife habitat.
3. Mitigation shall maintain or enhance the wetland hydrological balance through the
following:
a. Restoration of partially drained wetlands.
b. Creation of new wetlands.
c. Restoration of buffer area functions.
4. Mitigation involving the buffer area shall provide landscaping for nesting, and
food for wildlife habitat. The buffer area landscape shall provide for wildlife
cover and utilize a diversity of native flora (i.e., trees, shrubs, grasses, herbaceous
plants) to encourage wildlife diversity.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Wetlands Protection
10.12
5. Wetland and buffer area mitigation should be undertaken on site. If this is not
feasible, mitigation should occur locally within the sub-watershed. If this is not
possible, mitigation should occur outside the sub-watershed, elsewhere in the
City.
6. Wetland and buffer area plantings that are completed for mitigation shall meet the
standards for plantings specified in Section 10-8.A.
7. Wetland buffers can be utilizes for wetland mitigation credits if it meets the
requirements of the Wetland Conservation Act.
10-8 WETLAND RESTORATION REQUIREMENT
An applicant will be required to provide a hydrologic restoration plan and implementation of the
plans for wetlands within a proposed subdivision if all the following criteria are met:
A. A wetland that has been hydrologically altered by ditching, drain tile, or a lower outlet
elevation but still exists in a partially drained state. Wetlands that have been entirely
drained by ditches or tile lines and are no longer jurisdictional wetlands will not have a
hydrologic restoration requirement.
B. The wetland, if restored, can be reasonably designed to only impact the hydrology of the
property in which it is located. If the restoration will impact the hydrology or drainage of
an adjacent landowner, the landowner shall be contacted to determine if they are willing
to allow the alteration. If the landowner is not willing to accept the alteration, then the
wetland restoration will not be required.
C. The hydrologic restoration can be designed in a way to limit the conversion of upland to
wetland. If the wetland is restored, the applicant will be allowed to grade up to the
delineated wetland edge to maintain the developable upland of the property. The wetland
restoration will not be required if the applicant cannot reasonably restore the wetland
without a net increase of five (5) percent or more of wetland on the property.
D. All wetlands within a subdivision will be required to be hydrologically restored if they
meet the criteria of one (1) to three (3) above unless it is proven that it is technically or
economically not feasible. The goal of the restoration shall be to the previous (prior to
hydrologic alteration) wetland type.
10-9 APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Wetlands Protection
10.13
A. Subdivisions that have preliminary plat approvals previously obtained or have
subdivision approvals within sixty (60) days after Council’s approval of this Ordinance
are exempt from this Ordinance. Any subdivisions submitted for approval sixty (60) days
or more after the Council formally approves this Ordinance shall be subject to this
Ordinance and the following will be required as part of the submittal for approval.
1. A grading plan with pipe locations and sizes for the property.
2. Existing and proposed drainage areas to wetlands.
3. Wetland delineation report.
4. Filled out Minnesota Routine Assessment Method (Version 2.0 or newer)
(General sections along with Floral Diversity section).
5. Buffer landscaping plan that meets the requirements in Section 10-6 of this
Ordinance.
6. Wetland restoration plan if it meets the requirements of Section 10-8 of this
Ordinance.
7. Submittals required by the Wetland Conservation Act if wetland impacts are
proposed.
B. Ordinance compliance can be approved at the staff level. A wetland replacement plan
application approval shall not be issued without having first been reviewed and approved
by the City Council.
C. Decisions made under this Ordinance may be appealed to the City’s designated Technical
Evaluation Panel. Staff costs to the City associated with the appeal shall be borne by the
applicant.
10-10 VARIANCES
Variances from the requirements of this section may be granted in accordance with the variance
provisions as regulated by the City Code, so long as the variances do not violate the Wetland
Conservation Act or its rules.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Improvements
11.1
SECTION 11: IMPROVEMENTS
11-1 REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
No final plat shall be approved by the Council without first receiving a report from the City
Engineer certifying that the improvements and construction of the land, streets, and trails,
together with all other necessary facilities in the plat have been designed and satisfactorily
arranged in accordance with provisions of the City’s development regulations, design standards,
and conditions of subdivision approval. In addition to construction on land, streets, and trails,
the developer, as part of the final plat, shall install and pay for light poles, fixtures and street
name signs as approved by the Council for Delano and the City utility. Such installations shall
be completed before the street is surfaced. The following is a detailed description of public
improvements required to be completed for each final plat:
A. Grading, drainage, wetland mitigation, and erosion control. A grading permit is required
by the City of Delano.
B. Storm sewer.
C. Sanitary sewer facilities.
D. Water facilities.
E. Public utilities.
F. Sidewalks and trails.
G. Streets.
H. Street and traffic signs.
I. Street lights.
J. Subdivision monuments.
11-2 GRADING AND DRAINAGE
The grade and drainage requirements for each plat shall be approved by the City Engineer at the
expense of the applicant. Every plat presented for final signature shall be accompanied by a
certificate of the City Engineer that the grade and drainage requirements have been met on the
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Improvements
11.2
grading plan. The grading and drainage plans shall include wetland mitigation, erosion and
sediment control, and tree preservation.
11-3 STORM SEWER
In an area not having municipal storm sewer, the applicant shall be responsible, before platting,
to provide for a storm water disposal plan, without damage to properties outside the platted area,
and said storm water disposal plan shall be submitted to the City Engineer, who shall report to
the City Council on the feasibility of the plan presented. No plat shall be approved before an
adequate storm water disposal plan is presented and approved by the City Council. The use of
dry wells for the purpose of storm water disposal is prohibited.
11-4 SANITARY SEWER AND WATER DISTRIBUTION IMPROVEMENTS
A. Sanitary sewers shall be installed in accordance with the standards and specifications as
required by the City Council and subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
B. Water from Delano public utilities shall be installed in accordance with the standards and
specifications as required by the Public Utilities Department and subject to the approval
of the Public Utility Superintendent.
11-5 PUBLIC UTILITIES
Telephone, electric, cable TV, and/or gas service lines are to be placed underground in
accordance with the provisions of all applicable City ordinance. All necessary utility easements
must be recorded prior to utility installation.
11-6 SIDEWALKS/TRAILS
In those cases where the City Council deems it appropriate, concrete sidewalks of not less than
five (5) feet in width or bituminous trails of not less than eight (8) feet in width shall be provided
in accordance with Section 7-6 of this Ordinance.
11-7 STREET IMPROVEMENTS
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Improvements
11.3
A. The full width of the right-of-way shall be graded in accordance with the provisions for
construction as outlined in Section 7-5 of this Ordinance, Design Standards.
B. All streets shall be improved in accordance with the standards and specifications for
street construction as required by the City Council.
C. All streets to be surfaced shall be of an overall width in accordance with the standards
and specifications for construction as approved by the City Council. The portion of the
right-of-way outside the area surfaced shall be seeded, sodded, or riprapped by the
developer. Temporary seeding of oats and mulch will be required on all disturbed areas
over Winter, by November 1st. Slopes that are three to one (3:1) or greater need wood
fiber blankets.
D. Where required, the concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed in accordance to the
standards and specifications for street construction as set forth and approved by the City
Council.
E. Trees and boulevard sodding shall be planted in conformance with the standards and
specifications as required by the City Council.
F. Street signs of the design approved by the City Council shall be installed at each street
intersection.
G. Driveway approaches and sidewalks of standard design or pedestrian pathways as may be
required by the City Council shall be installed.
H. Street lighting fixtures as may be required by the City Council shall be installed.
I. No street dedications will be accepted which require a crossing of a railroad unless
sufficient land as determined by the City Council is dedicated to insure a safe sight
distance.
J. The minimum requirement for street lighting facilities shall be one (1) eight thousand
(8,000) lumen light, or equal, at each street intersection within or abutting the
subdivision. At least one (1) street light shall be erected within blocks having a length of
nine hundred (900) feet or greater and no street light shall be located within two hundred
fifty (250) feet of another street light except for white-way areas. Light standards and
fixtures shall meet the standards established by the Delano Electric Utility and approved
by the City.
11-8 MONUMENTS
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Improvements
11.4
A. Official monuments, as designated and adopted by the Wright County Surveyor’s Office
and approved by the Wright County District Court for use as judicial monuments, shall
be set at each corner or angle on the outside boundary of the final plat or in accordance
with a plan as approved by the City Engineer. The boundary line of the property to be
included with the plat to be fully dimensioned; all angles of the boundary excepting the
closing angle to be indicated; all monuments and surveyor’s irons to be indicated, each
angle point of the boundary perimeter to be so monumented.
B. Proper survey monumentation shall be placed at each lot corner and points of curvature
and tangency along street rights-of-way. All Federal, State, County, or other official
benchmarks, monuments, or triangular stations or in adjacent to the property shall be
preserved in precise position and shall be recorded on the plat. All lot and block
dimensions shall be shown on the plat and all necessary angles pertaining to the lots and
blocks, as an aid to future surveys, shall be shown on the plat. No ditto marks will be
permitted in indicating dimensions.
C. To insure that all irons and monuments are correctly in place following the final grading
of a plat, a second monumentation shall be in the form of a surveyor’s certificate and this
requirement shall additionally be a condition of certificate of occupancy as provided for
in the City Zoning Ordinance, as may be amended.
D. All lot corners and survey control monuments shall be set and in place at the time the plat
is recorded. An exception to this requirement may be granted for up to one (1) year by
the City Council, provided such approval is made part of the development contract and a
financial guarantee in a form determined by the City Attorney is provided.
11-9 REQUIRED PRIVATE IMPROVEMENTS
As part of the final plat, the following private improvements shall be required where applicable
to a new subdivision:
A. Required Landscaping
1. The developer shall post financial securities to allow for the placement of sod
from the edge of the street to the front building line of the building. Sod must be
in place within one year of building occupancy.
2. The developer shall post financial security for the installation of one (1) tree
within the front yard of each lot. The tree shall have no less than a two (2) inch
diameter measure at breast height. Preferred tree species are identified in Section
9-5-3 of this Ordinance. Such tree(s) shall be installed within one (1) year of
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Improvements
11.5
building permit approval for individual lots and guaranteed for one (1) year after
installation.
3. The developer shall provide a detailed landscape plan for each required buffer
yards. Buffer yard landscaping shall meet the design standards of Section
51.03.B.7 of the Delano Zoning Ordinance. Buffer yard landscaping shall be
installed within one (1) year of final plat approval and guaranteed for one (1) year
after installation.
4. The developer shall submit a detailed landscape plan illustrating wetland
restoration in conjunction with wetland mitigation plans. All wetland landscaping
shall be installed within one (1) year of final plat approval and guaranteed for one
(1) year after installation.
B. Tree Preservation
The applicants shall fulfill their obligations to implement the City approved tree preservation
plan.
C. Wetland Boundary Markers
Where lots abut or contain wetlands, the applicant shall place boundary markers along the
delineated wetland buffer. The type and location of wetland boundary markers shall be reviewed
and approved with the preliminary plat.
11-10 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT INSTALLATION
Public improvements associated with the subdivision shall be installed in accordance with one of
the following methods:
A. Private Installation
1. Prior to the installation of any required improvements by the applicant and prior
to approval of the final plat, the applicant shall enter into a development
agreement in writing with the City requiring the applicant/developer to furnish
and construct said improvements at their sole cost and in accordance with
approved plans and specifications and usual agreement conditions. This shall
include provisions for inspection of the construction of the public improvements
by the City Engineer and other City staff.
2. The development agreement shall require the applicant to post a financial security
consisting of an escrow deposit, irrevocable letter of credit, or a certified check
with the City, guaranteeing performance in accordance with the terms of the
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Improvements
11.6
development agreement. The type and conditions of the financial security must
be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney. The amount of the security is to
be based on the project’s estimate of the total cost of the improvements to be
furnished under the agreement, including but not limited to, sanitary sewer, water
main, on-site storm sewer, streets, grading, drainage, wetland mitigation, erosion
control, street and traffic signs, street lights, sidewalks, trails, monumentation,
engineering, surveying, planning, City administration and legal costs. The project
costs must be reviewed by City staff. The security amount shall equal one
hundred fifteen (115) percent of the project estimate.
3. If evidence is presented that the described work and improvements have been paid
for, the amount of the deposit or bond may be reduced in a sum equal to the
estimated cost of the improvements so completed prior to the acceptance of the
plat.
4. The schedule for completion of the work described in the final plat and the
development agreement shall be determined by the City Council, upon
recommendation of the engineer after consultation with the applicant. It shall be
reasonable with relation to the work to be done, the seasons of the year, and
proper coordination with construction activities in the plat and subdivision.
5. Improvements shall be constructed only in platted real estate.
6. No applicant/developer shall be permitted to start work on any subdivision
improvements without entering into a development agreement and posting a City
approved financial security.
B. City Installation
1. Any person desiring to have utility and street improvements installed may request
the City to install them, if such request is accompanied by a petition of one
hundred (100) percent of the land owners and a waiver of assessment appeal,
subject to the following conditions and to the approval and authorization thereof
by the City Council and as authorized by State law.
2. If so approved by the City Council, the person requesting the installation of said
utility and street improvements shall supply a security approved by the City
running to the City guaranteeing payment for the installation of the improvements
in an amount based on the City Engineer’s estimate of the total cost of the
improvements to be installed. The security amount shall equal five (5) years
special assessments held until fifty (50) percent of the project special assessments
have been paid. At such time, the City may reduce the amount of security
required of the developer in amounts equivalent to subsequent assessments for
which payment has been made.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Improvements
11.7
3. Improvements shall be constructed only in platted real estate.
4. No applicant/developer shall be permitted to start work on any subdivision
improvements without entering into a development agreement and posting a City
approved financial security.
C. Private / City Installation
1. Prior to installation of any required improvements by the applicant and prior to
final plat approval, the applicant shall enter into a development agreement in
writing with the City. The developer agreement shall require the applicant to post
a financial security consisting of an escrow deposit, irrevocable letter of credit, or
a certified check with the City, guaranteeing performance in accordance with the
terms of the development agreement. The type and conditions of the financial
security must be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney. The amount of the
security is to be based on the City Engineer’s estimate of the local cost of the
improvements to be furnished under the agreement, including the cost of
inspection. The security amount shall equal one hundred fifteen (115) percent of
the City Engineer’s estimate.
2. If evidence is presented that the described work and improvements have been paid
for, the amount of the deposit or bond may be reduced in a sum equal to the
estimated cost of the improvements to completed prior to the acceptance of the
plat.
3. The schedule for completion of the work described in the final plat and the
development agreement shall be determined by the City Council, upon
recommendation of the City Engineer after consultation with the applicant. It
shall be reasonable with relation to the work to be done, the seasons of the year,
and proper coordination with construction activities in the plat and subdivision.
4. Improvements shall be constructed only in platted real estate.
5. No applicant/developer shall be permitted to start work on any subdivision
improvements without entering into a development agreement and posting a City
approved financial security.
11-11 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Improvements
11.8
Prior to installation of any required improvements and prior to approval of the final plat, the
developer shall enter into a development agreement in writing with the City requiring the
developer to furnish and construct said improvements in accordance with plans and
specifications and usual agreement conditions and/or pay appropriate costs for improvements or
other costs associated with the plat. Further, the agreement shall provide for the development of
any restrictions, covenants, easements, signage, park or open space requirements, or other
conditions of the approved preliminary plat and provide for the proper execution, recording or
other action required. In addition, the development agreement shall include such other terms
and conditions as required by the City. Approval of the development agreement shall be by City
Council resolution.
A. The signed development agreement shall be recorded with the final plat and shall be
binding upon the developer, his or their heirs, personal representative, and assigns
stipulating:
1. All improvements called for in the plat, or in any supplementary agreements, to
be complete within the time specified by the City.
2. Unless approved by the City Council, no private construction shall be conducted
on any lots in the plat or filing of applications for building permits for said
construction on said lots, until all improvements required under the City
regulations for the proposed subdivision have been made or arranged in a manner
provided for in this section.
B. The development agreement shall include provisions for construction work inspection by
the City and assurance that the developer will conform with current testing requirements
and quality control procedures of the City of Delano. The developer shall provide
documentation from a qualified testing laboratory and/or registered professional engineer
that all improvements have been constructed in accordance with the requirements of the
approved plans and specifications.
C. The development agreement shall require the developer to provide a financial security to
ensure payment of fees related to the subdivision and completion of all improvements as
provided in Section 10-10 of this Ordinance.
D. A time schedule for completion of the work shall be determined by the City upon
recommendation of the City Engineer after consultation with the developer and shall be
reasonable in relation to the work to be done, the seasons of the year, and proper
coordination with construction activity in the subdivision.
E. The development agreement shall include action remedies in the event of default
including:
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Improvements
11.9
1. The City may complete the improvements by contract or force and obtain
reimbursement of its costs from the posted security deposit.
2. The City reserves the right to withhold building permits for violation of any terms
of the development agreement.
11-12 CONSTRUCTION PLANS
Construction plans for the required improvements shall conform in all respects with all
applicable ordinances and standards of the City. Construction documents shall be prepared, at
the expense of the developer, by a licensed professional who is registered in the State of
Minnesota, and said plans shall contain his certification. Such plans, together with the quantities
of construction items, shall be submitted to the City Engineer for his approval and for his
estimate of the total cost of the required improvements. Upon approval, they shall become a part
of the development agreement. A minimum of five (5) copies of the construction plans shall be
furnished to the City for City Engineer review and approval. Additional copies may be required
by the City.
11-13 MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
The developer shall be required to maintain all improvements in the subdivision or on the
individual subdivided lots and provide for snow removal and maintenance of streets, if required,
until acceptance of said improvements by the City Council in coordination with the development
agreement.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Enforcement
12.1
SECTION 12: ENFORCEMENT
12-1 VIOLATIONS
The violation of any provision of this Ordinance or the violation of the conditions or provisions
of any permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall be a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof, the violator shall be subject to fine or imprisonment or both, as set forth in Minnesota
Statutes plus, in either case, the cost of prosecution.
A. Sale of Lots From Unrecorded Plats. It shall be misdemeanor to sell, trade, or otherwise
convey any lot or parcel of land as a part of, or in conformity with any plan, plat or replat
of any subdivision or area located within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance, unless said
plan, plat or replat shall have first been recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Wright
County.
B. Receiving or Recording Unapproved Plats. It shall be unlawful for a private individual
to receive or record in any public office any plans, plats of land laid out in building lots
and streets, alleys or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to public or
private use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent thereto,
and located within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance, unless the same shall bear thereon,
be endorsement or otherwise, the approval of the City Council.
C. Misrepresentations. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person owning an addition or
subdivision of land within the City to represent that any improvement upon any of the
streets, alleys or avenues of said addition or subdivision or any sewer in said addition or
subdivision has been constructed according to the plans and specifications approved by
the City Council, or has been supervised or inspected by the City, when such
improvements have not been so constructed, supervised or inspected.
12-2 PENALTIES
Anyone violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each
month during which compliance is delayed shall constitute a separate offense.
12-3 APPLICATION TO CITY PERSONNEL
The failure of any officer or employee of the City to perform any official duty imposed by this
Ordinance shall not subject the officer or employee to a penalty imposed for violation unless a
penalty is specifically provided for such failure.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Enforcement
12.2
12-4 INJUNCTION
In the event of a violation or the threatened violation of any provision of this Ordinance, or any
provision or condition of an approval issued pursuant to this Ordinance, the City, in addition to
other remedies, may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct, or
abate such violation or threatened violation.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Wetlands Protection
13.1
SECTION 13: SEVERABILITY AND SUPREMACY
13-1 SEVERABILITY
Every section, provision, or part of this Ordinance or any permit issued pursuant to this
Ordinance is declared separable from every other section, provision, or part thereof to the extent
that if any section, provision, or part of this Ordinance or any permit issued pursuant to this
Ordinance shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not invalidate any
other section, provision, or part thereof.
If any court of competent jurisdiction shall judge invalid the application of any provision of this
Ordinance to a particular property, building, or structure, such judgment shall not affect other
properties, buildings or structures.
13-2 SUPREMACY
When any condition imposed by a provision of this Ordinance on the use of land or building or
on the bulk of buildings is either more restrictive or less restrictive than similar conditions
imposed by any provision of any other City ordinance or regulation, the more restrictive
conditions shall prevail.
This Ordinance is not intended to abrogate any easements, restrictions, or covenants relating to
the use of land within the City by private declaration or agreement, but where the provisions of
this Ordinance are more restrictive than any such easement, restriction, or covenant, or the
provision of any private agreement, the provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail.
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Wetlands
Protection
13.2
Delano
Subdivision Ordinance Effective Date
14.1
SECTION 14: EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after March 4th, 2003
Jon Steinmetz, /s/,
Mayor
Attest:
Marlene E. Kittock, /s/,
City Clerk