 DAYTON, MINNESOTA
ZONING AND SUBDIVISION CODE
2019 S-12 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2018-22, passed 11-28-2018
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
DAYTON CITY COUNCIL
 
Mayor
Tim McNeil
Councilmembers:
Jon Mellberg
Bob O'Brien
Dennis Fisher
Julie Gustafson
 
CHAPTER 1000: LAND USAGE
   Sections
      
1001.   ZONING
      
1002.   SUBDIVISIONS
Amended Through:  October 2017.
SECTION 1001:  ZONING
Section
1001.01   Purpose
1001.02   Scope and Interpretation
   Subd. 1   Scope
   Subd. 2   Interpretation
   Subd. 3   Private Agreements
1001.03   Rules and Definitions
   Subd. 1   Rules
   Subd. 2   Definitions
1001.04   Classification of Districts
   Subd. 1   Districts
   Subd. 2   Zoning Map
   Subd. 3   District Boundaries
   Subd. 4   Future Annexation
1001.05   Residential Districts
   Subd. 1   Single-Family Residential District (R-1)
   Subd. 2   Single-Family Residential District with Lot Averaging (R-1A)
   Subd. 3   Single-Family Residential District (R-2)
   Subd. 4   Residential Estate District (R-E)
   Subd. 5   Single-Family Attached and Detached District (R-3)
   Subd. 6   Medium Density Residential District (RM)
   Subd. 7   High Density Residential District (RH)
   Subd. 8   Manufactured Housing District (RMH)
   Subd. 9   Agricultural Districts (A-1) and Special Agricultural District
(SA)
   Subd. 10   Special Homestead Agricultural District (A-2)
   Subd. 11   Historic Village Residential District (RO)
   Subd. 12   Allowable Uses; Table 5.1
1001.06   Business District Special Requirements
   Subd. 1   Special Requirements and Performance Standards in all Business
Districts
   Subd. 2   Special Requirements and Performance Standards in B-2, B-3, and B-
4 Districts (where use is listed)
   Subd. 3   Special Requirements and Performance Standards in all B-3 and B-
4 Districts (where use is listed)
   Subd. 4   Special Requirements and Performance Standards in B-2 Neighborhood
District
1001.061   Business Districts
   Subd. 1   Office Business District (B-1)
   Subd. 2   Neighborhood Commercial District (B-2)
   Subd. 3   General Business District (B-3)
   Subd. 4   Commercial/Industrial District (B-4)
1001.062   Special Requirements in all Industrial Districts
   Subd. 1   Special Requirements and Performance Standards in all Industrial
Districts
   Subd. 2   Special Requirements and Performance Standards in I-1, I-2 and BP
Districts (where use is listed)
   Subd. 3   Special Requirements and Performance Standards in I-1 and I-
2 Districts (where use is listed)
1001.063   Industrial Districts
   Subd. 1   Light Industrial District (I-1)
   Subd. 2   Heavy Industrial District (I-2)
   Subd. 3   Business Park District (B-P)
1001.064   Additional Non-Residential Districts
   Subd. 1   Village-Mixed Use District (VM)
   Subd. 2   Public Recreation District (PR)
   Subd. 3   Table of Uses
1001.065   General Mixed Use Districts
   Subd. 1   General Mixed Use District-1 (GMU-1): Highway 81 Corridor
   Subd. 2   General Mixed Use District-2 (GMU-2): City Center
   Subd. 3   General Mixed Use District-3 (GMU-3): Historic Village
   Subd. 4   General Mixed Use District-4 (GMU-4): Balsam Lane
1001.07   Mississippi River Corridor
   Subd. 1   General Provisions
   Subd. 2   Site Planning Requirements
   Subd. 3   General Development Requirements
   Subd. 4   Additional Dimensional Requirements
   Subd. 5   Slope Protection and Soil Erosion Control
   Subd. 6   Grading and Filling
   Subd. 7   Vegetation Management
   Subd. 8   Surface Water Runoff Management
   Subd. 9   Utility and Transportation Facilities
   Subd. 10   Riverfront Uses  and Dedication
   Subd. 11   Existing Uses
   Subd. 12   Boat Launching Ramps and Docks
   Subd. 13   Management of Islands
   Subd. 14   Land Suitability
   Subd. 15   Planned Unit Developments (Cluster Developments)
   Subd. 16   Mining
   Subd. 17   Agricultural Uses
   Subd. 18   Performance Standards
   Subd. 19   Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources
   Subd. 20   Enforcement
1001.08   Shoreland Zoning
   Subd. 1   Statutory Authorization
   Subd. 2   Purpose and Intent
   Subd. 3   Jurisdiction
   Subd. 4   Enforcement
   Subd. 5   Interpretation
   Subd. 6   Severability
   Subd. 7   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
   Subd. 8   Definitions
   Subd. 9   Administration
   Subd. 10   Shoreland Classification and Land Use Districts
   Subd. 11   Dimensional Requirements
   Subd. 12   General Provisions
   Subd. 13   Planned Developments (Cluster Developments) in a Shoreland
   Subd. 14   Non-Conformities
1001.09   Floodplains
   Subd. 1   Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact and Purpose
   Subd. 2   General Provisions
   Subd. 3   Establishment of Zoning Districts
   Subd. 4   Floodway District (FW)
   Subd. 5   Flood Fringe District (FF)
   Subd. 6   General Floodplain District
   Subd. 7   Subdivisions
   Subd. 8   Utilities, Railroads, Roads and Bridges
   Subd. 9   Manufactured Homes and Manufactured Home Parks and Placement of
Recreational Vehicles
   Subd. 10   Administration
   Subd. 11   Non-Conforming Uses
   Subd. 12   Penalties for Violation
   Subd. 13   Amendments
1001.10   Planned Unit Development
   Subd. 1   General Provisions
   Subd. 2   Purpose
   Subd. 3   Allowed Uses
   Subd. 4   General Standards for Approval
   Subd. 5   Coordination with Subdivision Regulations
   Subd. 6   Procedure for Processing a Planned Unit Development (PUD)
1001.11   Mobile Home Park Development
   Subd. 1   Purpose
   Subd. 2   Application, Review, Administrative Procedures and General
Regulations
   Subd. 3   Responsibilities of Park Management
1001.12   Adult Establishments
   Subd. 1   Authority, Purpose and Intent
   Subd. 2   Definitions
   Subd. 3   Application of this Subsection
   Subd. 4   Hours of Operation
   Subd. 5   Operation
   Subd. 6   License Required
   Subd. 7   License Application
   Subd. 8   Disqualifications and Requalification
   Subd. 9   Expiration and Renewal
   Subd. 10   Suspension
   Subd. 11   Revocation
   Subd. 12   Procedures for Appeal
   Subd. 13   Posting
   Subd. 14   Fees
   Subd. 15   Inspection
   Subd. 16   Transfer of License
   Subd. 17   Penalty
   Subd. 18   Severability
1001.13   Home Occupations
   Subd. 1   Purpose
   Subd. 2   Home Occupation Categories
   Subd. 3   General Provisions
   Subd. 4   Performance Standards
   Subd. 5   Procedures and Permits
   Subd. 6   Non-Conforming and Existing Home Business Uses
1001.14   General Regulations, Additional Requirements, Exceptions and
Modifications
   Subd. 1   Intent
   Subd. 2   Standards
   Subd. 3   Height Regulations
   Subd. 4   Yard Regulations
   Subd. 5   Area Regulations
   Subd. 6   Accessory Uses
   Subd. 7   One Family Dwellings:  Standards, Minimum Dwelling Size, Materials
and Requirements
   Subd. 8   Manufactured Homes
   Subd. 9   Driveways, Residential
   Subd. 10   Compliance
   Subd. 11   Swimming Pools
1001.19   Parking Regulations
   Subd. 1   General Provisions
   Subd. 2   Design, Construction, and Maintenance
   Subd. 3   Parking Provisions in Residential Districts
   Subd. 4   Parking Provisions in Business Districts
   Subd. 5   Parking Provisions in Industrial Districts
   Subd. 6   Parking Design Requirements in all Business, Commercial, and
Industrial Districts
   Subd. 7   Required Off-Street Parking Spaces and Garages
   Subd. 8   Off-Street Loading and Unloading Areas
   Subd. 9   Minimum Parking Space and Aisle Dimensions
1001.20   Signs
   Subd. 1   Findings, Purpose and Effect
   Subd. 2   Substitution
   Subd. 3   Measurements
   Subd. 4   Permit Required
   Subd. 5   Permit Not Required
   Subd. 6   Non-Conforming Signs
   Subd. 7   General Requirements
   Subd. 8   Prohibited Signs
   Subd. 9   District Regulations
   Subd. 10   Enforcement and Penalties
   Subd. 11   Severability
1001.21   Telecommunications Towers and Facilities
   Subd. 1   Findings
   Subd. 2   Purpose
   Subd. 3   Definitions
   Subd. 4   Development of Towers
   Subd. 5   Performance Standards
   Subd. 6   Setbacks
   Subd. 7   Separation or Buffer Requirements
   Subd. 8   Illumination
   Subd. 9   Signs and Advertisements
   Subd. 10   Fencing
   Subd. 11   Landscaping
   Subd. 12   Security
   Subd. 13   Access
   Subd. 14   Structural Requirements
   Subd. 15   Permit Requirements
   Subd. 16   Certifications and Inspections
   Subd. 17   Maintenance
   Subd. 18   Stealth
   Subd. 19   Other Telecommunications Facilities
   Subd. 20   Existing Towers
   Subd. 21   Abandoned or Unused Towers or Portions of Towers
   Subd. 22   Interference with Public Safety Telecommunications
   Subd. 23   Exemptions
   Subd. 24   Violations
1001.22   Non-Conforming Uses
   Subd. 1   Non-Conforming Buildings and Uses
   Subd. 2   Discontinuance
   Subd. 3   General Alteration Provisions
   Subd. 4   Business, Industrial and Mixed Use Building Alterations
   Subd. 5   Restoration
   Subd. 6   Normal Maintenance
1001.23   Conditional Use and Interim Use Permits
   Subd. 1   Conditional Use Permits
   Subd. 2   Interim Use Permits
1001.24   Landscaping and Screening
   Subd. 1   Purpose and Objectives
   Subd. 2   Landscaping Plan
   Subd. 3   General Plan Requirements
   Subd. 4   Landscape Design Standards and Guidelines
   Subd. 5   General Landscaping Requirements
   Subd. 6   Parkway Landscaping
   Subd. 7   Screening, Buffering and Fencing
   Subd. 8   Security
   Subd. 9   Installation of Landscape Materials
   Subd. 10   General Mandatory Landscaping and Maintenance
1001.25   Tree Preservation and Replacement, Tree Disease and Landscaping
Requirements
   Subd. 1   Purpose
   Subd. 2   Definitions
   Subd. 3   Removal Threshold
   Subd. 4   Tree Inventory Requirements
   Subd. 5   Tree Replacement Policy
   Subd. 6   Requirements for Reforestation Plans
   Subd. 7   Tree Protection Measures
1001.26   Steep Slopes
   Subd. 1   Purpose
   Subd. 2   Definitions
   Subd. 3   Review by Planning Commission and Council of Development on Steep
Slopes
1001.27   Wetlands
   Subd. 1   Purpose
   Subd. 2   Definitions
   Subd. 3   General Provisions
   Subd. 4   Application Materials
   Subd. 5   Upland Buffer Zone and Required Structure Setbacks
   Subd. 6   Alterations Within Wetlands and Upland Buffer Zones
   Subd. 7   Upland Buffer Zone Markers
   Subd. 8   Vegetation Performance Standards
   Subd. 9   Maintenance
   Subd. 10   Upland Buffer Zone Mitigation
   Subd. 11   Wetland Restoration Requirement
   Subd. 12   Variance
   Subd. 13   Enforcement
1001.28   Administration and Enforcement
   Subd. 1   Administration/Zoning Administrator
   Subd. 2   Zoning Ordinance Text and Map Amendments
   Subd. 3   Final Site Plan and Building Plan Regulations
   Subd. 4   Building Permits
   Subd. 5   Certificate of Occupancy
   Subd. 6   Administrative Fees
   Subd. 7   Violations and Penalties
   Subd. 8   Notice
1001.29   Variances
   Subd. 1   Purpose
   Subd. 2   Initiation
   Subd. 3   Criteria
   Subd. 4   Procedure
   Subd. 5   Subsequent Application
1001.30   Validity and Severability
1001.31   Repeal of Ordinance
1001.32   Effective Date
1001.33   Construction Site Runoff Control
   Subd. 1   Intent
   Subd. 2   Statutory Authorization
   Subd. 3   Findings
   Subd. 4   Purpose
   Subd. 5   Definitions
   Subd. 6   Scope and Effect
   Subd. 7   Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan Submittal Procedures
   Subd. 8   Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan Review Process
   Subd. 9   Minimum Construction Site Best Management Practices
   Subd. 10   Completion of Work
   Subd. 11   Enforcement Procedures
   Subd. 12   Penalty
1001.34   Storm Water Illicit Discharge and Illicit Connection
   Subd. 1   Intent
   Subd. 2   Statutory Authorization
   Subd. 3   Findings
   Subd. 4   Purpose
   Subd. 5   Definitions
   Subd. 6   Administration
   Subd. 7   Illegal Disposal and Dumping
   Subd. 8   Illicit Discharges and Connections
   Subd. 9   Good Housekeeping Provisions
   Subd. 10   Industrial Activity Discharges
   Subd. 11   Notifications of Spills
   Subd. 12   Access to Buildings for Inspection, Monitoring and/or Dye Testing
   Subd. 13   Suspension of Storm Sewer System Access
   Subd. 14   Enforcement
   Subd. 15   Penalty
   Subd. 16   Compensatory Action
1001.35   Accessory Buildings and Structures
   Subd. 1   Purpose
   Subd. 2   General Regulations
   Subd. 3   Conditional Use Permits
   Subd. 4   Agricultural Districts
   Subd. 5   Residential Districts
   Subd. 6   Industrial Districts
1001.40   Model Homes
   Subd. 1   Purpose
   Subd. 2   Qualification
   Subd. 3   Procedure
   Subd. 4   Special Requirements
   Subd. 5   Restricted Use
1001.41   Temporary Structures
   Subd. 1   Purpose
   Subd. 2   Procedure
   Subd. 3   Special Requirements
1001.42   Animals
   Subd. 1   Keeping of Animals Other than Dogs and Cats
   Subd. 2   Standards for Keeping and Maintaining Animals
   Subd. 3   Dead Animals
   Subd. 4   Cat and Dog License and Kennels
1001.43   Alternative Energy Systems
   Subd. 1      Scope
   Subd. 2      Purpose and Intent
   Subd. 3      Definitions
   Subd. 4      Solar Energy Standards
1001.01   PURPOSE.
Subd. 1
   Dayton City Code Chapter
1000 is broken into 2 sections, Section
1001, Zoning, and Section
1002, Subdivision. Section
1001, Zoning, includes provisions for the purpose, scope and interpretation,
and rules and definitions of this section. In addition, Section
1001 provides for classifications of districts including 2 special protection
districts, 11 residential districts, 10 non-residential districts, and 4
overlay districts. Section
1001 also sets out the allowable uses and zoning requirements for the various
districts, along with zoning requirements for each district. The section
includes provisions for the Critical Rivers Area and Shoreland Management
Controls. It also includes subsections on conditional use permits, Planned Unit
Development, and mobile home park development. Finally, the section provides
general regulations, including performance standards, street regulations and
off-street parking and loading regulations, administration and fee provisions
and non-conforming uses.
Subd. 2
   Section
1002, Subdivision, includes provisions for purpose, application and
definitions. This section primarily sets out the procedures and data required
for the filing of preliminary plats and final plats. In addition, the section
provides for design standards, including general requirements, streets and
alleys, blocks, lots, easements and dedication of lands for public purposes,
basic required improvements, required of new subdivisions. This section also
addresses the issue of registered land surveys and conveyance by metes and
bounds, variances, building permits, the signing and recording of the final
plat, and violations of this section.
Subd. 3
   A printed copy of this Chapter
1000 is available for inspection by any person during the regular office hours
at the office of the City Clerk, City of Dayton.
Subd. 4.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
general welfare of the community and its people through the establishment of
minimum regulations in regard to location, erection, construction, alteration
and use of structures and land. These regulations are established to assist the
City in 1) implementing its Comprehensive Plan, 2) protecting and enhancing the
natural environment and resources that currently exist within the City, 3)
ensuring orderly and quality development and redevelopment, 4) protecting the
quality and diversity of the City’s tax base, 5) protecting the quality of
residential neighborhoods, 6) providing opportunities for an affordable and
diverse housing supply, 7) managing traffic, 8) ensuring compatibility between
different land uses, and 9) regulating businesses that may have adverse
secondary effects on the quality of life of Dayton residents. These regulations
are also established to provide for administration of this chapter, to provide
for amendments; to prescribe penalties for violation of such regulations: and
to define powers and duties of the City staff, the Zoning Board of Adjustment
and Appeals, the Planning Commission and the City Council in relation to the
Zoning Ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 1001.01)  (Am. Ord. 2010-18, passed 9-28-2010)
1001.02   SCOPE AND INTERPRETATION.
Subd. 1   Scope.
   From and after the date of original enactment, January 31, 1980, the use of
all land and every building, or portion of a building erected, altered in
respect to height or area, added to, or relocated, and every use within a
building or use accessory thereto in the City of Dayton shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. Any existing building or structure and any
existing use of properties not in conformity with the regulations herein
prescribed which is lawful, shall be regarded as non-conforming, but may be
continued, extended or changed, subject to the special regulations herein
provided with respect to non-conforming uses.
Subd. 2   Interpretation.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of this
chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any other ordinance or
regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling. Where the
provisions of any other statute, ordinance or regulation impose greater
restrictions than this chapter, the provision of such other statute, ordinance
or regulation shall be controlling.
Subd. 3   Private Agreements.
   This chapter does not abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private
agreement where it is not legally enforceable provided that where the
regulation of this chapter is more restrictive (or imposes higher standards or
requirements) than the easements, covenants or other private agreements, the
requirements of this chapter shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 1001.02)
1001.03   RULES AND DEFINITIONS.
Subd. 1   Rules.
   For the purpose of this chapter, words used in the present tense shall
include the future tense; words used in the singular shall include the plural,
and the plural shall include the singular; the word “building” shall include
the word “structure,” the word “lot” shall include the word “plot,” “piece,” or
“parcel;” the word “person” shall include any firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual; and the
words “used for” shall include the phrases “arranged for,” “designed for,”
“intended for,” “maintained for,” and “occupied for.”
Subd. 2   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are described as
follows:
Abandoned Sign
   Any sign and/or its supporting sign structure which remains without a
message or whose display surface remains blank for a period of 1 year or more,
or any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies,
shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Signs applicable to a business
temporarily suspended because of a change in ownership or management of such
business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a
period of 1 year or more. Any sign remaining after demolition of a principal
structure shall be deemed to be abandoned. Signs which are present because of
being legally established non-conforming signs or signs which have required a
conditional use permit or a variance shall also be subject to the definition of
Abandoned Sign.
Abutting
   See Adjacent.
Accessory Apartment
   A secondary dwelling unit within an existing owner-occupied single-family
dwelling unit for use as a complete independent living facility. A density unit
is not attributed to this dwelling unit when calculating density.
Accessory Building
   A subordinate building or structure which is incidental and customary to
that of the principal building and which is located on the same lot as the
principal building or use. Any detached building 64 square feet or larger shall
be defined as an Accessory Building including, but not limited to, garages,
sheds, playground equipment or other storage buildings.
Accessory Storage Container
   A container placed outdoors and used for the storage of goods, materials or
merchandise that are used in connection with a lawful principal or accessory
use of the lot. The term Accessory Storage Container includes but is not
limited to, containers such as boxcars, semi-trailers, roll-off containers,
slide-off containers, railroad cars, piggyback containers, and portable moving
and storage containers. The term Accessory Storage Container does not include a
garage, barn, or storage shed accessory to a dwelling, provided the structure
is not of a type designed, equipped, or customarily used for over-the-road
transport of goods, materials, or merchandise.
Accessory Use
   A use incidental or subordinate to the principal use on a lot.
Act
   The Critical Areas Act of 1973, M.S. §§ 116G.01 to 116G.151, as may be
amended from time to time.
Adjacent
   Having a boundary which physically touches or adjoins. Parcels separated by
a street right-of-way are not Adjacent.
Adult Use
   See Adult Entertainment, Subsection
1001.12.
Agricultural Building
   A structure on agricultural land designed, constructed, and used to house
farm implements, livestock, or agricultural produce or products used by the
owner, lessee, or sub-lessee of the building and members of their immediate
families, their employees, and persons engaged in the pickup or delivery of
agricultural produce or products.
Agricultural Business
   An agricultural business operated year round on a rural farm (as defined)
offering for sale to the general public, produced or any derivative thereof
grown or raised on the property by the seller.
Agricultural-Business, Seasonal
   A temporary seasonal business on a commercially zoned property operated on a
rural farm (as defined), offering for sale to the general public, produce or
any derivative (such as honey, maple syrup) thereof grown or raised locally.
Agricultural Use
   Land whose use is devoted to the production of horticulture and nursery
stock, fruit of all kinds, vegetables, forage, grains, bees and apiary
products, and raising domestic farm animals. This activity does not need to be
the principal source of income.
Airport or Heliport
   Any land or structure which is used or intended for use for the landing and
take-off of aircraft and any appurtenant land or structure used or intended for
use for port buildings or other port structures or right-of-ways.
Alley
   A public right-of-way that affords a secondary means of access to abutting
property.
Alteration
   To change or make different, to remodel or modify.
Animal Unit
   A unit of measure used to compare differences in the production of animal
wastes that has a standard as the amount of waste produced on a regular basis
by a slaughter steer or heifer.
Animals, Domestic Farm
   Cattle, hogs, horses, bees, sheep, goats, chickens, and other animals
commonly kept for commercial food producing purposes.
Animals, Domestic Pets
   Dogs, cats, birds, and similar animals commonly kept in a residence.
Animals, Nondomestic Pets
   Animals considered wild or exotic, such as bears, lions, wolves, ocelots,
and similar animals.
Antenna
   That portion of any equipment used to radiate or receive radio frequency
energy for transmitting or receiving radio or television waves.
Applicant
   The owners, their agent, or representative having interest in land where an
application for City review of any permit, use, or development is required by
this chapter.
Appraised Valuation
   The market value of a structure or lot as determined by the current records
of the County Assessor.
Architectural Metal
   A metal building wall section that has a shape, design, surface texture, and
permanent color finish that enhances the building.  The metal panel shall not
be colored by oilcan, and it shall not have exposed fasteners unless they are
the same color of the building.
Area, Gross Developable
   Those lands within a development parcel remaining after the deletion of
wetlands, all other water bodies, and public road right-of-ways.
Attic
   Space of a building located directly under a roof that is not directly free
and open to the public and is unfinished or finished only to a limited degree
to provide for inactive storage and/or mechanical equipment.
Attorney
   The City Attorney.
Auto and Marine Sales
   Buying, selling, leasing, wholesaling, brokering, auctioning or displaying
motor or marine vehicles.
Auto Reduction Yard
   A lot or yard where 3 or more unlicensed motor vehicles or the remains
thereof are kept for the purpose of dismantling, sale of parts, sale as scrap,
storage, or abandonment.
Automobile Repair and Service-Major
   See Motor Vehicle Repair-Major.
Automobile Repair and Service-Minor
   See Motor Vehicle Repair-Minor.
Awning
   A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal or glass designed and
intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment, and
which projects from a wall or roof of a structure primarily over a window,
walk, or the like. Any part of an awning which also projects over a door shall
be counted as an Awning.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e776b805fd11200858c1748733feb8a077c4b552/
IMAGES/0-0-0-278.jpg]
 
Awning Sign
   A building sign or graphic printed on or in some fashion attached directly
to the awning material.
Balloon Port, Commercial
   An area of land designated for the take-off, storage, and maintenance of hot
air balloons on a commercial basis.
Balloon Sign
   A sign consisting of a bag made of lightweight material supported by helium,
hot, or pressurized air which is greater than 24 inches in diameter.
Basement
   Any floor level below the first story, as further defined by the adopted
Building Code.
Bed and Breakfast Inn
   An owner-occupied private home where accommodations are offered for 1 or
more nights to transients.
Best Management Practices
   Techniques, methods, processes, activities, incentives, or rewards that are
believed to be more effective at delivering a particular outcome than any
others. Best management practices are commonly used for natural resources
management, such as erosion control measures, runoff minimization or management
measures, or water conservation measures that typically incorporate
conservation criteria.
Billboard
   See Off-premises Sign.
Block
   An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, or
by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision, or a
combination of the above with a river or lake.
Bluff Impact Area or Zone, Mississippi River Corridor Overlay District
   Lands subject to the Mississippi River Corridor Overlay District within 40
feet from the bluffline.
Bluff Impact Area or Zone, Shoreland
   A bluff and land subject to the Shoreland Zoning Overlay District located
within 20 feet from the top of a bluff.
Bluff, Mississippi River Corridor Overlay District
   For lands subject to the Mississippi River Corridor Overlay District, all
slopes 18% or greater.
Bluff, Shoreland
   For lands subject to the Shoreland Zoning Overlay District, a topographic
feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having the following
characteristics (an area with an average slope of less than 18% over a distance
for 50 feet or more shall not be considered part of a bluff):
      a.   Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area;
      b.   The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water level
of the waterbody;
      c.   The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25 feet
or more above the ordinary high water level averages 30% or greater; and
      d.   The slope shall drain toward the waterbody.
Bluffline (or Bluff Line)
   The line delineating the top of a slope connecting the points at which the
slope becomes less than 18%. More than 1 bluff line may be encountered
proceeding landward from the water. All setbacks required herein shall be
applicable to each bluff line. This definition also applies to lands subject to
the Mississippi River Corridor Overlay District.
Boarding House
   Any dwelling unit other than a hotel, motel or bed and breakfast inn where
meals or lodging or both are provided for compensation for 3 or more persons,
pursuant to previous arrangements.
Boathouse
   An accessory building enclosed on the top and at least 3 sides, designed to
provide storage and protection for water craft and their accessories during
periods of inactivity.
Buffer
   A strip of land intended to create physical separation between potentially
incompatible uses of land or environmentally sensitive areas.
Buildable Lot Area, Net
   The space remaining on a lot after the setback requirements, steep slopes,
floodplain, drainage easements, wetland or other unbuildable areas have been
subtracted.
Building
   Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof and built or
used for support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or
property of any kind.
Building Code
   The Minnesota State Building Code.
Building Height
   The vertical distance between the lowest elevation where the exterior
building wall emerges from the finished grade elevation (pursuant to an
approved grading plan) and the highest point on the building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e776b805fd11200858c1748733feb8a077c4b552/
IMAGES/0-0-0-280.jpg]
 
Building Official
   The designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of
the State Building Code.
Building Permit
   A permit required from the responsible governmental agency before any site
work, construction, or alteration to structures can be started.
Building Setback
   See Setback.
Building Setback Line, Minimum Required
   A line within a lot parallel to a public right-of-way line, a side or rear
lot line, a bluff line, delineated wetland or an ordinary high water mark or
line, behind which buildings or structures must be placed.
Building Sign
   Any sign attached or supported by any building.
Bus Station
   See Transit Station.
Business
   Any occupation, employment, or enterprise wherein merchandise is exhibited
or sold, or where services are offered for compensation.
Business/Trade School
   See School, Business/Trade.
Canopy
   A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal, or glass on a support,
which provides shelter over a doorway.
Canopy Sign
   Any sign that is part of or attached to a canopy, made of fabric, plastic,
or structural protective cover over a door or entrance. A Canopy Sign is not a
marquee and is different from service area canopy signs.
Car Wash
   See Motor Vehicle Wash.
Carport
   An automobile shelter having 1 or more sides open.
Cemetery
   Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated
for cemetery purposes and including, but not limited to, columbariums,
mausoleums, and chapels when operated in conjunction with and within the
boundaries of the cemetery.
Certificate of Compliance
   A certificate issued by the City documenting that a proposed development
will meet all development standards if the project proceeds in accordance with
the plans.
Certificate of Occupancy
   A certificate issued by the Building Official authorizing the use or
occupancy of a building or structure.
Certificate of Survey
   A legal document depicting property information that is signed by a
registered land surveyor under Minnesota state laws.
City
   A conglomeration of public officials, Council, commission, and committee as
duly elected or appointed.
City Council
   The governing body of the City of Dayton.
Clearcutting (or Clear-Cutting)
   The removal of most or all of a stand of trees and shrubs.
Clear View Triangle
   The triangular area next to a street intersection formed by connecting the
following 3 points: the point of intersection of the adjacent curb lines
extended, and a point on each adjacent curb line 55 feet from the point of
intersection. If there are no curbs, the lines and points shall be from the
edge of the traveled portion of the road or street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e776b805fd11200858c1748733feb8a077c4b552/
IMAGES/0-0-0-282.jpg]
 
Clinics/Medical/Dental Offices
   A facility providing medical, psychiatric, chiropractic or surgical service
to persons exclusively on an out-patient basis, including emergency treatment,
diagnostic services, training, administration and services to outpatients,
employees or visitors.
Cluster Development
   See Planned Development.
Columbarium
   A structure, room, or other space in a building or structure containing
niches for inurnment of cremated remains in a place used, or intended to be
used, and dedicated for cemetery purposes.
Commercial Composting and Landspreading
   A commercial or public solid waste processing facility where yard or garden
waste is transformed into soil or fertilizer by biological decomposition.
Activities of a composting facility may include management, collection,
transportation, staging, composting, curing, storage, marketing or use of
compost.
Commercial Planned Development
   See Planned Unit, Commercial.
Commercial Recreation
   See Recreation, Commercial and Public.
Commercial Speech
   Speech advertising a business, profession, commodity, service or
entertainment.
Commercial Use
   The principal use of the land or buildings for the sale, lease, rental or
trade of products, goods, and services.
Common Open Space
   Land held in common ownership used for natural habitat, pedestrian
corridors, and/or recreational purposes that are protected from future
development.
Comparable Exterior Material
   Of a similar appearance and material type and color, with only slight
variations as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
Comprehensive Plan
   A compilation of policy statements, goals, standards, and maps for guiding
the physical, social and economic development, both private and public, of the
municipality and its environs, including air space and subsurface areas
necessary for mined underground space development as pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes, and may include, but is not limited to, the following: statements of
policies, goals, standards, a land use plan, a community facilities plan, park,
trail and open space plan, a transportation plan, storm water management plan,
sanitary sewer and water system plan, and recommendations for plan execution.
Conditional Use
   See Use, Conditional.
Conditional Use Permit
   A permit issued by the City Council in accordance with procedures specified
in this chapter.
Condominium
   An estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common
with other purchasers in a portion of a parcel of real property, together with
a separate interest in space in a building.
Conservation Easement
   An interest in real property created in a manner that imposes limitations or
affirmative obligations in regard to the use of property, including the
retention, protection and maintenance of natural resources, open space, and
agriculture.
Construction Trailer
   A mobile manufactured trailer that temporarily serves as an office for
building construction or property maintenance services.
Contiguous
   Parcels of land that share a common lot line or boundary. Parcels which are
separated by a right-of-way, easement, or railroad right-of-way are considered
Contiguous for the purposes of this chapter.
Convenience/Gas Station
   See Motor Vehicle Convenience Store.
Conveyance
   As defined in Minnesota State Statutes.
Cooperative
   A multi-unit development operated for and owned by its occupants. Individual
occupants do not own their specific dwellings unit outright, as in a
condominium, but they own shares in the enterprise.
Cost of Renovation, Repair, or Replacement
   The fair market value of the materials, labor, and services necessary to
accomplish the renovation, repair, or replacement as determined by the Building
Official.
Crawl Space
   As defined by the Building Code.
Crematorium or Crematory
   A place where bodies are consumed by incineration and the ashes of the
deceased are collected for permanent burial or storage in urns.
Critical Area
   The Mississippi River Corridor Critical Area as designated by the Governor
in Executive Order No. 79-19 (as amended) dated February 26, 1979.
Curb Level
   The level of the established curb as measured at the top of curb, in front
of a building or structure measured at the center of the front. Where no curb
elevation has been established, the City Engineer shall establish the curb
elevation.
Day Care Facilities
   Facilities including but not limited to: family day care homes, group family
day care homes, day care centers, day nurseries, day time activity centers, day
treatment programs and day services, nursery and preschools, and Montessori
schools, as defined by Minnesota State Statutes.
Day Care Facility, Licensed
   Any facility required to be licensed by a governmental agency which, for
gain or otherwise, regularly provides 1 or more persons with care, training,
supervision, rehabilitation, or development guidance on a regular basis, for
periods of less than 24 hours per day, in a place other than the person’s own
home.
Decibel
   The unit of sound measured on the “A” weighing scale of a sound level meter,
set on slow response, the weighing characteristics of which are specified in
the “Standards on Sound Level Meters of the USA Standards Institute.”
Deck
   A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached railings, seats,
trellises, or other features, attached or functionally related to a principal
use or site.
Density, Gross
   The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
Density, Net
   The number of dwelling units per acre of net developable acres of land
(excluding water, wetlands and arterial roadways).
Development
   Any human-caused change to improved or unimproved real estate that requires
a permit or approval from the City, county, state, or other regulatory agency,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling, storage of materials,
subdivision, vegetative alterations, or utilities.
Digital Off-Premises Signs
   An off-premises sign meeting the definition of an Electronic Graphic Display
Sign.
Disposal Area, On-Site Sewage Treatment
   As defined by County Codes.
D.N.R.
   The Department of Natural Resources.
Dredging
   The process by which soils or other surface materials, normally transported
by surface water erosion into a body of water, are removed for the purpose of
deepening the body of water.
Drive-Thru (or Drive-Through)
   Any use where products and/or services are provided to the customer under
conditions where the customer does not have to leave the car or where service
to the automobile occupants is offered regardless of whether service is also
provided within a building.
Driveway Access Permit
   A permit required from the responsible governmental agency that allows
access onto a public road. The permit must be acquired prior to construction
and the issuance of a building permit.
Driving Range
   A limited area on which golf players do not walk, but onto which they drive
golf balls from a central driving tee.
Dwelling
   Any building or any portion thereof which is intended for residential
occupancy on an on-going basis by a single household unit as opposed to a
hotel, motel, guest rooms, boarding house, and the like, which are intended to
be occupied on a short term (daily or weekly basis).
Dwelling, Duplex
   A dwelling structure on a single lot, having 2 units, attached by common
walls and each unit equipped with separate sleeping, cooking, eating, living,
and sanitation facilities.
Dwelling, Multiple-Family
   A residential building containing 3 or more dwelling units with separate
housekeeping and cooking facilities for each.
Dwelling, Multiple-Family Apartment
   A room or suite of rooms available for rent which is occupied as a residence
by a single-family or group of individuals living together as a single-family
unit.
Dwelling, Seasonal
   A residential building not capable of year-round occupancy due to non-
winterized construction or inadequate non-conforming year-round on-site sewage
treatment systems.
Dwelling, Single-Family Attached Residences
   A residential unit designed for occupancy by 1 family or group of
individuals living as a household unit that may be attached or semi-attached to
other single-family dwellings. Each single-family dwelling has its own direct
outside entrance to and from the living quarters and a garage or space for a
garage. These may include groupings of attached single-family dwellings in rows
that are commonly referred to as townhomes.
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached Residences
   A freestanding residential building containing 1 dwelling unit on an
individual lot, designed and used for occupancy by a single-family or group of
individuals living as a household unit. Each single-family dwelling has its own
direct outside entrance to and from the living quarters and a garage or space
for a garage.
Dwelling Site
   A designated location for residential use by 1 or more persons using
temporary or movable shelter, including camping and recreational vehicle sites.
Dwelling, Temporary
   A manufactured home which temporarily serves as a residence for the present
or potential occupant while the primary single-family residence is being
constructed or reconstructed or altered.
Dwelling, Two-Family Dwelling
   See Dwelling, Duplex.
Dwelling Unit
   A residential accommodation including complete kitchen and bathroom
facilities, permanently installed, which is arranged, designed, used, or
intended for use exclusively as living quarters for 1 family.
Dynamic Display
   Any characteristics of a sign that appear to have movement or that appear to
change, caused by any method other than physically removing and replacing the
sign or its components, whether the apparent movement or change is in the
display, the sign structure or any other component of the sign. This includes
displays that incorporate technology or methods allowing the sign face to
change the image without having to physically or mechanically replace the sign
face or its components as well as any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing,
blinking or animated display and any display that incorporates rotating panels,
LED lights manipulated through digital input, digital ink or any other method
or technology that allows the sign face to present a series of images or
displays.
Easement
   A grant by an owner of land for a specific use by persons other than the
owner.
Electronic Graphic Display Sign
   A sign or portion thereof that displays electronic, static images, static
graphics or static pictures, with or without text information, defined by a
small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting
diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within
the display area where the message change sequence is accomplished immediately
or by means of fade, re-pixalization or dissolve modes.
Electronic Graphic Display Signs include computer programmable, microprocessor
controlled electronic or digital displays. Electronic Graphic Display Signs
include projected images or messages with these characteristics onto buildings
or other objects.
Elevation
   The view of the side, front, or rear of a given structure(s).
Elevation Area
   The area of all walls that face any lot line.
Engineer
   The City Engineer.
Environmental Impact Worksheet, Assessment or Statement
   A document that might be required under Minnesota Statutes or this chapter
to determine the environmental effects resulting from a ground disturbing,
development, or construction activity.
Equal Degree of Encroachment
   A method of determining the location of encroachment lines so that the
hydraulic capacity of floodplain lands on each side of a stream are reduced by
an equal amount when calculating the increases in flood stages due to
floodplain encroachments.
Equipment Rental
   Establishments primarily engaged in the rental of tools, trucks, tractors,
construction equipment, agricultural implements and similar industrial
equipment. Included in this use type is the incidental storage, maintenance and
servicing of the equipment; provided the incidental storage, maintenance and
servicing complies with all performance standards of the section.
Equestrian Uses
   Those uses commonly associated with the raising, maintaining, and training
of horses for riding, racing, or breeding.
Erect
   Activity of constructing, building, raising, assembling, placing, affixing,
attaching, creating, painting, drawing or any other way of bringing into being
or establishing.
Essential Services
   Overhead or underground electrical, gas, steam or water transmission or
distribution systems; collection, communication, supply or disposal systems
used by public utilities or governmental department or commissions or as are
required for the protection of the public health, safety or general welfare,
including towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables,
reservoirs, wells, elevated tanks, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes and
other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, but not
including electrical transmission lines larger than 69 KV, or buildings, except
those buildings that are an integral part of the essential service.
Exterior Storage
   The storage of goods, materials, equipment, manufactured products, and
similar items not fully enclosed by a building.
Extractive Use
   See Mining.
Family
   See Household.
Farm
   A tract of land which is principally used for agricultural activities such
as the production of cash crops, livestock or poultry farming. Such Farms may
include agricultural dwellings and accessory buildings and structures necessary
to the operations of the farm.
Farmland
   Land that is capable of supporting the commercial production of agricultural
crops, livestock or livestock products, poultry products, milk or dairy
products, or fruit or other horticultural products.
Feedlots and Poultry Facilities
   A lot or building or combination of lots and buildings intended for the
confined feeding, breeding raising or holding of animals and specifically
designed as a confinement area in which manure may accumulate or where the
concentration of animals is such that a vegetative cover cannot be maintained
within the enclosure. Open lots used for feeding and rearing of poultry and
poultry barns, dairy farms, swine facilities, beef lots and barns, horse
stalls, mink ranches and zoos, shall be considered to be animal Feedlots.
Fence
   A partition, structure, wall, or gate erected as a dividing marker, visual
or physical barrier, or enclosure.
Fill
   Any act by which soil, earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any-similar material is
deposited, placed, pushed, or transported and shall include the conditions
resulting thereupon.
Final Plat
   A drawing or map of an approved subdivision that meets all requirements of
the subdivision regulations.
Financial Institution
   A business that provides financial and banking services to consumers or
clients. Walk-in and drive-in services to consumers are generally provided on
site. Typical uses include banks, savings and loan associations, savings banks,
credit unions, lending establishments and automatic teller machines (ATMs).
Fitness Center
   A business that provides recreational services and facilities, usually for
the benefit of its membership or the general public, involving aerobic
exercises, strength and cardiovascular equipment, indoor or outdoor game
courts, swimming pools, running tracks, massage, tanning, hair and other
personal services, saunas, steam room, showers and lockers and the like that
may be used at any time that the operation is open for business.
Flag
   Any fabric or similar lightweight material attached at one end of the
material, usually to a staff or pole, so as to allow movement of the material
by atmospheric changes and which contains distinctive colors, patterns,
symbols, emblems, insignia, or other symbolic devices.
Flag Lot
   A lot with access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a narrow
corridor.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e776b805fd11200858c1748733feb8a077c4b552/
IMAGES/0-0-0-284.jpg]
 
Flashing Sign
   A directly or indirectly illuminated sign or portion thereof that exhibits
changing light or color effect by any means, so as to provide intermittent
illumination that changes light intensity in sudden transitory bursts and
creates the illusion of intermittent flashing light by streaming, graphic
bursts showing movement, or any mode of lighting which resembles zooming,
twinkling or sparkling.
Flood Fringe
   That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.
Floodplain
   The areas adjoining a watercourse which have been or hereafter may be
covered by the regional flood.
Floodway
   The channel and those portions of the floodplains adjoining the channel
which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the flood water or flood
flow of a specific size without unduly raising upstream water surface
elevation.
Floor Area
   The area inside the exterior walls of a building or area. Measurements shall
be made from the inside of exterior walls.
Floor Area Ratio
   The ratio of the total enclosed square footage of a building or group of
buildings located on the same lot to the total square foot area of the lot.
Floor Plan
   A graphic representation of the anticipated use of the floor area within a
building or structure.
Florist, Commercial
   A building or premises used primarily for the retail sale of flowers and
small plants which may not have been grown or raised on the property and does
not include a greenhouse.
Footprint
   The area of the land covered by a building’s foundation.
Forest Land Conversion
   The clear cutting of forested lands to prepare for a new land use other than
reestablishment of a subsequent forest stand.
Forest Management
   Activities conducted on or directly pertaining to forested land, including
but not limited to the growing, managing, harvesting, and interim storage of
timber for commercial purposes.
Freestanding Sign
   Any sign which has supporting framework that is placed on, or anchored in,
the ground and which is independent from any building or other structure.
Frontage
   That boundary of a lot that abuts a public street or private road.
Funeral Home
   A building or part thereof used for funeral services. The buildings may
contain space and facilities for: embalming and the performance of other
services used in preparation of the dead for burial; the storage of caskets,
urns, and other related funeral supplies; and the storage of funeral vehicles.
Where a funeral home is permitted, a funeral chapel shall also be permitted.
This definition shall not include facilities for cremation.
Garage, Private
   A detached accessory building or portion of the principal building,
including a carport, which is used primarily for the storing of vehicles,
trailers, or trucks.
Garden Supply Store and Nursery Yard
   A building or premises used primarily for the wholesale and retail sale of
trees, shrubs, flowers, other plants, and accessory products, excluding power
tools, tractors, decorative rock, tree bark, gravel, and compost. Accessory
products are those products that are used in the culture, display, and
decoration of lawns, gardens, and indoor plants.
Golf Course
   A tract of land laid out with at least 9 holes for playing golf (miniature
golf excluded).
Grade
Grade shall be construed to be the final ground elevation after construction.
Earth mounding criteria for landscaping and screening is not part of the final
grade for sign height computation.
Ground Sign
   Any freestanding sign with its sign face mounted on the ground or mounted on
a base at least as wide as the sign and which has a total height not exceeding
8 feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e776b805fd11200858c1748733feb8a077c4b552/
IMAGES/0-0-0-286.jpg]
 
Hardship
   Where property in question cannot be put to reasonable use under the
conditions allowed by the official controls; the plight of the landowner is due
to circumstances unique to his or her property, not created by the landowner;
and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the
locality. Economic considerations alone shall not constitute a Hardship if a
reasonable use of the property exists under terms of the official controls.
Hazardous Building or Hazardous Property
   Any building or property that, because of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, physical damage, unsanitary condition, or abandonment,
constitutes a fire hazard or a hazard to public safety or health.
Hazardous Material
   A chemical or substance, or a mixture of chemicals or substances, which:
      a.   Is regulated by the Federal Occupational Safety and Health
Administration regulations; or
      b.   Is either toxic or highly toxic materials, an irritant, corrosive, a
strong oxidizer, a strong sensitizer, combustible, either flammable or
extremely flammable, dangerously reactive, pyrophoric, pressure-generating, a
compressed gas, a carcinogen, a teratogen, a mutagen, a reproductive toxic
agent, or that otherwise, according to generally accepted documented medical or
scientific evidence, may cause substantial acute or chronic personal injury or
illness during or as a direct result of any customary or reasonably foreseeable
accidental or intentional exposure to the chemical or substance.
Height
   See Building Height.
Height of Sign
   The height of the sign shall be computed as the vertical distance measured
from the base of the sign at grade to the top of the highest attached component
of the sign.
High Power Transmission Line
   A 69 kV or greater electric transmission line or with towers a minimum of 75
feet in height.
Historic Building and Structure
   See Significant Historic Sites.
Home Extended Business
   An occupation or profession engaged in, at or from the homestead and/or
attached and/or detached accessory building of the business owner-operator. The
business owner- operator must reside in the dwelling. The business use may not
utilize more 30% of the floor area of the dwelling (excluding any attached
garage area). In addition to the resident/business operator, the Home Extended
Business may employ a limited number of employees, who do not reside at the
home. The primary use of the dwelling shall remain as a residence, and not as a
business, shall remain compatible to the neighborhood, and all business-related
storage and activities shall take place entirely within enclosed structures on
properties less than 2.5 acres. Outdoor storage may be allowed on properties
over 2.5 acres provided it is significantly screened from adjacent properties
and street right-of-way.
Home Occupation
   Any use conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by members of a
family residing therein, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the
use of the dwelling for residential purposes and does not change the character
thereof. Occupations or professions, which utilize more than 25% of the
dwelling, shall not be considered to be Home Occupations, except for family day
cares, which shall be exempt from the 25% regulation. The primary use of the
dwelling shall remain as a residence, and not as a business, shall remain
compatible to the neighborhood. The business owner-operator must reside in the
dwelling. Home Occupations shall not include uses involving outside storage,
garages or accessory building and storage areas.
Homeowner’s Association
   A formally constituted non-profit association or corporation made up of the
property owners and/or residents of the development for the purpose of owning,
operating, and maintaining the common open space and facilities.
Horse Show
   An event where horses not boarded on the subject property are shown to the
general public and guests.
Horse Training Facility, Commercial
   A building in which horses not owned by the property owner are kept for
commercial use, including boarding, breeding, hire, sale, show, and training.
Horse Training Facility, Private
   A building in which horses owned by the property owner are kept for private
use and training.
Hospitals
   An institution licensed by the State Department of Health, providing primary
health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily in-patients,
suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical
or mental conditions, and including as an integral part of the institution,
related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training
facilities.
Hotel
   A building having provisions for 4 or more sleeping rooms in which lodging
is provided with or without meals, for compensation, and which is open to
transient or permanent guests or both, and which ingress and egress to and from
all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in
charge.
Hotel, Full Service
   A hotel that also includes meeting rooms, on site restaurant and/or bars or
other public amenities.
Household
   Includes the following:
      a.   An individual;
      b.   A group of no more than 4 individuals, who are not necessarily
related by blood, marriage, adoption or foster care, but all of whom are
maintaining a common residence;
      c.   Up to 2 adult individuals, whether related or unrelated, and the
parent(s) or child(ren) of each, if any, residing in the same dwelling unit and
maintaining a common residence;
      d.   The combination of items a. and b. above, all maintaining a common
residence; and
      e.   The temporary guest(s) of any of the above staying on the premises
for no more than 30 days in any 12 month period.
Impervious Surface
   The portion of the buildable parcel which has a covering which does not
permit water to percolate into the natural soil. Impervious Surface shall
include, but not be limited to, buildings, all driveways and parking areas
(whether paved or not), sidewalks, patios, swimming pools, tennis and
basketball courts, covered decks, porches, and other structures.
Impervious Surface Area
   The area of a site which is covered by an impermiable surface that includes
but is not limited to all structures, building roof area, paving, gravel
surfaces, decks, patios, appurtenances, sidewalks, water and other impervious
surfaces which significantly reduce or prevent absorption of stormwater into
the soil and cause water to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an
increased rate of flow.
Industrial Use
   The use of land or buildings for the production, manufacture, warehousing,
storage, or transfer of goods, products, commodities, or other wholesale items.
Industry, Heavy
   The manufacture or compounding process of raw materials. These activities or
processes may necessitate the proper storage and handling of flammable, toxic
matter or hazardous materials needed for the manufacturing process. These
activities may involve outdoor operations as part of their manufacturing
process.
Industry, Light
   Research and development activities, the manufacturing, compounding,
processing, packaging, storage, assembly, and/or treatment of finished or semi-
finished products from previous prepared materials, which activities are
conducted wholly within an enclosed building.
Industry, Medium
   All those uses defined in Light Industry with the addition of food
processing, wholesale bakeries and dry-cleaning processing and other similar
uses. Finished or semi-finished products may be temporarily stored outdoors in
an approved and screened area pending shipment.
Inoperative Vehicle
   A vehicle incapable of movement under its own power.
Intensive Vegetation Clearing
   The complete removal of trees, grasses or shrubs in a contiguous patch,
strip, row, or block.
Interim Use
   A temporary use of property until a particular date, until the occurrence of
a particular event, or until the use is no longer allowed by zoning
regulations.
Junk Yard
   An area where used, waste, discarded, or salvaged materials are bought,
sold, exchanged, stored, gartered, cleaned, packed, disassembled, or handled,
including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber
products, bottles, and lumber. Storage of the material in conjunction with a
permitted manufacturing process when within an enclosed area or building shall
not be included.
Kennel, Commercial
   A business which conducts the selling, boarding, breeding, showing, treating
or grooming of domestic animals over 6 months of age.
Kennel, Private
   An accessory structure kept on premises and owned by a member of the
household, which is zoned and occupied for residential purposes and where the
keeping of such domestic animals is incidental to the occupancy of the premises
for residential purposes.
Laboratory, Medical/Dental
   A facility for scientific laboratory analysis of medical and dental
resources including: analysis of blood, tissue, or other human medical or
animal products and associated biological phenomena.
Landscaping
   Planting trees, shrubs, and turf covers such as grasses and shrubs.
Lift Station
   A facility, usually including pumping facilities, for the lifting of sewage
or stormwater runoff to a higher sewage or stormwater runoff facility.
Lighting Related
      a.   Cutoff Angle. The angle formed by a line drawn from the direction of
light rays at the light source and a line perpendicular to the ground from the
light source above from which no light is emitted.
      b.   Cutoff. The point at which all light rays emitted by a lamp, light
source, or luminaire are completely eliminated at a specific angle above the
ground.
      c.   Cutoff Type Luminaire. A luminaire with elements such as shields,
reflectors, or refractor panels that direct and cut off the light at a cutoff
angle that is less than 90 degrees.
      d.   Fixture Outdoor. Outdoor electrically powered illuminating devices,
outdoor lighting or reflective surfaces, lamps and similar devices, permanently
installed or portable, used for illumination or advertisement. The fixture
includes the hardware that houses the illumination source and to which the
illumination source is attached, including, but not limited to, the hardware
casing. The devices shall include, but are not limited to, search, spot, and
flood lights for:
         1.   Buildings and structures;
         2.   Recreational areas;
         3.   Parking lot lighting;
         4.   Landscape lighting;
         5.   Billboards and other signs;
         6.   Street lighting;
         7.   Product display area lighting; and
         8.   Building overhangs and open canopies.
      e.   Flashing Light. A light source that is not constant in intensity or
color at all times while in use.
      f.   Footcandle. A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points
of which is 1 foot from a uniform point source of 1 candle.
      g.   Luminaire. A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and
all necessary mechanical, electrical, and decorative parts.
      h.   Security Lighting. Outdoor lighting fixtures installed exclusively
as a measure to reduce the possible occurrence of a crime on the property.
      i.   Shielding. A technique or method of construction permanently
covering the top and sides of a light source by a material which restricts the
light emitted to be projected below an imaginary horizontal plane passing the
light fixture.
      j.   Source. A single artificial point source of luminescence that emits
measurable radiant energy in or near the visible spectrum.
      k.   Spillage. Any reflection, glare, or other artificial light emission
onto any adjoining property or right-of-way above a defined maximum
illumination.
      l.   Outdoor. Any light source or collection of light sources located
outside of a building, including, but not limited to, light sources attached to
any part of a structure, located on the surface of the ground, or located on
free standing poles.
Limited Access Highway
   A traffic way including toll roads, for through traffic, in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have no
legal right of access to or from the same, except at points only and in a
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
the traffic way.
Liquor Store, Off-Sale
   An establishment properly licensed by the City under the control of a
proprietor or manager wherein consideration of payment, liquor is sold by the
bottle for consumption off the premises.
Liquor Store, On-Sale
   An establishment other than a restaurant under the control of proprietor or
manager which is properly licensed by the City wherein for consideration of
payment, liquor is regularly served and sold by the drink for consumption only
on the premises within the confines of the licensed premises. With service of
liquor, these establishments are commonly known as bars or taverns.
Live Entertainment
   A public event or private use with the intent of entertaining spectators.
Livestock
   See Animals, Domestic Farm.
Livestock Operations
   A lot or structure or combination of lots and structures intended for the
breeding, raising, or holding of 11 or more animal units.
Lot
   A Lot which is a part of an approved subdivision, the map of which has been
recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds and on file with the County
Finance Division, or a lawful Lot described by metes and bounds, the deed to
which has been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds on or before
January 31, 1980, or 1 for which the City has granted a waiver from platting.
      a.   Lot Area. The total land area within the lot lines, excluding public
and private road right-of-way; provided, however, that in agricultural zones of
the City, the Lot Area shall include property to the centerline of abutting
roadways, if any, which is in common fee ownership with the proposed lot and
included in the legal description of the real estate for tax purposes.
      b.   Area - Minimum Per Dwelling Unit. The minimum number of square feet
or gross developable area per dwelling unit.
      c.   Buildable Lot. A lot that meets or exceeds all requirements of this
chapter without the necessity of a variance.
      d.   Corner Lot. A lot situated at the junction of and abutting 2 or more
intersecting streets or public right-of ways; or a lot at the point of a
deflection in alignment of a single street, the interior angle of which does
not exceed 135 degrees.
      e.   Coverage of Lot. That portion of a lot containing an artificial or
natural surface through which water cannot penetrate. This definition includes,
but is not limited to, driveways, structures, and patios.
      f.   Depth of Lot. The mean horizontal distance between the front and
rear lines measured at right angles to the street or, in the case of a curved
street or a cul-de-sac, on a line which is at right angles to a tangent of the
curve radius.
      g.   Interior Lot. A lot other than a corner lot including through lots.
      h.   Lot Line. A Lot Line is the property line bounding a lot except that
where any portion of a lot extends into a public right-of-way or a proposed
public right-of-way, the line of the public right-of-way shall be the Lot Line
for applying this chapter.
Lot Line Related
      a.   Front Lot Line. That boundary of a lot that abuts an existing or
dedicated public street or a private road. In the case of a corner lot, it
shall be the shortest dimension of the
   lot abutting the street or road. If the dimensions of a corner lot are
equal, the front lot line shall be designated by the owner and filed with the
City. In the case of a corner lot in a non-residential area, the lot shall be
deemed to have frontage on both streets.
      b.   Rear Lot Line. That boundary of a lot that is opposite to the front
lot line. If the rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length, or if the lot
forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line 10 feet in length
within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the front lot
line.
      c.   Lot Frontage. The portion of a lot abutting a public street right-
of-way or approved private street. The length of the lot frontage is the
distance of frontage on 1 street, not the combination of frontage on multiple
streets. On a curved street or cul-de-sac, the lot frontage shall be measured
at the front building setback line.
      d.   Side Lot Line. Any boundary of a lot that is not a front lot line or
a rear lot line.
      e.   Through Lot. Any lot other than a corner lot that abuts more than 1
street or street right-of-way. On a through lot, all property lines abutting
the street right-of-way shall be considered the front lines. Also known as a
double frontage lot.
      f.   Width Of Lot. The straight line distance measured between lot lines,
parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required front yard setback.
Manufactured Home
   A structure transportable in 1 or more sections which, in the transporting
mode, is 8 body feet or more in width, or 40 body feet or more in length, or
when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein;
except that the term includes any structure which meets all the requirements
and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification
required by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development and complies with the standards established under Minnesota
Statutes.
Manufactured Home Park
   Any site, lot, field, or tract of land on which 2 or more occupied
manufactured homes are kept or located, either free of charge or for revenue
purposes, and shall include any building, structure, tents, vehicle, or
enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of the mobile home
park.
Manufacturing
   A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared
materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication,
assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales, and distribution of
the products.
Manure
   Any solid or liquid containing animal excreta.
Marina
   An area of concentrated small craft mooring, where ancillary facilities may
be provided for services as fueling, sewage pump out, boat launching, repair
and storage. Marina does not mean temporary docks associated with riparian
residential development if the mooring area is of a size not to exceed the
resource limitations of the site and the needs of the residents of the
development.
Marine Vehicle Repair, Major
   General repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of engines or marine vehicles;
collision service; overall painting and upholstering; and/or marine vehicle
steam cleaning.
Marine Vehicle Repair, Minor
   Repairs, incidental body work, replacement of parts and motor services to
marine vehicles, but not to include any operation specified under Marine
Vehicle Repair, Major.
Marquee
   Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a theater building or
extending along and projecting beyond the wall of that building, generally
designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
Marquee Sign
   Any building sign painted, mounted, constructed or attached in any manner,
on a marquee.
Mini Storage-Commercial
   A series of individual indoor storage compartments where goods, materials,
or personal property not owned by the owner or occupant of the premises is
placed and kept for more than 24 consecutive hours for compensation.
Mining
   The extraction of sand, gravel, or other material from a site in the amount
of 50 cubic yards or more and removal from the site, except for removal in
connection with building or subdivision for which a building or grading permit
has been issued. The term Mining also includes the excavation, removal,
placement or storage of rock, sand, dirt, gravel, or clay or other like
material. The term Mining shall be synonymous with excavation and all permits,
exceptions, requirements and other conditions on and regarding excavations and
excavation applications shall also apply to mining applications.
Mississippi River Corridor
   That area within the described boundaries of the designated Mississippi
River Corridor Critical Area in accordance with Executive Order 79-19 (as
amended), dated February 26, 1979, and as shown on the official Zoning Map.
Mixed Use
   A single building containing more than 1 type of land use or a single
development of more than 1 building and use, where different types of land uses
are in close proximity, planned as a unified complementary whole, and
functionally integrated to the use of shared vehicular and pedestrian access
and parking areas, (such as traditional development with retail shops on the
first floor and residential units above).
Mobile Home
   A manufactured home which was constructed on a permanent chassis and which
was designed to be use as a year-round dwelling but which is not attached or
anchored to a permanent foundation.
Modular Manufactured or Pre-Fabricated Home
   A non-mobile housing unit that is fabricated off site and transported to a
building site where final installations are made, permanently affixing the
module to a foundation on the site.
Mortuaries, Funeral Homes
   A facility in which dead bodies are prepared for burial or cremation and
where funeral services may be conducted.
Motel
   A building having provisions for 4 or more sleeping rooms in which lodging
is provided with or without meals, for compensation, and which is open to
transient or permanent guests or both, and which ingress and egress to and from
some or all rooms is through separate entrances providing direct access to the
outside.
Motor Vehicle Convenience Store
   Premises for self-service motor fuel sales that may include the sale of
convenience groceries, fast foods and/or a restaurant and may offer a car wash.
Motor Vehicle, New Auto Dealership, Licensed
   Premises for the sale, rental, leasing, and service of motor vehicles,
including a building containing such things as a showroom, offices, service
area and parts room, and exterior sales lots for displaying new and used
vehicles.
Motor Vehicle Parts
   Retail and wholesale sale of new auto parts, equipment, and supplies to the
general public and the automotive industry.
Motor Vehicle Repair, Major
   General repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles, or
trailers; collision service, including body frame, or fender straightening or
repair; overall painting and upholstering; and/or vehicle steam cleaning.
Motor Vehicle Repair, Minor
   Repairs, incidental body and fender work, replacement of parts and motor
services to passenger automobiles and trucks not exceeding 12,000 pounds gross
weight, but not to include any operation specified under Motor Vehicle Repair,
Major.
Motor Vehicle Service Station
   A place for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale of motor fuel
directly to users of motor vehicles, together with the sale of minor
accessories and the servicing of and minor repair of motor vehicles.
Motor Vehicle, Used Auto Dealership, Licensed
   Premises having an open sales lot for displaying used vehicles and which may
include a small structure for conducting sales and a service bay for detailing
and minor preparation of vehicles for sale.
Motor Vehicle Wash
   Premises having a structure for washing and drying vehicles and adequate
outdoor space for staging vehicles into and out of the wash.
Moving Permit
   A permit required from the responsible governmental agency prior to the
moving of any partially or wholly erected structure from one location to
another.
Multiple Tenant Site
   Any site which has more than 1 tenant, and each tenant has a separate ground
level exterior public entrance.
Multi-vision Sign
   Any sign composed in whole or part of a series of vertical or horizontal
slats or cylinders that are capable of being rotated at intervals so that
partial rotation of the group of slats or cylinders produces a different image
and when properly functioning allows on a single sign structure the display at
any given time 1 of 2 or more images.
Municipal Water and Sewer Systems
   Public utility systems serving a group of buildings, lots, or an area of the
City, with the design and construction of the utility systems as approved by
the City Engineer.
Natural Drainage Way
   A depression in the earth’s surface, such as ravines, draws, and hollows,
which has definable beds and banks capable of conducting surface water runoff
from adjacent lands.
Natural Resources
   The physical values of the land supplied by nature, including, but not
limited to, animal life, plant life, soil, rock, minerals, and water.
Neighborhood
   An area containing a contiguous group of residential lots distinguishable by
some identifiable feature or point of reference where people live in close
proximity to one another.
Noise, Ambient
   The all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, being either
a composite of sounds transmitted by any means from many sources near and far
or a single predominate source.
Nominal Parcel
   A parcel not reduced by more than 10% of its lot area due to road right-of-
way dedication or survey corrections.
Non-commercial Speech
   Dissemination of messages not classified as commercial speech which include,
but are not limited to, messages concerning political, religious, social,
ideological, public service and informational topics.
Non-conforming Lot
   A separate parcel or lot of record on the effective date of this chapter, or
any amendments thereto, which lot or parcel does not conform to the
regulations, including area or dimensional standards contained in this chapter
or amendments thereto.
Non-conforming Structure
   Any structure lawfully or legally existing on the effective date of this
chapter, or any amendment thereto, which does not conform to the regulations,
including the dimensional standards, for the district in which it is located
after the effective date of this chapter or amendments thereto.
Non-conforming Use
   Any use lawfully or legally existing on the effective date of this chapter,
or any amendment thereto, that does not conform to the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
Normal High Water Mark
   See Ordinary High Water Level (OHWL).
Nursery
   An establishment for the growth, transplanting, display and/or sale of
trees, shrubs, flowers and other plants and materials used in indoor and
outdoor planting, conducted within or without an enclosed building or
greenhouse.
Nursing Home
   A residential complex containing multifamily dwellings designed for and
principally occupied by senior citizens and licensed by the State Department of
Human Services, public or private, which for gain or otherwise, regularly
provides 1 or more persons with 24 hour substitute care, food, lodging,
training, education, supervision, habilitation, but which for any reason cannot
be furnished in the person’s own home.
Occupancy
   The purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used. The term
shall also include the building or room housing this use. Change of Occupancy
is not intended to include change of tenants or proprietors.
Office
   A room, suite of rooms, or a building containing rooms or suites of rooms in
which commercial activities, professional services, or occupations are
conducted that do not require that goods are stored, produced, sold at retail,
or repaired, including, but not limited to, financial institutions,
professional offices, governmental offices, insurance offices, real estate
offices, utility offices, radio broadcasting, and similar uses.
Official Control
   Legislatively defined and enacted policies, standards, precise detailed
maps, and other criteria, all of which control the physical development of the
City, or any part thereof, or any detail thereof, and the means of translating
into ordinances all or any part of the general objectives of the Comprehensive
Plan. The Official Controls may include, but are not limited to, ordinances
establishing zoning, subdivision controls, site plan regulations, sanitary
codes, building codes, housing codes, and official maps that have been adopted
by the City.
Official Map
   A map adopted in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota State Statutes.
Official Sign
   Signs of a public noncommercial nature including public notification signs,
safety signs, traffic signs, direction to public facilities when erected by or
on behalf of a public official or employee in the performance of official duty.
Off-premises Sign
   A commercial speech sign which directs the attention of the public to a
business, activity conducted, or product sold or offered at a location not on
the same lot where such sign is located. For purposes of the sign ordinance,
easements and other appurtenances shall be considered to be outside such lot
and any sign located or proposed to be located in an easement or other
appurtenance shall be considered an Off-premises Sign.
Open Space
   Land used for agriculture, natural habitat, pedestrian corridors, and/or
recreational purposes that is undivided and permanently protected from future
development.
Open Space, Common
   Open space not required for storage of the regional flood, or a combination
of land and water area within the site designated for private open space for
the sole benefit, use, and enjoyment of present and future lot or homeowners
within a Planned Unit Development.
Ordinary High Water Level (OHWL)
   The boundary of public waters and wetlands, shall be an elevation
delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient
period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where
the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly
terrestrial. For watercourses, the Ordinary High Water Level is the elevation
of the top of the bank of the channel. For reservoirs and flowage, the Ordinary
High Water Level is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool.
Ordinary High Water Mark
   See Ordinary High Water Level.
Outdoor
   Not enclosed by 4 walls and a roof.
Outdoor Sales Lot
   An outdoor display area of products for sale or lease. Exterior display is a
defined area for customers to examine and compare products. Exterior display
does not include storage of materials or products. Any Outdoor Sales Lot must
occur within a defined area as indicated on an approved final site plan and
approved conditional use or interim use permit. Conditions regarding the
location, screening, size and other conditions may be placed on the approval to
minimize the impact to adjacent properties.
Outdoor Storage
   Storage, keeping or locating materials, goods, equipment or vehicles for
more than a 24 hour period, not in an enclosed building. Construction materials
actively being used for construction on the site under a valid building permit,
and licensed and operable vehicles owned by the property owner, employees or
resident, are not considered as Outdoor Storage. The Outdoor Storage area must
be defined in an approved final site plan and approved conditional use or
interim use permit. Conditions regarding the location, screening, size and
other conditions may be placed on the approval to minimize the impact to
adjacent properties. Outdoor Storage areas may not be located in the front
yard, it may only be located in the rear and side yards. Outdoor Storage areas
shall be screened to 90% opacity from adjacent property lines and street
rights-of-way.
Owner
   In the case of a lot, the legal owner of the lot as officially recorded by
Hennepin County, and including fee owners, contract for deed purchasers and
ground lessees. In the case of a sign, the owner of the sign including any
lessees.
Park and Public Uses
   Any publicly owned or leased land available for public, recreational,
educational, cultural or aesthetic use.
Parking, Public
   A structure, lot, or portion thereof, for the parking of motor vehicles by
the general public.
Parking Space
   A suitably surfaced and permanently maintained area on privately owned
property either within or outside of a building of sufficient size to store 1
standard automobile.
Pasture
   Areas where grass or other growing plants are used for grazing, and where
the concentration of animals is such that a vegetation cover is maintained
during the growing season.
Pedestrian Way
   A public or private right-of-way across or within a block or tract to be
used by pedestrians.
Performance Standards
   The minimum development standards adopted by the City that apply to all lots
or uses, in addition to the other specific regulations which apply to the
individual lot or use.
Person
   Any person, corporation, or association, including governmental agencies and
political entities.
Pervious Surface
   Surface materials that admit the passage of water.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e776b805fd11200858c1748733feb8a077c4b552/
IMAGES/0-0-0-288.jpg]
 
Pipeline
   A line of pipe either above ground or underground including associated
pumps, valves, control devices and other structures utilized for conveying
liquids, gases, sewage, or other finely divided solids from one point to
another.
Plan, Comprehensive
   The series of maps, reports, statement of goals, objectives and criteria,
and documents prepared by the Planning Commission and adopted by the City
Council, to designate long range orderly growth and development of Dayton.
Including, but not limited to a Land Use Guide Plan, a Thoroughfare Guide Plan,
Community Facilities Plans and policies for plan execution.
Planned Development, Commercial
   A planned development of a mix of commercial uses.
Planned Development or Cluster Development
   A type of development characterized by a unified site design for a number of
dwelling units or dwelling sites on a parcel, whether for sale, rent or lease
and also usually involving clustering of these units or sites to provide areas
of common space, density, increase, and/or mix of structure types and land
uses. These developments may be organized and operated as condominiums, time-
share condominiums, cooperatives, full fee ownership, commercial enterprises,
or any combination of these, or cluster subdivisions of dwelling units,
residential condominiums, townhouses or apartment buildings, and accessory land
uses to the principal users. Any development in which a number of residential
structures are grouped on smaller than usual lots, leaving some land undivided/
dedicated for common use by all members of the association is classified as a
Planned Development. These developments can be clustered, open space design
developments.
Planned Unit Development
   A type of development which may incorporate a variety of land uses planned
and developed as a unit. The Planned Unit Development is distinguished from the
traditional subdivision process of development in that zoning standards such as
density, height limits, and minimum lot sizes may be altered by negotiation and
agreement between the developer, the municipality and, when involving land
within the Shoreland District, the Commissioner of Natural Resources. See
Subsection
1001.10.
Planning Agency
   The Planning Commission or Planning Department as created by the City
Council.
Plat
   A drawing or map of a subdivision, meeting all the requirements of the City
and in the form as required by the county for purposes of recording.
Pole Sign
   See Pylon Sign.
Portable Sign
   Any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported, including by
trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign may be
removed and the remaining chassis or support is converted to another sign or
attached temporarily or permanently to the ground since this characteristic is
based on the design of such a sign.
Principal Structure or Use
   The primary or predominant use for which a lot and structure, if any located
thereon, is conducted or maintained, as contrasted to an accessory use or
structure.
Private Clubs
   Private buildings and facilities, owned or operated by a corporation,
association, person or persons, for a social, educational or recreational
purpose, to which membership is required for participation and not primarily
operated for profit nor to render a service that is customarily carried on as a
business.
Projecting Sign
   Any sign which is affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its
leading edge extends more than 2 feet beyond the surface of such building or
wall face.
Protected Waters
   Any waters of the state as defined in M.S. §§ 103G.005, Subdivisions 15 and
15a, and 103G.201, as may be amended from time to time.
Protective or Restrictive Covenant
   A contract entered into between private parties that constitutes a
restriction of the use of a particular parcel of property.
Public Land
   Land owned and/or operated by a governmental unit, including school
districts.
Public Notices
   Official notices posted by public officers, employees or their agents in the
performance of their duties, or as directed by such officers, employees or
agents.
Public Recreation
   See Commercial Recreation.
Public Street Right-of-Way
   The entire right-of-way of any public street.
Public Utility Stations
   All production, storage, substations, transmission lines over 69 KV, and
recovery facilities for water, sewerage, telephone and other similar utilities
owned or operated by any public agency or by any utility subject to the
jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission, except for energy facilities.
Public Waters
   Any existing or proposed body of water or drainage channel that has the
potential to support any type of recreational pursuit or water supply purpose
or as defined in M.S. §§ 103G.005, Subds. 15 and 15a, or 103G.201, as may be
amended from time to time.
Pylon Sign
   Any freestanding sign which has its supportive structure(s) anchored in the
ground and which has a sign face elevated above ground level by pole(s) or beam
(s) and with the area below the sign face open.
Recreation, Commercial or Public
   Recreational activity on a single contiguous tract which is open to the
general public for a fee or otherwise, including but not limited to, golf
courses, miniature golf courses, camping facilities, skating rinks, water
slides, arcades, public parks, bowling alleys, billiard halls, travel agencies,
tennis clubs and related type facilities, but not movie theaters or adult uses.
Recreational Vehicle (RV)
   A vehicle designed as temporary living quarters for recreational camping,
travel or seasonal use. RVs may have their own motor power (as in the case of
motorhomes); may be mounted (as are truck campers); or towed by another vehicle
(as are travel trailers, park trailers and folding camping trailers). Not
included in the RV definition are conversion vehicles, off-road vehicles and
manufactured housing for long-term residence (mobile homes).
Recreational Vehicle Sales
   New Recreational Vehicle (RV) Sales (buying, selling, leasing, wholesaling,
brokering), that involve outdoor display area, as a principal use. Permitted
accessory uses other than those allowed as a permitted use or conditional use
within the zoning district (the combined area of which is not to exceed 40% of
the sum of the gross area of the principal building and outdoor display area)
may include the following uses:
      a.   Used RV sales (buying, selling, leasing, wholesaling, and
brokering);
      b.   RV tow and towed vehicles sales (buying, selling, leasing,
wholesaling, and brokering);
      c.   Retail sales and installation of RV parts, accessories, services and
supplies including propane;
      d.   RV rentals; and
      e.   RV wash facility.
Recycling and Salvage (Outdoor)
   A parcel of land on which salvaged or used materials are bought, sold,
exchanged, stored, processed or handled for the purposes of recycling.
Materials include but are not limited to: scrap iron and other ferrous metals,
paper, rags, rubber tires, discarded goods, machinery and inoperable motor
vehicles.
Recycling Facility (Indoor)
   A facility for the drop-off and temporary holding of materials such as
paper, cardboard, glass, metal, plastic, batteries and motor oil for the
purposes of recycling. Processing of materials is limited to glass breaking and
separation. Recycling materials are not sold to a recycling drop-off center. A
recycling drop-off center is intended for household or consumer use. Use by
commercial or industrial establishments is not included. Unattended drop-off
stations for single materials, such as newsprint, are also not included.
Refuse
   Perishable and non-perishable solid wastes, including garbage, rubbish,
ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residue, street cleanings, and market and
industrial solid wastes, and including municipal treatment wastes which do not
contain free moisture.
Regional Flood
   A flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred
generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to
occur on an average frequency every 100 years.
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation
   A point not less than 1 foot above the water surface profile associated with
the regional flood plus any increases in flood heights attributable to
encroachments on the floodplain. It is the elevation to which uses regulated by
this chapter are required to be elevated or flood proofed.
Religious Institutions
   A building, together with its accessory buildings and use, where persons
regularly assemble for religious purposes and related social events and which
building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and
controlled by a religious body organized to sustain religious ceremonies and
purposes.
Residential Care
   Any facility required to be licensed by a governmental agency, public or
private, which for gain or otherwise regularly provides 1 or more persons with
a 24 hour per day substitute for care, food, lodging, training, education,
supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation and treatment they need, but which
for any reason cannot be furnished in the person’s own home. Residential
facilities include, but are not limited to, state institutions under the
control of the Commissioner of Human Services, foster homes, residential
treatment centers, maternity shelters, group homes, residential programs,
supportive living residences for functionally impaired adults or schools for
handicapped children.
Residential Planned Development
   A use where the nature of residency is non-transient and the major or
primary focus of the development is not service oriented. For example,
residential apartments, manufactured home parks, townhouses, and cooperatives,
would be considered as Residential Planned Developments.
Restaurant - Class I (Sit Down)
   An eating facility, other than a hotel or motel, under the control of a
proprietor or manager, having appropriate facilities for the serving and
preparation of meals and where, in consideration of payment, meals are prepared
on site and regularly served at tables to the general public. The sale of
liquor is not permitted on the premises.
Restaurant - Class II (with Alcohol)
   An eating facility, other than a hotel or motel, under the control of a
proprietor or manager, having appropriate facilities for the serving and
preparation of meals and where, in consideration of payment, meals are prepared
on site and regularly served at tables to the general public. At least 60% of
the gross receipts shall be from the sale of food items. The sale of liquor by
the drink is allowed, as properly licensed by the City.
Restaurant - Class III
   An eating facility where customers order food at a counter and consume the
food either on the premises or away from the premises. The sale of liquor is
not permitted.
Restaurant - Class IV (with Drive Up)
   An eating facility where customers order food at a counter or through a
drive up facility and consume the food either on the premises or away from the
premises. The sale of liquor is not permitted. The facilities are commonly
known as fast food restaurants. The facilities may include, but are not limited
to cafes, coffee shops, ice cream parlors, take out restaurants and fast food
restaurants with drive up facilities.
Retail and Service Shops
   A business that sells goods to the general public and has merchandise in
stock or samples, and/or is engaged in providing individual services generally
related to personal needs. This may include but is not limited to grocery
stores, drug stores, hardware stores, gift shops, and specialty stores, barber,
tailor, laundromat, shoe repair and dry-cleaning (drop-off with processing done
elsewhere).
Retail/Office/Multi-Tenant Structure
   Any grouping of 2 or more principal retail uses, whether on a single lot or
on abutting lots under multiple or single ownership.
Retaining Wall
   A structure utilized to hold a slope in a position which it would not
naturally remain in.
Right-Of-Way, Public
   An area for public use owned and maintained by a government jurisdiction.
Riverfront
      a.   Every lot or parcel of land which is immediately adjacent to a
river; and
      b.   For the Critical Rivers section, this also refers to, every portion
of a lot or parcel of land which riverward of the bluff line to the Mississippi
River.
Roadside Sales Stand
   A structure used only for the display and sale of products with no space for
customers within the structure on a seasonal basis.
Roof
   The exterior surface and its supporting structure on the top of a building
or structure. The structural make-up of which conforms to the roof structures,
roof construction and roof covering sections of the International Building
Code.
Roof Line
   The upper-most edge of the roof or in the case of an extended facade or
parapet, the upper-most height of the facade.
Roof Sign
   Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and above the roof of a building,
supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest
portion of the roof.
Roof Sign, Integral
   Any building sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially
integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, so that no part of the
sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and so that no
part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than
6 inches.
Rotating Sign
   A sign or portion of a sign which turns about on an axis.
School, Business/Trade
   A specialized instructional establishment that provides on-site training of
business, commercial and/or trade skills such as accounting, data processing,
and computer repair. This classification excludes establishments providing
training in an activity that is not otherwise permitted in the zone. Incidental
instructional services in conjunction with another primary use, for which
compensation is not separately received shall not be considered a business and
trade school.
Schools
   Unless otherwise specifically described in the ordinances of the City or
other applicable laws or regulations, the term School shall mean any building
used for educational (academic and/or artistic) purposes by 5 or more persons
at one time.
Screening
   Includes earth mounds, berms, or ground forms, fences and walls, or
landscaping (plant materials) or landscaped fixtures (such as timbers) used in
combination or singularly so as to block direct visual access to an object
throughout the year.
Selective Cutting
   The removal of single scattered trees or shrubs. Selective Cutting shall not
be construed to mean the removal of all trees or shrubs in a given area
resulting in the clearing of the land.
Semi-Public Use
   The use of land by a private, nonprofit organization to provide a public
service that is ordinarily open to some persons outside the regular
constituency of the organization.
Senior Citizen Housing
   Housing designed and limited to occupancy by persons 55 years of age and
older.
Sensitive Resource Management
   The preservation and management of areas unsuitable for development in their
natural state due to constraints such as shallow soils over ground water or
bedrock, highly erosive or expansive solids, steep slopes, susceptibility to
flooding or occurrence of flora and fauna in need of special protection.
Septic Tank
   Any device for the treatment and disposal of human waste which utilizes the
percolation of the liquid portion of the waste into the soil, including all
portions of the system which are not contained inside a building.
Setback
   The minimum horizontal distance between a structure, sewage treatment
system, or other feature and an ordinary high water level, sewage treatment
system, bluff line, top of bluff, road, highway, property line, or other
facility.
Sewage Treatment System
   A septic tank and soil absorption system or other individual or cluster type
sewage treatment system as described and regulated herein.
Sewer System
   The pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force main, and all other
constructions, devices, appliances, or appurtenances used for conducting sewage
or industrial waste or other waste to a point of ultimate disposal and
treatment.
Shimmering Sign
   A sign which reflects an oscillating, sometimes distorted, visual image.
Shopping Center
   See Retail/Office/Multi-Tenant Structure.
Shore Impact Zone
   Land located between the ordinary high water level of a public water and a
line parallel to it at a setback of 50% of the structure setback.
Shoreland
   Land located within the following distances from public waters:
      a.   One thousand feet from the ordinary high water mark of a lake, pond,
or flowage; or
      b.   Three hundred feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of
a floodplain on rivers or streams, whichever is greater.
Sign
   Any letter, word or symbol, poster, picture, statuary, reading matter or
representation in the nature of advertisement, announcement, message or visual
communication, whether painted, posted, printed, affixed or constructed,
including all associated brackets, braces, supports, wires and structures,
which is displayed for informational or communicative purposes.
Sign Face
   The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the message of the
sign is exhibited.
Sign Structure
   Any structure including the supports, uprights, bracing and framework which
supports or is capable of supporting any sign.
Significant Historic Sites
   Any archaeological site, standing structure or other property that meets the
criteria for eligibility to National Registers of Historic Places or is listed
in the State Register of Historic Sites, or is determined to be an unplatted
cemetery that falls under the provisions of M.S. § 307.08, as may be amended
from time to time. A Historic Site meets these criteria if it is presently
listed on either register or it if is determined to meet the qualification for
listing after review by the Minnesota State Archaeologist or the Director of
Minnesota Historical Society. All unplatted cemeteries are automatically
considered to be Significant Historic Sites.
Site
   A lot or combination of contiguous lots which are intended, designated, and/
or approved to function as an integrated unit.
Slope
   The inclination of the natural surface of the land from the horizontal.
Slope, Steep
   Land where agricultural activity or development is either not recommended or
described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and the site’s soil
characteristics, as mapped and described in available Hennepin County soil
surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and construction
techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. Where specific information is not available, steep slopes are
lands having average slopes over 12%, as measured over horizontal distances of
50 feet or more, that are not bluffs.
Story
   That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor
and upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall
include that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the
topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level
directly above a basement, cellar or unused under floor space is more than 6
feet above grade, as defined herein, for more than 50% of the total perimeter
at any point, such basement, cellar, or unused underfloor space shall be
considered as a Story.
Street, Community Collector
   A street that connects communities within and between subregions; provides
mobility between communities; and provides access to other streets, as found on
the Comprehensive Plan.
Street, Local
   A street that connects blocks within neighborhoods, provides mobility within
neighborhoods, and provides access to neighborhood collector streets and other
local streets, as found on the Comprehensive Plan.
Street, Minor Arterial
   A street that connects adjacent subregions and activity centers within
subregions; provides mobility within and between 2 subregions; and provides
access to interstate freeways, major arterial streets, other minor arterial
streets, and collector streets, as found on the Comprehensive Plan.
Street, Minor or Marginal
   A street that is used primarily for access to abutting properties.
Street, Neighborhood Collector
   A street that connects neighborhoods within and between subregions, provides
mobility between neighborhoods, provides access to minor arterials, other
community collector streets and local streets, as found on the Comprehensive
Plan.
Street, Public
   Any thoroughfare with a right-of-way width not less than 24 feet which has
been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use.
Structure
   Anything manufactured, constructed or erected that is normally attached to
or positioned on land, including buildings and portable structures. An edifice
or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed
of parts joined together in some definite manner that is constructed or erected
upon or attached to the ground, or positioned on land, including buildings and
portable structures.
Subdivision
   A described tract of land which is to be or has been divided into 2 or more
lots or parcels, any of which resultant parcels is less than 20 acres in area,
for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building a development, or, if a
new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land. The term includes re-
subdivision and, where it is appropriate to the context, relates either to the
process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
Substandard Lot
   Any lot which does not meet the minimum lot area, length, depth, width or
other dimensional standards of the section.
Substandard Use
   Regarding the Shoreland or Mississippi River Corridor Districts, any use of
the districts existing prior to the date of enactment of this section which is
permitted within the applicable zoning district but does not meet the minimum
lot area and length or water frontage, structure setbacks, or other dimensional
standards of the applicable section.
Substation
   Any utility structure other than lines, pipelines, holes or towers.
Surface Water-Oriented Commercial Use
   The use of land for commercial purposes, where access to and use of a
surface water feature is an integral part of the normal conductance of
business. Marinas, resorts, and restaurants with transient docking facilities
are examples of this use.
Suspended Sign
   Any building sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane
surface and is connected to this surface.
Tavern or Bar
   A building with facilities for the serving of beer, liquor, wine, set-ups,
and short order foods.
Temporary/Seasonal Sales
   A facility or area for temporary or seasonal sales of goods, wares, or
merchandise.
Terrace
   A relatively level area bordered on 1 or more sides by a retaining wall.
Theaters
   A building or part of a building devoted to showing motion pictures, or for
dramatic, dance, musical or other live performances. This does not include
adult use or drive-in theaters.
Time and Temperature Sign
   A sign that displays only current time and temperature information.
Toe of the Bluff
   For lands subject to the Shoreland Zoning Overlay District, the lower point
of a 50 foot segment with an average slope exceeding 18%. This does not apply
for lands in the Mississippi River Corridor.
Top of the Bluff
   For lands subject to the Shoreland Zoning Overlay District, the higher point
of a 50 foot segment with an average slope exceeding 18%. This does not apply
for lands in the Mississippi River Corridor.
Total Site Signage
   The maximum permitted combined area of all signs allowed on a specific lot.
Tower
   Any pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof, including supporting
lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts.
Tower Accessory Structure
   A structure located at the base of the tower.
Tower, Amateur Radio
   Towers constructed for the purposes of supporting radio antennas for private
and personal use by the resident of the property.
Tower Apparatus
   Any equipment mounted to a new or existing tower, including platforms,
antennas, rotors, emergency sirens, lights, and the like.
Towers, Cellular and Communications
   Towers constructed for the purposes of supporting radio and other
transmission antennas for public or private communications.
Transit Station
   Taxi, bus, train, and mass transit terminal and related ticketing, passenger
waiting, parking, and storage areas.
Transmission Services
   Electric power, telephone, and telegraph lines, cables, or conduits used to
transport large blocks of power between 2 points. In the case of electrical
power, this will generally mean 69 KV or more. For mains or pipelines for gas,
liquids or solids in suspension, this means those that are used to transport
large amounts of gas, liquids or solids in suspension between 2 points.
Trash Enclosure Service Structure
   A covered or uncovered structure screening and containing trash receptacles
and maintenance equipment used on site.
Travel Trailer/RV Campground/Marina
   An area or premises operated as a commercial enterprise on a seasonal basis
and generally providing space for seasonal accommodations for transient
occupancy or use by transients occupying camping trailers, self-propelled
campers, and tents.
Truck Stop
   A motor fuel station devoted principally to the needs of tractor-trailer
units and trucks, and which may include eating and/or sleeping facilities.
Truck Terminal (Motor Freight)
   A building in which freight brought by motor truck is assembled and sorted
for routing in intrastate and interstate shipment.
Use, Conditional
   A use, which because of special problems of control the use presents,
requires reasonable, but special, unusual and extraordinary limitations
peculiar to the use for the protection of the public welfare and the integrity
of the City Comprehensive Plan.
Use Permit, Conditional
   A permit issued by the City Council in accordance with procedures specified
in this Code, as a flexibility device to enable the City Council to assign
dimensions to a proposed use or conditions surrounding it after consideration
of adjacent uses and their functions and the special problems which the
proposed use presents.
Use Permit, Interim or Interim Conditional
   A conditional use permit specially and individually granted for a particular
use on a specified parcel or lot or a person for a specific period of time by
the City Council after recommendation by the Planning Commission, authorizing
use of property which generally conforms to uses in the area but may not be
consistent with the adopted land use plan or Comprehensive Plan allowing a land
use or development that would not be appropriate generally but may be allowed
with appropriate restrictions as provided by official controls upon finding
that certain conditions as detailed in this section exist. The permit is
designated to meet the problem which arises where certain uses should not be
permitted to be located as a matter of right in every area included within the
zone because of hazards inherent in the use itself or special problems which
its proposed locations may represent.
Use, Permitted
   A use that may be fully established in a particular district, provided it
conforms with all requirements, regulations, and performance standards of the
district.
Utility Facility
   The physical facilities associated with electric, telephone, telegraph,
cable television, water, sewer, solid waste, gas, and similar service
operations.
Variance
   A modification or variation of the provisions of this chapter as applied to
a specific piece of property. Modification of the allowable uses within a
district shall not be allowed as a Variance. The term Variance, as defined or
described in M.S. Chapter 462, as may be amended from time to time, shall be
applicable.
Vegetation, Natural
   Plant life which is native to the location and which would normally grow if
the ground were left undisturbed.
Veterinarian Clinic
   An establishment for the care (medical), treatment, observation, and/or
boarding of pets and animals in conjunction with treatment.
Video Display Sign
   A sign that changes its message or background in a manner or method of
display characterized by motion or pictorial imagery, which may or may not
include text and depicts action or a special effect to imitate movement, the
presentation of pictorials or graphics displayed in a progression of frames
that gives the illusion of motion, including, but not limited to the illusion
of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light, or expanding or
contracting shapes, not including electronic changeable copy signs. Video
Display Signs include projected images or messages with these characteristics
onto buildings or other objects.
Visible
   Capable of being seen by a person of normal visual acuity (whether legible
or not) without visual aid.
Wall
   Any structure which defines the exterior boundaries or courts of a building
or structure and which has a slope of 60 degrees or greater with the horizontal
plane.
Wall Sign
   Any building sign attached parallel to, but within 2 feet of a wall, painted
on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside
wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building,
and which displays only 1 sign surface.
Warehouse and Distribution Centers
   The storage, packing, and crating of materials or equipment within an
enclosed building or structure.
Water Body (or Waterbody)
   Any lake, stream, pond, wetland or river.
Water-Oriented Accessory Structure or Facility
   For lands within the Shoreland Zoning Overlay District, a small, above
ground building or other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks and
retaining walls, which, because of the relationship of its use to a surface
water feature, reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters than the
normal structure setback. Examples of these structures and facilities include
boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses, and detached
decks.
Wetland
   Areas saturated or inundated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support,
a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions. Wetlands are classified in the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service Circular No. 39 (1971).
Wholesaling
   The display, storage, and sale of goods to other firms for resale. This does
not involve sales to the general public or the end consumer.
Wind Energy Conversion System
   One tower with rotors and motors with 1 conversion generator.
Window Sign
   Any building sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to
communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or
service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and
is visible from the exterior of the window.
Yard
   An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed
by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise
provided herein. For the purpose of determining the width of a yard, the
distance between the lot line and nearest point of the building or structure
shall be used.
Yard, Depth of
   The horizontal distance between the building line and the street line or lot
line.
Yard, Front
   The yard between any street line and the front of the principal building or
any projections thereof other than steps, entranceway, unenclosed balconies, or
open porch.
Yard, Rear
   The yard between the rear lot line and the rear of the principal building or
any projections thereof other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed
porches. On corner lots the Rear Yard shall be considered as parallel to the
street upon which the lot has its least dimension. On both corner lots and
interior lots the Rear Yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the
lot from the front yard.
Yard, Side
   A yard between the principal building and the side lot line, extending from
the front yard line to the rear yard line.
Zoning Administrator
   The officer charged with the administration and enforcement of this Zoning
Section.
Zoning District
   An area of the City (as delineated on the Zoning Map) set aside for specific
uses with specific regulations for use and development.
Zoning District Overlay
   A zoning district containing regulations superimposed upon other zoning
district regulations and superseding the underlying zoning district use
regulations. In the Shoreland and Critical Rivers Districts, the Zoning
District Overlay supersedes the underlying zoning district use regulations if
the overlay regulations are more restrictive.
Zoning Map
   The map or maps incorporated into this chapter as a part thereof,
designating the zoning districts.
(Ord. 2010-18, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-05, passed 3-22-2011; Am. Ord.
2012-07, passed 5-22-2012; Am. Ord. 2018-06, passed 2-13-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-
11, passed 5-8-2018)
1001.04   CLASSIFICATION OF DISTRICTS.
Subd. 1   Districts.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the City of Dayton is hereby divided into
classes of districts, which shall be designated as follows:
 
Special Protection Districts
GFP  General Floodplain
MRCA Mississippi River Critical Area
 
 
Residential Districts
A-1  Agricultural
SA   Special Agricultural
A-2  Special Homestead Agricultural
RO   Old Village Residential District
R-1  Single-Family District (15,000 square feet minimum lot size)
R-1A Single-Family District with Lot Averaging
R-2  Single-Family District (90,000 square feet minimum lot size)
R-E  Residential Estate District (5 acre minimum lot size)
R-T  Attached and Detached Transitional District
R-M  Medium Density Residential District
RH   High Density Residential District
RHM  Manufactured Housing District
 
 
Non-residential Districts
B-1   Office Business District
B-2   Neighborhood Commercial District
B-3   General Business District
B-4   Commercial/Industrial District
VM    Village Mixed Use District
I-1   Light Industrial District
I-2   Heavy Industrial District
B-P   Business Park District
P-R   Public and Recreational District
GMU-1 General Mixed Use - Highway 81 Corridor
GMU-2 General Mixed Use - City Center
GMU-3 General Mixed Use - Historic Village
 
 
Overlay Districts
CR  Critical Rivers Area
SH  Shoreland
PUD Planned Unit Development
 
   (1)   A-1, Agricultural District. The intent of this district is to
encourage and preserve for as long as possible the predominantly agricultural
character of the Dayton area; to facilitate to the maximum extent possible
agricultural activities with density at a minimum of 1 unit per 40 acres; to
restrict the use of land which would be incompatible with or detrimental to
agricultural activities.
   (2)   SA, Special Agricultural District. The intent of this district is to
provide for the long-term preservation of agricultural land. The owner of land
at least 10 acres in size and devoted to agricultural or related purposes may
petition the City to have the property zoned as special agricultural. In the
zones, only agricultural and accessory uses shall be permitted with no more
than 1 dwelling per 40 acres.
   (3)   A-2, Special Homestead Agricultural. The intent of this district is to
allow subdivision of the homestead portion of a parcel from the remaining
acreage while maintaining a density of 1 unit per 40 acres by creating a
homestead parcel and a non-buildable outlot for the remainder of the nominally
40 acre or larger parcel. The A-2 zone is intended for agricultural use in
areas that are not served by public sewer and water.
   (4)   RO, Residential Historic Village District. It is the intent of this
district is to allow development and redevelopment within the residential areas
of the Historic Village of Dayton. All new development should be in keeping
with the scale and character of the area and the existing platted lot
configuration, and shall be connected to municipal sewer and water. A mix of
residential dwelling types is anticipated with detached single-family dwelling
as the primary housing type. New single-family detached, attached single-family
development and small scale multi-family dwellings may be appropriate.
   (5)   R-1, Residential Single-Family District. This district is intended to
preserve, create and enhance single-family residential development at a minimum
lot size of 15,000 square feet, when municipal sewer and water is available.
Other uses, which are complementary to a single-family residential
neighborhood, may also be developed with appropriate permits.
   (6)   R-1A, Single-Family District with Lot Averaging. The intent of the R-
1A, Single-Family Residential District with Lot Averaging is to provide for
development of low-density neighborhoods with varying lot width and lot sizes
that is planned in a manner that maintains the natural topography of the site,
preserves more open space than what would otherwise be achieved, and preserves
or enhances natural features on the site within private common and public open
space.
   (7)   R-2, Residential Single-Family District. This district is intended to
preserve, create and enhance areas for low-density large lot single-family
detached residential development and directly related, complementary uses on
land that is: substantially developed with single-family detached residential
dwellings on parcels of 90,000 square feet or larger; and areas where municipal
services are not yet provided.
   (8)   R-E, Residential Estate District. This district is intended is to
provide for low-density, large lot, single-family detached residential dwelling
units and directly related, complementary uses on land that is:
      a.   Substantially developed with single-family detached residential
dwellings on parcels of 90,000 square feet or larger;
      b.   Adjacent to the Mississippi River bluff and within the critical area
boundary;
      c.   Located in areas of steep slopes, significant vegetation, wetlands
or other unique natural features which, in the opinion of the City Council are
necessary to maintain the character of the area or the community and which
would be irreparably harmed by denser development; or
      d.   Constrained by topographic or other physical conditions, where in
the opinion of the City Council, municipal sanitary sewer service will not be
practical.
   (9)   R-T, Attached and Detached Transitional District. This district is
designed to allow a mix of single-family detached and single-family attached
housing (with a maximum of 4 units per building) at a more moderate single-
family density. The mix of detached and attached housing units shall reflect a
minimum of 60% detached single-family and maximum of 40% attached or detached
townhouse dwelling ratio in a given residential subdivision.
   (10)   RM, Medium Density Residential District. This district is designed to
allow a variety of housing types including single-family attached and detached
dwelling and multi-family with a minimum net density of 6 units per acre and
maximum net density of 12 units per acre.
   (11)   RH, High Density Residential District. This district is designed to
allow development of multi-family housing. It is intended that this district
provide a mix of life-cycle housing choices throughout the City with a minimum
net density of 10 units per acre or greater.
   (12)   RHM, Manufactured Housing District. This district is intended to
create areas for manufactured home parks to accommodate manufactured homes,
which do not comply with the standards established for single-family dwellings
within other residential districts. It is also intended to preserve and enhance
areas for medium density residential development of a manufactured home nature.
It is further the intent to supplement applicable state laws pertaining to
manufactured homes; to provide reasonable standards for site development of the
parks; to avoid overcrowding; to provide setbacks and other development
standards which will make the development standards more attractive, safe and
pleasant to live in and compatible with other land uses and developments in the
community.
   (13)   B-1, Office Business District. This district is intended to provide
areas appropriate for office and service uses and uses that are compatible with
commercial offices. A range of public, medical, and educational uses shall be
available in the B-1 areas. Development is to be connected to municipal sewer
and water.
   (14)   B-2, Neighborhood Commercial District. This district is intended to
provide for the establishment of highly limited scale neighborhood commercial
centers that offer basic, convenience-type goods and services to the
immediately surrounding areas in which they are located. To avoid nuisance
characteristics and require high quality site and architectural design in
conformance with the character of and scale of the neighborhood. To minimize
the nuisance influence on surrounding residential neighborhoods by limitations,
performance standards, and control of uses; to exclude highway-oriented, strip
commercial and businesses that would tend to disrupt the neighborhood
stability. New development is to be connected to municipal sewer and water.
   (15)   B-3, General Business District. This district is intended to provide
for the establishment of areas devoted to high intensity retailing and service
activity primarily oriented toward motorists and requiring higher volumes of
traffic and visibility from major roads. Uses will serve a City-wide and multi-
community consumer market. Development is to be connected to municipal sewer
and water.
   (16)   B-4, Commercial/Industrial District. This district is intended to
provide areas for businesses that have both commercial and industrial
characteristics. The district will include a mixture of commercial, office, and
light industrial land uses, made mutually compatible through the enforcement of
performance standards, to encourage and accommodate high quality, large scale
development opportunities along intermediate arterial roadways within the City.
Development is to be connected to municipal sewer and water.
   (17)   MV, Mixed Use Historic Village District. This district is intended to
allow a mix of non-residential and residential uses along Robinson Street
within the Historic Village area of Dayton. The district is designed to create
a pedestrian oriented main street character where buildings are located
abutting the public sidewalk and parking is located to the side or rear of the
building. Development is to be connected to municipal sewer and water.
   (18)   I-1, Light Industrial District. The Light Industrial District is
intended to provide for the establishment of warehousing and light industrial
development. The overall character of the I-1 District is intended to have a
low impact manufacturing/warehouse character. Industrial uses allowed in this
district shall be limited to those which can compatibly exist adjacent to both
lower intensity business uses and high intensity manufacturing uses and which
have limited amounts of truck traffic in comparison to higher intensity
industrial districts. Because I-1 may abut residential uses the I-1 uses are
regulated in height, lot coverage, setbacks, landscaping, loading and use type
so as to facilitate compatibility between these uses and residential
development.
   (19)   I-2, Heavy Industrial District.  The intent of the I-2, Heavy
Industrial District is to provide areas suitable for the location of general
industrial activities, including heavy manufacturing and other such activities
which, because of the nature of the product or character of operation, require
more isolation from or special protections for non-industrial uses.
   (20)   B-P, Business Park District. The intent of the B-P, Business Park
District is to provide for multi-use building and/or the establishment of
business offices, wholesale showrooms, and related uses in an environment which
provides a high level of amenities, including landscaping, preservation of
natural features, increased architectural design, pedestrian facilities and
other features.
   (21)   PR, Public Recreation District. This district is intended to allow
for recreational activity on a single contiguous tract. Examples of this
recreational activity would include, but not be limited to, golf courses,
camping facilities, public parks, tennis clubs and bowling alleys. It is
intended to include both publicly and privately owned facilities and can be
operated on a fee or non-fee basis.
   (22)   GMU-1, General Mixed Use - Highway 81 Corridor. This district is
intended to provide an area for compact, walkable, mixed-use development along
Highway 81 which has been identified as key community corridor and to support
high quality development and site flexibility due to the unique site conditions
in this area.
   (23)   GMU-2, General Mixed Use - City Center. This district is intended to
provide an area for compact, walkable, mixed-use development that also provides
for the establishment of a community focal point with a blend of cultural,
recreational, entertainment, commercial retail and office uses along key
community corridors.
   (24)   GMU-3 General Mixed Use - Historic Village. This district is intended
to provide an area for compact, walkable, mixed-use development that is
appropriately scaled with high quality architecture in conformance with the
unique character of the Historic Village.
   (25)   CR, Critical Rivers Area. This district is designed to add controls
and standards within the critical river area along the Mississippi River in a
location as defined by the State of Minnesota to preserve and enhance the river
and its associated natural, aesthetic, cultural and historic values.
   (26)   SH, Shoreland. This district is designed to add controls and
standards to ensure wise preservation, use and development of shorelands of
protected waters as classified by the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources.
   (27)   PUD, Planned Unit Development. This is an overlay district which
allows flexibility from the strict application of zoning standards in exchange
for improved design and public benefit. Development is to be connected to
municipal sewer and water.
Subd. 2   Zoning Map
   (1)   The location and boundaries of the districts established by this
chapter are hereby set forth on the Dayton, Minnesota Zoning Map and the Map
(hereinafter referred to as Zoning Map) is hereby adopted and made a part of
this chapter; Zoning Map shall be known as the Dayton, Minnesota Zoning Map.
   (2)   Zoning Map and all notations, references and data shown thereon are
hereby incorporated by reference into this section and shall be as much a part
of it as if all were fully described herein.
   (3)   It shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Administrator to maintain
Zoning Map within 30 days after official publication of amendments.
   (4)   The official Zoning Map shall be kept on file at the City Hall.
Subd. 3   District Boundaries
   (1)   The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated,
either the center line of streets or railroad rights-of-way or lot lines or
section lines or the center lines of lot lines extended or lines parallel to
perpendicular thereto.
   (2)   Where numbers are shown on the Zoning Map between a street or lot line
and a district boundary line, they indicate that the district boundary runs
parallel to the street line or property line at a distance therefrom equivalent
to the number of feet so indicated, unless otherwise indicated. Public lands
shall be considered to be included in the most restrictive zoning district the
lands adjoin.
Subd. 4   Future Annexation.
   Any land annexed to the City in the future shall be placed in the A-
1 Agricultural District until another zoning district is approved by action of
the City Council after receipt of the recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
(Ord. 2010-18, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-06, passed 4-24-2012; Am. Ord.
2014-04, passed 3-25-2014)
1001.05   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
Subd. 1   Single-Family Residential District (R-1)
         (1)   Purpose. The purpose of the R-l, Single-Family Residential
District is to provide for development of low-density neighborhoods
predominantly single-family residences and related uses that are served by
municipal sewer and water.
         (2)   Permitted uses. In addition to other uses specifically
identified elsewhere in this Code, the following are permitted uses in an R-
l District:
            a.   Essential service structures.
            b.   Public parks, trails, playfields, playgrounds, and directly
related buildings and structures.
            c.   Residential facility licensed by the state serving 6 or fewer
persons in a single-family detached dwelling.
            d.   Single-family detached dwellings.
         (3)   Permitted accessory uses. Uses such as those listed below that
are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to the permitted or approved
conditional uses:
            a.   Private garages and accessory buildings in conformance with
district requirements.
            b.   The renting of rooms in a single-family detached dwelling by a
resident family for lodging purposes only and for the accommodation of not more
than 2 individuals per dwelling unit.
            c.   Daycare facilities (licensed) serving 12 or fewer persons in a
single-family detached dwelling.
            d.   Fences as regulated by Subsection
1001.24.
            e.   Home occupations and home offices as regulated by Subsection
1001.13.
            f.   Play and recreational facilities, only accessory to an
existing principal permitted use on the same lot and which are operated for the
enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their
occasional guests, except as otherwise permitted.
            g.   Private swimming pools and tennis courts.
            h.   Signs as regulated by Subsection
1001.20.
         (4)   Conditional uses.  In addition to other uses specifically
identified elsewhere in this Code, the following are conditional uses in an R-
1 District and require a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth
in and regulated by Subsection
1001.23 of the Code.
            a.   Bus/transit facility.
            b.   Daycare facilities (licensed) for 14 or more persons, as a
principal or an accessory use, except as provided for by this chapter, provided
that the use complies with all state licensing requirements.
            c.   Government buildings and structures; public or quasi-public or
private recreational buildings and neighborhood or community centers.
            d.   Kennel, private - subject to Subsection
1001.14.
            e.   Golf courses, country clubs, tennis clubs, public swimming
pools serving more than 1 family. The principal structure for any of the above
listed uses shall be 100 feet or more from any abutting lot in an R District
and accessory structure shall be a minimum of 50 feet from any lot line.
            f.   Housing dedicated to people 55 and older.
            g.   Public and parochial schools; provided, no building shall be
located within 50 feet of any lot line.
            h.   Religious and religious institutions such as churches,
chapels, temples, and synagogues including those related structures located on
the same site which are an integral part of the church proper, convents or
homes for persons related to a religious function on the same site; provided,
no more than 10 persons shall reside on the site and no building shall be
located within 50 feet of any lot line.
         (5)   Lot requirements and setbacks. The following rninimum
requirements shall be observed in an R-l District subject to additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Code:
 
Minimum lot size                     15,000 SF
Minimum lot frontage                 60 feet
Minimum corner lot frontage          100 feet
Minimum lot width at setback         80 feet
Minimum lot depth                    120 feet
Maximum impervious surface (per lot) 50%
* minimum setback to an arterial street: 50 feet.
 
 
Setbacks - Dwelling
Living area                 25 feet
Front porch (120 sq. ft.)** 20 feet
Garage                      30 feet
Side to dwelling            10 feet
Side to non-dwelling        10 feet
Rear                        20 feet
Dwelling maximum height     35 feet
 
 
Decks and attached open structures
Front, side or rear to street* 30 feet
Side                           10 feet
Rear                           15 feet
* Minimum setback to an arterial street is 50 feet.
** Per requirements in Subdivision 1(5)a. below.
 
            a.   Front yard. The front yard setback for living area in an R-
1 District shall be 25 feet. The setback may be reduced to 20 feet if the
following conditions are met:
               1.   The setback reduction is for an attached living area or
porch to the principal structure, not including the garage, which does not
exceed a total of 120 square feet of above grade finished livable space.
               2.   The exterior materials of the proposed living area or porch
are consistent or complementary in color, texture and quality with those
visible at the front of the dwelling.
               3.   The roof of the proposed living area or porch is properly
proportioned to and integrated with the roof of the dwelling.
               4.   The structure does not adversely affect drainage on the lot
or neighboring properties.
            b.   Rear yard. The rear yard setback for a principal structure in
an R-l District shall be 30 feet. The setback may be reduced to 20 feet if the
following conditions are met:
               1.   The setback reduction is for an attached living area to the
principal structure, not including the garage, that does not exceed a total of
300 square feet of above grade finished livable space.
               2.   There is a minimum of 40 feet measured at the closest
point, between the attached living area and the neighboring principal structure
and any attached living area to the rear.
               3.   The structure does not adversely affect drainage on the lot
or neighboring properties.
         (6)   Special minimum requirements for single- family home new
construction:
            a.   Parking regulations:
               1.   A private 2-car garage with a minimum floor area of 440
square feet shall be required to be built concurrent with the principal
structure. The maximum footprint of the garage shall not exceed the footprint
of the living area of the principal structure.
               2.   Two surface parking spaces shall be provided in a driveway
location.
               3.   For non-residential permitted or conditional uses, parking
shall be as required in Subsection
1001.19.
            b.   No more than 1 principal use shall be permitted on a platted
lot or parcel of record.
            c.   All developed properties shall display the street address on
at least 1 street frontage.
            d.   No fence greater than 3 feet shall be erected within the front
yard within 20 feet of any street right-of-way line.
            e.   Newly constructed single-family homes shall be constructed
with the following design elements:
               1.   Front elevation:
                  (a)   Each front elevation shall include three types of
siding designs in two different styles that provide noticeable variations in
color, texture, design and/or shape. Materials and overall design shall provide
breaks and reduce blank spaces within the elevation. One siding style can be
used provided a second hard material, such as stone or brick, is included on
both the house and garage portions of the elevation. Vinyl siding shall not be
permitted on any front elevation. When used, brick and stone must wrap the
house corner at least 6 inches.
                  (b)   A plaque address stone is required.
                  (c)   All windows, on all elevations, shall include trim at a
minimum of 4 inches wide.
                  (d)   Design of front exterior elevations shall be varied
within the development with a minimum of 5 different styles provided.
                  (e)   Homes in proximity to each other shall not look alike
in terms of color of siding, accent and roofing materials. The home under
consideration will be compared to the 2 homes on the 2 lots on either side of
it and to the 3 homes directly facing it.
               2.   Architectural elements: All front elevations shall contain
a minimum of 4 of the following elements:
                  (a)   Corner trim;
                  (b)   Shutters;
                  (c)   Dormers;
                  (d)   Front porch;
                  (e)   Frieze board;
                  (f)   Eighteen inch heel rise;
                  (g)   Covered stoop;
                  (h)   Belly band;
                  (i)   Decorative window header;
                  (j)   Decorative windows and/or window grids; or
                  (k)   Gabled end returns.
               3.   Anti-monotony requirements: Design of front exterior
elevations shall be varied within the development with a minimum of 5 different
styles provided.
                  (a)   Homes in proximity to each other shall not look alike
in terms of color of siding, accent and roofing materials. The home under
consideration will be compared to the 2 homes on the 2 lots on either side of
it and to the 3 homes directly facing it.
                  (b)   Villa neighborhoods within developments shall be
allowed to have a monochromatic color variation as approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
               4.   Garages: All homes shall tame the appearance of the garage
in a manner consistent with the following:
                  (a)   All garage doors shall include raised panels, windows,
accents or other details to break up its scale and to make it more of a
continuation of the home.
                  (b)   The color of the garage door shall be compatible with
the front facade.
                  (c)   The use of flush steel doors is prohibited.
                  (d)   Home designs shall reduce the impact of blank areas
above the garage doors through the use of windows, louvers, lowered roof lines,
eyebrows, frieze board, or other trim and details consistent with the overall
architecture.
                  (e)   Garage doors shall be wrapped with columns, trim or
other design elements that is consist with the major materials of the house.
                  (f)   Any garage on a corner lot shall have a window, window
like feature or trim elements that break up the facade.
                  (g)   Garage width shall not comprise more than 70% of the
viewable street-facing linear building frontage.
               5.   Roof:
                  (a)   Architectural design roofing materials including
composition, wood shingles (including shake), concrete, clay or ceramic tile
roofs are required on all roofs.
                  (b)   Overhangs must be a minimum of 12 inches on all
elevations.
                  (c)   No bright or garish shingles are allowed.
               6.   Side and rear facades:
                  (a)   Equal architectural treatment of all sides of the
building shall be used for all elevations located on or visible from a street
or public park. Each elevation shall use a minimum of 2 different materials
compatible with the front elevations.
                  (b)   Each side elevation on a corner lot shall have at least
1 window or door opening which cannot be garage.
                  (c)   A maximum of 18 inches of the foundation wall may be
exposed on any elevation.
               7.   Fences: All new developments shall designate a permitted
fence type in covenants.
               8.   Perimeter landscaping: All front elevations shall be
landscaped with rock, mulch, or other decorative material. Sod is not an
acceptable perimeter foundation material.
               9.   Buffer yards: A buffer yard and additional landscape
screening will be required when a higher density zoning district (i.e. R-1A
adjacent to R-1) is adjacent to a lower density zoning district. The screening
requirements are applicable when any portion of a lot with a higher zoning
designation shares a property line with a lot of a lower zoning designation.
Within the buffer yard landscape screening shall consist of:
                  (a)   Buffer yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide.
                  (b)   Planting screens shall consist of healthy, hardy
plants, a minimum of 6 feet in height and designed to provide a year round
visual screen at the time of installation whenever screening or buffering is
required. A minimum of 6 trees per 100 feet of property boundary adjacent to a
lower density zoning district. Additional trees may be required to accomplish
required screening. A variety of species, including deciduous, non-deciduous
trees and shrubs shall be provided.
                  (c)   Landscape screen plant material shall be staggered to
avoid single rows.
                  (d)   Shrubs shall be arranged to lessen the visual gaps
between trees.
                  (e)   Deciduous trees intended for screening shall be planted
not more than 40 feet apart. Evergreen trees intended for screening shall be
planted not more than 15 feet apart.
                  (f)   Buffer yards shall be platted through lots and be
placed in a separate conservation and landscape easement to be recorded at the
time of final plat.
Subd. 2   Single-Family Residential District with Lot Averaging (R-1A)
         (1)   Purpose. The purpose of the R-1A, Single-Family Residential
District with Lot Averaging is to provide for development of low-density
neighborhoods with varying lot width and lot sizes that is planned in a manner
that maintains the natural topography of the site, preserve more open space
than what would otherwise be achieved, and preserves or enhances natural
features on the site within private common and public open space.
         (2)   Development in an R-1A shall provide shared amenities on site
together with the variety of lot width and lot sizes in an integrated and well
planned development including a greater variety in home design.
         (3)   Permitted uses. In addition to other uses specifically
identified elsewhere in this Code, the following are permitted uses in an R-1A
District:
            a.   Uses permitted in the R-1 District.
         (4)   Permitted accessory uses. Uses such as those listed below that
are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to the permitted or approved
conditional uses:
            a.   Accessory uses permitted in the R-1 District.
         (5)   Conditional uses. In addition to other uses specifically
identified elsewhere in this Code, the following are conditional uses in an R-
1A District and require a conditional use permit based upon procedures set
forth in and regulated by Subsection
1001.23 of this Code.
            a.   Conditional uses permitted in the R-1 District.
         (6)   Lot requirements. The following minimum requirements shall be
observed in an R-1A District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Code:
            a.   Minimum lot requirements:
               1.   Lot area. Total lot area of individual lots may vary to
accommodate variety in subdivision design and layout provided the overall lot
sizes in the development maintains an average of 15,000 square feet (except for
lots located in exception as described in Subdivision 2(7)  below) and no lots
shall fall below 10,890 square feet. Various lot sizes shall be distributed
throughout the development.
         (7)   Exception. R-1A zoned areas within the Critical Area Boundary as
shown the Future Land Use Plan shall maintain a minimum lot area of 20,000
square feet.
         (8)   Setbacks. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
in an R-1A District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Code:
 
Minimum lot size                                             10,890-12,500 SF
Minimum lot width at setback                                 60 feet
Minimum lot frontage at street                               50 feet
Lot size                                                     Over 12,500 SF
Minimum lot width at setback                                 70 feet
Minimum corner lot frontage                                  75 feet
Minimum lot frontage at street                               60 feet
Maximum impervious surface                                   50%
Living area or side loaded garage                            20 feet
Front porch (120 sq. ft.)                                    15 feet
Garage front                                                 25 feet
Side yards                                                   7.5 feet
Side yard corner lot                                         20 feet
Garage side (15 feet between structures)                     5 feet
Rear                                                         15 feet
Maximum height (as measured from the midpoint on a hipped or 35 feet
pitched roof)
 
 
Setbacks - Dwelling
Living area                    20 feet
Front porch (120 sq. ft.)**    15 feet
Garage                         25 feet
Side to dwelling               10 feet
Side to non-dwelling           10 feet
Rear                           20 feet
Dwelling maximum height        35 feet
Decks and attached open structures
Front, side or rear to street* 30 feet
Side                           10 feet
Rear                           15 feet
* Minimum setback to an arterial street is 50 feet
** Per requirements in Subdivision 2(8)a. below
 
            a.   Front yard. The front yard setback living area in an R-1A
District shall be 20 feet. The setback may be reduced to 15 feet if the
following conditions are met:
               1.   The setback reduction is for an attached living area or
porch to the principal structure, not including the garage, which does not
exceed a total of 120 square feet of above grade finished livable space.
               2.   The exterior materials of the proposed living area or porch
are consistent or complementary in color, texture and quality with those
visible at the front of the dwelling.
               3.   The roof of the proposed living area or porch is properly
proportioned to and integrated with the roof of the dwelling.
               4.   The structure does not adversely affect drainage on the lot
or neighboring properties. We should be able to remove.
            b.   Rear yard. The rear yard setback for a principal structure in
an R-1A District shall be 30 feet. The setback may be reduced to 20 feet if the
following conditions are met:
               1.   The setback reduction is for an attached living area to the
principal structure, not including the garage, that does not exceed a total of
300 square feet of above grade finished livable space.
               2.   There is a minimum of 40 feet measured, at the closest
point, between the attached living area and the neighboring principal structure
and any attached living area to the rear.
               3.   The structure does not adversely affect drainage on the lot
or neighboring properties.
         (9)   Special minimum requirements.
            a.   All development in R-1A shall follow the same special minimum
requirements as listed in the R-1 District Subd. 1(6).
Subd. 3   Single-Family Residential District (R-2)
         (1)   Purpose. The purpose of the R-2, Single-Family Residential
District is to provide for low-density, large lot, single-family detached
residential dwelling units and directly related, complementary uses on land
that is:
            a.   Substantially developed with single-family detached
residential dwellings on parcels of 90,000 square feet or larger;
            b.   Areas where municipal services are not yet provided.
         (2)   Permitted uses. In addition to other uses specifically
identified elsewhere in this Code, the following are permitted uses in an R-
2 District:
            a.   Uses permitted in the R-1 District.
         (3)   Permitted accessory uses. Uses such as those listed below that
are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to the permitted or approved
conditional uses:
            a.   Accessory uses permitted in the R-1 District.
         (4)   Conditional uses. In addition to other uses specifically
identified elsewhere in this Code, the following are conditional uses in an R-
2 District and require a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth
in and regulated by Subsection
1001.23 of this Code.
            a.   Conditional uses permitted in the R-1 District.
            b.   Existing agricultural uses as of the date of this Subsection.
            c.   Cemeteries.
            d.   Horse boarding and riding facilities.
         (5)   Lot requirements and setbacks. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in an R-2 District subject to additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Code:
 
Minimum lot size           90,000 SF
Minimum lot width          200 feet
Minimum lot depth          200 feet
Maximum impervious surface 30%
* Minimum setback to an arterial street is 50 feet
 
 
Setbacks - Dwelling
Living area          25 feet
Front porch*         20 feet
Garage               30 feet
Side to dwelling     10 feet
Side to non-dwelling 10 feet
Rear                 20 feet
* Per requirements in Subdivision 3(5)a. below
 
            a.   Front yard. The front yard setback for living area in an R-
2 District shall be 25 feet. The setback may be reduced to 20 feet if the
following conditions are met:
               1.   The setback reduction is for an attached living area or
porch to the principal structure, not including the garage, which does not
exceed a total of 120 square feet of above grade finished livable space.
               2.   The exterior materials of the proposed living area or porch
are consistent or complementary in color, texture and quality with those
visible at the front of the dwelling.
               3.   The roof of the proposed living area or porch is properly
proportioned to and integrated with the roof of the dwelling.
               4.   The structure does not adversely affect drainage on the lot
or neighboring properties.
         (6)   Special minimum requirements.
            a.   Utility connections for septic development in areas ultimately
planned for sanitary sewer access shall be designed to accommodate future
connection to sanitary sewer and municipal water supply.
            b.   All development in R-1A shall follow the same special minimum
requirements as listed in R-1.
Subd. 4   Residential Estate District (R-E)
         (1)   Purpose. The purpose of the R-E, Residential Estate District is
to provide for low-density, large lot, single-family detached residential
dwelling units and directly related, complementary uses on land that is:
            a.   Substantially developed with single-family detached
residential dwellings on parcels of 90,000 square feet or larger;
            b.   Adjacent to the Mississippi River bluff and within the
Critical Area Boundary;
            c.   Located in areas of steep slopes, significant vegetation,
wetlands or other unique natural features which, in the opinion of the City
Council are necessary to maintain the character of the area or the community
and which would be irreparably harmed by denser development; or
            d.   Constrained by topographic or other physical conditions, where
in the opinion of the City Council, municipal sanitary sewer service will not
be practical.
         (2)   Permitted uses. In addition to other uses specifically
identified elsewhere in this Code, the following are permitted uses in an R-
E District:
            a.   Permitted uses in R-1 District.
         (3)   Permitted accessory uses. Uses such as those listed below that
are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to the permitted or approved
conditional uses:
            a.   Accessory uses permitted in the R-1 District.
         (4)   Conditional uses. In addition to other uses specifically
identified elsewhere in this Code, the following are conditional uses in an R-
E District and require a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth
in and regulated by Subsection 1001.23 of this Code.
            a.   Conditional uses in the R-3 District.
         (5)   Lot requirements and setbacks. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in an R-E District subject to additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Code:
 
Minimum lot size           5 acres
Minimum lot width          200 feet
Minimum lot depth          200 feet
Maximum impervious surface 25%
* minimum setback to an arterial street is 50 feet
 
 
Setbacks - Dwelling
Front, side or rear to a street 30 feet
Side                            20 feet
Rear                            20 feet
 
            a.   Front yard. The front yard setback for a principal structure
in an R-E District shall be 30 feet. The setback may be reduced to 20 feet if
the following conditions are met:
               1.   The setback reduction is for an attached living area or
porch to the principal structure, not including the garage, which does not
exceed a total of 120 square feet of above grade finished livable space.
               2.   The exterior materials of the proposed living area or porch
are consistent or complementary in color, texture and quality with those
visible at the front of the dwelling.
               3.   The roof of the proposed living area or porch is properly
proportioned to and integrated with the roof of the dwelling.
               4.   The structure does not adversely affect drainage on the lot
or neighboring properties.
         (6)   Special minimum requirements.
            a.   Utility connections for septic development in areas ultimately
planned for sanitary sewer access shall be designed to accommodate future
connection to sanitary sewer and municipal water supply.
            b.   All development in R-1A shall follow the same special minimum
requirements as listed in R-1.
Subd. 5   Single-Family Attached and Detached District (R-3)
         (1)   a.   Purpose. The purpose of the R-3, Single-Family Attached and
Detached District is to allow a mix of single-family detached and single-family
attached housing (with a maximum of 4 units per building) at a more moderate
single-family density. The R-3 District will also support a range of lot sizes
of single-family detached, including villas,  to accommodate natural topography
of the site, preserve open space, natural features and provide shared amenities
on site with a variety of lot width and sizes that support a greater variety in
home design within a single development that is served by municipal sewer and
water. A maximum of 30% of the lots shall be villa lots.
            b.   A conventional subdivision of traditional single-family
housing units is also allowed provided it meets minimum density requirements.
         (2)   Permitted uses. In addition to other uses specifically
identified elsewhere in this Code, the following are permitted uses in an R-
3 District:
            a.   Permitted uses as allowed within the R-1 Zoning District.
            b.   Attached single family dwelling units (townhomes, single or
multi-level).
            c.   Two-family dwelling units.
            d.   Four-plex dwelling units.
         (3)   Permitted accessory uses. In addition to other uses specifically
identified elsewhere in this Code, the following are permitted accessory uses
in an R-3 District:
            a.   Accessory uses permitted in the R-1 Zoning District.
         (4)   Conditional uses. In addition to other uses specifically
identified elsewhere in this Code, the following are conditional uses in an R-
3 District and require a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth
in and regulated by Subsection
1001.23 of this Code.
            a.   Conditional uses permitted in the R-1.
         (5)   Lot requirements and setbacks.
            a.   Minimum lot requirements:
               1.   Lot area. Total lot area of single family detached lots may
vary to accommodate variety in subdivision design and layout provided the
development includes public and private open space, increased protection of
natural resources and/or on site amenities above what is required by ordinance.
                  (a)   All R-3 developments shall incorporate 4 of the
following elements into the development plan at time of Preliminary Plat.
                     i.   Public or private open space accessible and useable
by the neighborhood;
                     ii.   Increased park land dedication of 2% beyond the
required park dedication amount when land is required by the ordinance;
                     iii.   Expansion of existing open space or open space
corridors and/or linking open space corridors beyond borders of the site;
                     iv.   Preservation of existing natural resources,
woodlands and unique topographical features if they exist;
                     v.   Increased landscape buffer along roadways beyond
minimum requirements of the ordinance;
                     vi.   Increased internal landscaping throughout the site
beyond minimum requirements of the ordinance;
                     vii.   Private parks furnished with commercial grade
playground equipment approved by City Staff;
                     viii.   Enhanced pedestrian scale and decorative street
lighting;
                     ix.   Construction of trails (above what is required by
ordinance);
                     x.   Sidewalks are provided on both sides of the street;
                     xi.   Recreational facilities, pool or other on site
amenities which serve the entire development;
                     xii.   Monument signage with decorative lighting, and
enhanced entry landscaping surrounding the monument;
                     xiii.   Water feature at entry or used in storm water
ponds;
                     xiv.   Innovative street designs that encourages a variety
of building orientation along roads;
                     xv.   Architectural detail beyond minimum requirements of
the ordinance;
                     xvi.   Unique environmentally friendly development
characteristics or building techniques.
               2.   Minimum single family detached lot size shall be 10,000
square feet (except for lots located in exception as described in Subdivision 5
(6) below). Developments providing elements as indicated in the following
categories (listed below) may include a variety of lots sizes, including lots
below 10,000 square feet provided the lot area of all proposed lots, within a
single development, maintains an average of 10,000 square feet and no single
family lots shall be below 6,000 square feet. Various lot sizes shall be
distributed throughout the development. Required elements include the
following:
                  (a)   Category 1: Choose 1 of the following:
                     i.   Public or private open space (above what is excluded
in net calculation);
                     ii.   Increased park land dedication beyond the required
park dedication amount when land is required by the ordinance;
                     iii.   Expansion of existing open space or open space
corridors and/or linking open space corridors beyond borders of the site;
                     iv.   Preservation of existing natural resources and
woodlands (as mapped as the greenway corridor on the Land Use Plan) beyond
minimum net calculation or required by ordinance.
                  (b)   Category 2: Choose 1 or more of the following:
                     v.   Site amenities: private parks, enhanced pedestrian
scale and decorative street lighting, tot lots, trails (above what is required
by ordinance), recreational facilities, community center, pools or other on
site amenities which serve the entire development.
                  (c)   Category 3: Choose 1 of the following:
                     vi.   Development based storm water treatment system that
provides treatment benefits beyond the site and the City’s LID ordinance;
                     vii.   Multiple development wide enhanced entry features
including the following elements: monument signage with decorative lighting,
water feature and enhanced entry landscaping surrounding the monument;
                     viii.   Innovative street designs including but not
limited to curvilinear streets;
                     ix.   Architectural detail beyond minimum requirements;
                     x.   Unique environmentally friendly development
characteristics or building techniques;
               3.   When a development contains a mixture of attached and
detached dwelling units a transition area shall be provided through means of
landscaping berming, buffering, or other manner.
               4.   Density. The minimum net density for the total development
shall be 2 units per acre with a maximum density of 4 units per net acre. When
calculating net density exclude from gross acres wetlands and water bodies,
public park dedication, arterial streets and natural resources mapped as the
Greenway Corridor on the Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
            b.   General standards for approval.
               1.   A rezoning will be required for all R-3 development. The
rezoning shall be considered at the same time as a site plan review and/or
preliminary or final plat review. A rezoning to R-3 cannot be approved
independently. The City may approve the rezoning only if it finds that the
development satisfies all of the requirements in this section and all of the
following requirements:
                  (a)   The rezoning to R-3 is an effective treatment of the
development possibilities on the project site and the development plan provides
for the preservation or creation of unique amenities.
                  (b)   The rezoning to R-3 and associated development plan is
prepared in a manner that harmonizes with an existing or proposed development
in the areas surrounding the project including connections to natural
resources, open space and trails.
                  (c)   The R-3 rezoning and development plan, using a range of
lot sizes, provides better adaptation to physical and aesthetic conditions of
the site.
                  (d)   The R-3 rezoning and development plan provides a better
mix of lot sizes, house styles in an overall integrated design to achieve a
higher quality development.
         (6)   Exception. R-3 zoned areas within the Critical Area Boundary as
shown the Future Land Use Plan shall maintain a minimum lot area of 20,000
square feet.
         (7)   The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-
3 District subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set
forth in this Code:
 
                                      Single-Family          Two-Family
Minimum lot size (SF)                 6,000 - 10,000 sq. ft. 15,000 sq. ft.
Minimum lot width at setback (SF)     65 feet                80 feet
Minimum lot frontage at street        50 feet                60 feet
Minimum corner lot frontage           75 feet
Maximum impervious surface            50%                    40%
Living area or side loaded garage     20 feet                20 feet
Front porch (120 sq. ft.)             20 feet                20 feet
Garage front                          25 feet                25 feet
Side yards                            7.5 feet               7.5 feet
Side yard corner lots                 20 feet
Rear                                  20 feet                20 feet
Maximum height (as measured from the  35 feet                35 feet
midpoint on a hipped or pitched roof)
 
 
Setbacks -  Dwelling - Detached
Living area                      20 feet
Front porch                      15 feet
Garage                           25 feet
Side to dwelling                 10 feet
Side to non-dwelling             10 feet
Rear                             20 feet
Dwelling maximum height          35 feet
Setbacks -  Dwelling - Attached
Front, side or rear to a street* 30 feet
Side to dwelling                 10 feet
Side to non-dwelling             10 feet
Rear                             20 feet
* minimum setback to an arterial street is 50 feet
 
            a.   Front yard (detached single-family). The front yard setback
for living area in an R-3 District shall be 25 feet. The setback may be reduced
to 20 feet if the following conditions are met:
               1.   The setback reduction is for an attached living area or
porch to the principal structure, not including the garage, which does not
exceed a total of 120 square feet of above grade finished livable space.
               2.   The exterior materials of the proposed living area or porch
are consistent or complementary in color, texture and quality with those
visible at the front of the dwelling.
               3.   The roof of the proposed living area or porch is properly
proportioned to and integrated with the roof of the dwelling.
               4.   The structure does not adversely affect drainage on the lot
or neighboring properties.
            b.   Side yard (detached single-family). The side yard setback in
an R-3 District shall be 10 feet. The setback may be reduced to 5 feet if the
following conditions are met:
               1.   The setback reduction is for the garage structure; and
               2.   There is a minimum of 15 feet between neighboring
structures.
            c.   Rear yard (detached single-family). The rear yard setback for
a principal structure in an R-3 District shall be 30 feet. The setback may be
reduced to 20 feet if the following conditions are met:
               1.   The setback reduction is for an attached living area to the
principal structure, not including the garage, that does not exceed a total of
300 square feet of above grade finished livable space.
               2.   There is a minimum of 40 feet measured at the closest
point, between the attached living area and the neighboring principal structure
and any attached living area to the rear.
               3.   The structure does not adversely affect drainage on the lot
or neighboring properties.
         (8)   Special minimum requirements - detached single-family.
            a.   A private 2 car garage with a minimum floor area of 440 square
feet shall be required to be built concurrent with the principal structure. The
maximum footprint of the garage shall not exceed the footprint of the living
area of the principal structure.
               1.   Two surface parking spaces shall be provided in a driveway
location.
               2.   For non-residential permitted or conditional uses, parking
shall be as required in Subsection
1001.19.
            b.   All developed properties shall display the street address on
at least 1 street frontage.
            c.   Newly constructed single-family homes (detached) shall be
constructed with the design elements as required in R-1 Single Family
Residential District.
         (9)   Special minimum requirements for attached dwelling units.
            a.   Unit size. The following unit size shall apply:
               1.   Floor area: 500 square foot minimum floor area for
efficiency apartment units. Minimum 800 square feet for a 1-bedroom unit plus
100 square feet for each additional bedroom. Seven hundred square foot minimum
floor area for 1-bedroom apartment dwelling units in retirement housing
developments, plus 100 square feet for each additional bedroom. Garages,
breezeways and porch floor spaces shall not be credited in determining the
required floor area of units.
            b.   Unit width. The minimum width of a dwelling unit within the R-
3 District shall be 25 feet.
            c.   Unit construction.
               1.   Subdivision requests. Building elevations and floor plans
shall be furnished with subdivision requests illustrating exterior building
material and colors to demonstrate compliance of this Code. Building floor
plans shall identify the interior storage space within each unit.
               2.   Decks or porches. Provision shall be made for possible
decks, porches or additions as part of the initial dwelling unit building
plans. The unit lot shall be configured and sized to include decks or porches.
               3.   Minimum overhang. In case of a gable roof, a minimum 12
inch soffit shall be required.
               4.   Exterior building finish. The exterior of attached/townhome
dwelling units shall include a variation in building materials which are to be
distributed throughout the building facades and coordinated into the
architectural design of the structure to create an architecturally balanced
appearance. In addition, attached/townhome dwelling structures shall comply
with the following requirements:
                  (a)   A minimum of 25% of the combined area of all building
facades of a structure shall have an exterior finish of brick, stucco and/or
natural or artificial stone.
                  (b)   Except for brick, stucco, and/or natural or artificial
stone, no single building facade shall have more than 75% of 1 type of exterior
finish.
                  (c)   Except for brick, stucco, and/or natural or artificial
stone, no townhome dwelling structure shall have more than 60% of all building
facades of 1 type of exterior finish.
                  (d)   For the purpose of this section and material
calculations:
                     i.   The area of the building facade shall not include
area devoted to windows, entrance doors, garage doors, or roof areas.
                     ii.   Variations in texture or style (i.e., lap siding
versus shake shingle siding) shall be considered as different materials meeting
the requirements of this section.
                     iii.   Integral colored split face (rock face) concrete
block shall not qualify for meeting the brick, stucco and/or natural or
artificial stone material requirements.
               5.   Color. Each attached/townhome building shall feature a
broad array of colors, including earth tones, muted natural colors found in
surrounding landscape or other colors consistent with the adjacent
neighborhood. Buildings in proximity to each other shall not look alike in
terms of color of siding, accent and roofing materials. The home under
consideration will be compared to 2 homes on 2 lots on either side of it and to
the 3 homes directly facing it.
               6.   Facades and walls. Each attached/townhome dwelling unit
shall be articulated with projections, recesses, covered doorways, balconies,
covered box or bay windows or other similar features, dividing large facades
and walls into human scaled proportions similar to adjacent single-family
dwellings.
               7.   Roofs. Each attached/townhome building shall feature a
combination of primary and secondary roofs. Primary roofs shall be articulated
by at least 1 of the following elements:
                  (a)   Changes in place and elevation.
                  (b)   Dormers or gables.
                  (c)   Transitions to secondary roofs over entrances, garages,
porches, bay windows.
               8.   Garages.
                  (a)   Each dwelling unit shall include an attached garage.
                  (b)   Garages shall comply with the following minimum size
standards:
                     i.   For dwellings with basements: 440 square feet.
                     ii.   For dwellings without basements: 540 square feet.
                     iii.   Garages shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width.
            d.   Outside storage. Outside storage shall be allowed only in
designated areas which are screened in accordance with Subsection
1001.24 of this Code and under the ownership of the property owners’
association subject to other applicable provisions of this Code.
         (10)   Common areas. The following minimum requirements shall be
observed in the R-3 District governing common areas:
            a.   Ownership. All common areas within an R-3 development not
dedicated to the public including, but not limited to, open space, driveways,
private drives, parking areas, play areas, and the like, shall be owned in 1 of
the following manners:
               1.   Twinhome and townhome subdivision common areas shall be
owned by the owners of each unit lot, with each owner of a unit having an equal
and undivided interest in the common area.
            b.   Homeowners’ association. A homeowners’ association shall be
established for all townhome developments within the R-3 District, subject to
review and approval of the City Attorney, and shall be responsible for all
exterior building maintenance, approval of any exterior architectural
modifications, landscaping, snow clearing and regular maintenance of private
driveways and other areas owned in common when there is more than 1 individual
property owner having interest within the development.
Subd. 6   Medium Density Residential District (RM)
         (1)   Purpose. The purpose of the RM, Medium Density Residential
District is to allow a variety of housing types including single-family
attached and detached dwelling and multi-family with a minimum net density of 6
units per acre and maximum net density of 12 units per acre.
         (2)   Permitted uses. In addition to other uses specifically
identified elsewhere in this Code, the following are permitted uses in an RM
District:
            a.   Public parks, trails, playfields, playgrounds, and directly
related buildings and structures.
            b.   Residential facility serving 6 or fewer persons in a single-
family detached dwelling.
            c.   Single-family detached dwellings.
            d.   More than 1 principal building on a base lot.
            e.   Twin, threeplex and fourplex multiple-family units.
            f.   Townhomes with no more than 6 dwelling units per structure if
in a row or no more than 8 dwelling units if back to back, with each having a
separate entrance.
         (3)   Permitted accessory uses.  In addition to other uses
specifically identified elsewhere in this Code, the following are permitted
accessory uses in the RM District:
            a.   All permitted accessory uses as allowed within the R-1 Zoning
District, except that:
               1.   Only those accessory buildings, structures, or fences owned
and maintained by a homeowners’ association shall be erected on a common base
lot or on an individual unit lot for 2-family, townhome dwellings.
         (4)   Conditional uses. In addition to other uses specifically
identified elsewhere in this Code, the following are conditional uses in an RM
District and require a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth
in and regulated by Subsection
1001.23 of this Code.
            a.   All conditional uses as allowed within the R-1 Zoning
District.
            b.   Personal wireless service antenna and towers as regulated by
Subsection
1001.21 of this Code.
         (5)   Lot requirements and setbacks. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in an RM District subject to additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Code:
            a.   Minimum lot requirements.
               1.   Lot area.
                  (a)   Detached single-family: 9,000 square feet;
                  (b)   Multiple-family dwelling: 43,560 square feet or 1 acre;
                  (c)   Attached townhouse: 7,500 square feet per unit, or no
minimum lot size if common site area owned and maintained by a homeowner’s
association.
                  (d)   Lot width.
                     i.   Detached single-family: 65 feet;
                     ii.   Multiple-family dwelling: 100 feet;
                     iii.   Attached townhouse: no established minimum.
               2.   Setbacks.
                  (a)   Principal structure.
                     i.   Front yard:
                        1.   Arterials: 50 feet from the public right-of-way;
                        2.   Collector street: 30 feet from the public right-
of-way;
                        3.   Local street: 30 feet from the public right-of-
way;
                        4.   Private street: 30 feet from the back of the curb
or edge of pavement;
                        5.   Internal: 20 feet between attached or multi-family
principal structures separated by common area.
                     ii.   Side yard:
                        1.   Single-family dwelling: 10 feet (unless abutting a
side street 20 feet);
                        2.   Multiple-family dwelling: 15 feet (unless abutting
a side street 20 feet).
                     iii.   Side street:
                        1.   Single-family dwelling: 20 feet;
                        2.   Multiple-family dwelling: 20 feet.
                     iv.   Rear yard: 25 feet.
                     v.   Internal:  20 feet between principal structures.
               3.   Building height.
                  (a)   Principal structures: shall be limited to a maximum
height of 45 feet or 3 stories, whichever is less.
         (6)   Special minimum requirements - single-family.
            a.   All single family development in RM shall follow the same
special minimum requirements for single family as listed in R-3.
         (7)   Special minimum requirements for single-family attached, twin,
threeplex and fourplex multiple-family units and townhomes.
            a.   Unit size. The following unit size shall apply:
               1.   Floor area: 500 square foot minimum floor area for
efficiency apartment units. Minimum 800 square feet for a 1-bedroom unit plus
100 square feet for each additional bedroom. Seven hundred square foot minimum
floor area for 1-bedroom apartment dwelling units in retirement housing
developments, plus 100 square feet for each additional bedroom. Garages,
breezeways and porch floor spaces shall not be credited in determining the
required floor area of units.
            b.   Unit width. The minimum width of a dwelling unit within the RM
District shall be 25 feet.
            c.   Unit construction.
               1.   Subdivision requests. Building elevations and floor plans
shall be furnished with subdivision requests illustrating exterior building
material and colors to demonstrate compliance of this Code. Building floor
plans shall identify the interior storage space within each unit.
               2.   Decks or porches. Provision shall be made for possible
decks, porches or additions as part of the initial dwelling unit building
plans. The unit lot shall be configured and sized to include decks or porches.
               3.   Minimum overhang. In case of a gable roof, a minimum 12
inch soffit shall be required.
               4.   Exterior building finish. The exterior of attached/townhome
dwelling units shall include a variation in building materials which are to be
distributed throughout the building facades and coordinated into the
architectural design of the structure to create an architecturally balanced
appearance. In addition, attached/townhome dwelling structures shall comply
with the following requirements:
                  (a)   A minimum of 25% of the combined area of all building
facades of a structure shall have an exterior finish of brick, stucco and/or
natural or artificial stone. This percent shall increase to 40% for all 2-story
structures and above and any buildings with 4 or more units.
                  (b)   Except for brick, stucco, and/or natural or artificial
stone, no single building facade shall have more than 75% of 1 type of exterior
finish.
                  (c)   Except for brick, stucco, and/or natural or artificial
stone, no townhome dwelling structure shall have more than 60% of all building
facades of 1 type of exterior finish.
                  (d)   For the purpose of this section and material
calculations:
                     i.   The area of the building facade shall not include
area devoted to windows, entrance doors, garage doors, or roof areas.
                     ii.   Variations in texture or style (i.e., lap siding
versus shake shingle siding) shall be considered as different materials meeting
the requirements of this section.
                     iii.   Integral colored split face (rock face) concrete
block shall not qualify for meeting the brick, stucco and/or natural or
artificial stone material requirements.
            d.   Color. Each attached/townhome building shall feature a broad
array of colors, including earth tones, muted natural colors found in
surrounding landscape or other colors consistent with the adjacent
neighborhood. Homes in proximity to each other shall not look alike in terms of
color of siding, accent and roofing materials. The home under consideration
will be compared to 2 homes on 2 lots on either side of it and to the 3 homes
directly facing it.
            e.   Facades and walls. Each attached/townhome dwelling unit shall
be articulated with projections, recesses, covered doorways, balconies, covered
box or bay windows or other similar features, dividing large facades and walls
into human scaled proportions similar to adjacent single-family dwellings.
            f.   Roofs. Each attached/townhome building shall feature a
combination of primary and secondary roofs. Primary roofs shall be articulated
by at least 1 of the following elements:
               1.   Changes in place and elevation.
               2.   Dormers or gables.
               3.   Transitions to secondary roofs over entrances, garages,
porches, bay windows.
            g.   Garages.
               1.   Each dwelling unit shall include an attached garage.
               2.   Garages shall comply with the following minimum size
standards:
                  (a)   For dwellings with basements: 440 square feet.
                  (b)   For dwellings without basements: 540 square feet.
                  (c)   Garages shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width.
            h.   Outside Storage. Outside storage shall be allowed only in
designated areas which are screened in accordance with Subsection
1001.24 of this Code and under the ownership of the property owners’
association subject to other applicable provisions of this Code.
            i.   Utilities.
               1.   Underground or exterior service: All utilities serving an
RM subdivision, including telephone, electricity, gas and telecable shall be
installed underground. Exterior utility meters and/or fixtures shall be located
in interior side or rear yards when possible and shall be screened from view of
adjacent properties and the public right-of-way.
               2.   Public utility service: Separate public utility services
shall be provided to each unit unless exempted by the City Engineer.
               3.   Water connection: Individual unit shutoff valves shall be
provided.
               4.   Sewer connection: Where more than 1 unit is served by a
sanitary sewer service, all maintenance and cleaning shall be the
responsibility of the property owners’ association or owners.
            j.   Streets and drive areas shall follow requirements in
Section 1002.
            k.   Guest parking. At minimum, ½ of guest parking spaces per unit
shall be provided in an off street parking lot or private drive at locations
dispersed within the development to provide convenient access to individual
dwelling units. The design and location of the off street parking shall be
between or to the side of buildings in a manner compatible with surrounding
dwelling units, including (but not limited to) a minimum 15 foot setback from
principal buildings, decks, patios or other open spaces intended for active
use. Guest parking areas shall be screened in conformance with the requirements
of Subsection
1001.19.
            l.   Parking lot screening.
               1.   The light from automobile headlights and other sources
shall be screened whenever it may be directed onto residential windows.
               2.   When required parking areas abut any Residential District,
the edge nearest the lot line shall be completely screened to a height of at
least 3 ½ feet above the parking grade. Such screening shall either be
constructed of durable building materials designed in harmony with the
principal structure or accomplished through use of earth mounds and/or
landscape materials as approved.
               3.   When the design of the site is such that parking occurs in
the front yard, a minimum of 10 feet landscaped area shall be provided between
parking and building, in addition to the required setbacks.
            m.   Recreational facilities. On site recreational facilities, such
as swimming pools, tennis courts, play equipment, walking trails, gardens, and
basketball courts, that are suitable for the projected population of the
development shall be provided when the nearest public park is more than ½ mile
or across a thoroughfare or arterial roadway from the development.
         (8)   Common areas. The following minimum requirements shall be
observed in the RM District governing common areas:
            a.   Ownership. All common areas within an RM development not
dedicated to the public including, but not limited to, open space, driveways,
private drives, parking areas, play areas, and the like, shall be owned in 1 of
the following manners:
               1.   Condominium ownership pursuant to M.S. § 515A.1-106, as may
be amended from time to time.
               2.   Twinhome, townhome subdivision common areas shall be owned
by the owners of each unit lot, with each owner of a unit having an equal and
undivided interest in the common area.
            b.   Homeowners’ association. A homeowners’ association shall be
established for all townhome developments within the RM District, subject to
review and approval of the City Attorney, and shall be responsible for all
exterior building maintenance, approval of any exterior architectural
modifications, landscaping, snow clearing and regular maintenance of private
driveways and other areas owned in common when there is more than 1 individual
property owner having interest within the development.
Subd. 7   High Density Residential District (RH)
         (1)   Purpose. The purpose of the RH, High Density Residential
District, is to allow development of multi-family housing. It is intended that
this district provide a mix of life-cycle housing choices throughout the City
with a minimum net density of 10 units per acre or greater.
         (2)   Permitted uses.
            a.   Public parks, trails, playfields, playgrounds, and directly
related buildings and structures.
            b.   Residential facility serving 6 or fewer persons.
            c.   More than 1 principal building on a base lot.
            d.   Townhomes with no more than 6 dwelling units per structure if
in a row or no more than 8 dwelling units if back to back, with each having a
separate entrance.
            e.   Dwelling, multiple-family (apartment, condominium,
cooperative).
         (3)   Accessory uses.
            a.   Day care facility, licensed - serving 7 to 14 persons.
            b.   Home occupations.
            c.   Residential facility, licensed - serving 7 to 10 persons.
            d.   Only those accessory buildings, structures, or fences owned
and maintained by a homeowners’ association shall be erected on a common base
lot or on an individual unit lot for 2-family, townhome dwellings.
         (4)   Conditional uses. In addition to other uses specifically
identified elsewhere in this Code, the following are conditional uses in an RH
District and require a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth
in and regulated by Subsection
1001.23.
            a.   All conditional uses as allowed within the R-M Zoning
District.
         (5)   Lot requirements and setbacks. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in an RH District subject to additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Code:
 
Minimum lot size                     2 acres
Minimum width*                       100 feet
Maximum impervious surface (per lot) 65%
* overall development, individual lot may be less
** 7,500 square feet per detached or attach townhome
Attached townhome - no established min. lot width
 
 
Setbacks -  Dwelling
Front, side or rear to a street** 50/40
Side                              10 feet + .25 for each 1 foot of structure
                                  height in excess of 30 feet
Rear                              30 feet
Dwelling maximum height           50 feet
** arterial or collector/local streets
 
         (6)   Special minimum requirements for multi-family residential
developments.
            a.   Unit size.
               1.   Floor area: 500 square foot minimum floor area for
efficiency apartment units. Minimum 800 square feet for a 1-bedroom unit plus
100 square feet for each additional bedroom. Seven hundred square foot minimum
floor area for 1-bedroom apartment dwelling units in retirement housing
developments, plus 100 square feet for each additional bedroom. Garages,
breezeways and porch floor spaces shall not be credited in determining the
required floor area of units.
            b.   Utilities. All multiple-family dwellings shall be served by
public sanitary sewer and water.
            c.   Parking. The design and maintenance of off street parking
areas and the required number of parking spaces shall be in accordance with
Subsection 1001.19 of this Code. Private driveways for garages in townhouse
developments shall be a minimum of 20 feet in length to allow vehicle parking
on the driveway.
            d.   Trash handling and recycling. All trash, recyclable materials,
and trash and recyclable materials handling equipment shall be stored within
the principal structure, totally screened from public view by the principal
building, or stored within an accessory structure constructed of building
materials compatible with the principal structure, enclosed by a roof, and
readily served through swinging doors. Compactors that are attached to the
principal structure shall be totally screened from eye level view from public
streets and adjacent properties by a screening wall constructed of the same
building material as the principal structure.
            e.   On site screening. All mechanical equipment, utility meters,
storage and service areas and similar features shall be completely screened
from the eye level view from adjacent properties and public streets, or
designed to be compatible with the architectural treatment of the principal
structure.
            f.   Building design and materials - multi-family (stacked). All
buildings shall be designed to accomplish the goals and policies of the
Comprehensive Plan. Building materials shall be attractive in appearance,
durable, and of a quality which is both compatible with adjacent structures and
consistent with the City’s standards for the district in which it is located.
All buildings shall be of good aesthetic and architectural quality, as
demonstrated by the inclusion of elements such as accent materials, entrance
and window treatments, contrasting colors, irregular building shapes and
rooflines, or other architectural features in the overall architectural
concept.
               1.   Major exterior surfaces on all walls shall include a
minimum of 50% of the combined area of all building facades of a structure
shall contain following permitted major exterior materials: face brick (glazed
or unglazed), clay faced tile, stone masonry (granite, limestone, marble,
slate, sandstone, or quartzite).
               2.   Accent materials may include: finished texture stucco
(cement or synthetic), exterior finished wood siding (painted, stained, or
weather sealed), exterior finished metal siding (not including sheet metal of
any kind), exterior finished vinyl siding or fiber cement siding in lap or
panel design (color impregnated or painted). Panel seam lines shall be
architecturally integrated into the building design so that they are not
visible. Seam lines can either be filled, covered with accent material or some
other method to make seam lines invisible. Accenting materials and design shall
be included on all facades.
               3.   All building and roofing materials shall meet current
accepted industry standards, and tolerances, and shall be subject to review and
approval by  the City for quality, durability, and aesthetic appeal. The
applicant shall submit to the City product samples, color building elevations,
and associated drawings which illustrate the construction techniques to be used
in the installation of such materials.
               4.   If complementary building styles, materials, and color
schemes are proposed for a development, the developer shall submit to the City
a plan showing the distribution of the styles, materials, and colors throughout
the development.
               5.   All townhome designs shall comply with the standards in
Subdivision 5.
            g.   Parking lot screening.
               1.   The light from automobile headlights and other sources
shall be screened whenever it may be directed onto residential windows.
               2.   When required parking areas abut any Residential District,
the edge (except for lots located in exception as described herein) nearest the
lot line shall be completely screened to a height of at least 3 ½ feet above
the parking grade. Such screening shall either be constructed of durable
building materials designed in harmony with the principal structure or
accomplished through use of earth mounds and/or landscape materials as
approved.
               3.   When the design of the site is such that parking occurs in
the front yard, a minimum of 10 feet landscaped area shall be provided between
parking and building, in addition to the required setbacks.
            h.   Setbacks in townhouse developments. Buildings in townhouse
developments shall be located at least 20 feet apart and 20 feet from the back
of the curb of private roadways.
            i.   Recreational facilities. On site recreational facilities, such
as swimming pools, tennis courts, play equipment, walking trails, gardens, and
basketball courts, that are suitable for the projected population of the
development shall be provided when the nearest public park is more than ½ mile
or across a thoroughfare or arterial roadway from the development.
            j.   Roadway and driveway design. All private roadways in multi-
family developments shall have a design speed of 25 miles per hour, and shall
have a maximum grade of 7%. All private driveways for garages in townhouse
developments shall have a maximum grade of 11%.
         (7)   Common areas. The following minimum requirements shall be
observed in the RH District governing common areas:
            a.   Ownership. All common areas within an RH development not
dedicated to the public including, but not limited to, open space, driveways,
private drives, parking areas, play areas, and the like, shall be owned in 1 of
the following manners:
               1.   Condominium ownership pursuant to M.S. § 515A.1-106, as may
be amended from time to time.
               2.   Twinhome, townhome subdivision common areas shall be owned
by the owners of each unit lot, with each owner of a unit having an equal and
undivided interest in the common area.
            b.   Homeowners’ association. A homeowners’ association shall be
established for all townhome developments within the RM District, subject to
review and approval of the City Attorney, and shall be responsible for all
exterior building maintenance, approval of any exterior architectural
modifications, landscaping, snow clearing and regular maintenance of private
driveways and other areas owned in common when there is more than 1 individual
property owner having interest within the development.
Subd. 8   Manufactured Housing District (RMH)
         (1)   Permitted uses. Within any RMH Manufactured Housing District, no
structure or land shall be used except for the following purpose:
            a.   Manufactured homes.
         (2)   Permitted accessory uses. Within any RMH Manufactured Housing
District, no structure or land shall be used as an accessory use except for
those accessory uses permitted in an R-1 District.
         (3)   Conditional uses. Within any RMH Manufactured Housing District,
no structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by conditional
use permit:
            a.   Mobile home sales.
            b.   Towers as regulated in Subsection
1001.21.
         (4)   Interim uses. Within any RMH Manufactured Housing District, no
structure or land shall be used for the following uses except by interim use
permit:
            a.   Interim uses permitted in the R-1 District.
         (5)   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements.
 
Lot area (interior)         3,600 sq. ft.
Lot area (corner)           4,500 sq. ft.
Lot width (interior)        40 feet
Lot width (corner)          50 feet
Setback Principal Structure
   Front yard            15 feet
   Side yard             10 feet
   Side yard (street)    15 feet
   Rear yard             10 feet
 
 
Setback Parking
   Front yard      10 feet
   Side yard       5 feet
   Side yard (stree10 feet
   Rear yard       5 feet
 
         (6)   Manufactured housing support and tie-down systems. The Minnesota
Department of Administration Building Code Division Rules for Manufactured
Housing Support and Tie-Down Systems, authorized by M.S. §§ 327.31 to 327.34,
as may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and made a
part of this Code as if fully set forth herein. All manufactured housing
erected or which changes ownership after the effective date of this Code shall
be equipped with an anchoring and support system as defined and approved by
state rules, and shall further be equipped with skirting to cover the
undercarriage of the manufactured home. It shall be unlawful for anyone to own
or occupy a manufactured home in violation of this Code. Owners and operators
of manufactured home parks shall not allow any manufactured home to remain in a
manufactured home park in violation of this Code.
         (7)   Performance standards for manufactured home parks.
            a.   The minimum street width within RMH Districts shall be 24
feet. Streets shall be surfaced with poured in place concrete or an approved
alternative.
            b.   A buffer yard of not less than 30 feet in width shall be
landscaped with appropriate grass, shrubbery and trees around the entire
perimeter of the manufactured home park. This buffer yard shall be maintained
by the owner of the manufactured home park.
            c.   All waste material, debris, refuse, garbage, fuel or materials
not currently in use for construction shall be stored indoors, or totally
screened from the eye-level view from public streets and adjacent properties.
            d.   All manufactured home parks shall have a storm shelter or
evacuation plan approved by the City.
            e.   Parking:
               1.   Each manufactured home site shall have off-street parking
space surfaced with concrete, bituminous or approved equivalent for 2
automobiles.
               2.   Each manufactured home park shall maintain a hard surfaced
off-street parking lot for guests of occupants of at least 1 space for each 5
coach sites.
               3.   Access drives off roads to all parking spaces and
manufactured home sites shall be surfaced with concrete, bituminous or approved
equivalent according to specifications established by the City.
            f.   Utilities:
               1.   All manufactured homes shall be served by a public water
and sanitary sewer system.
               2.   All utilities shall be underground. There shall be no
overhead wires or supporting poles except for those essential for street or
other lighting purposes.
               3.   Access shall be provided to allow the inspection of
plumbing, electrical facilities and related mobile home equipment.
            g.   The park shall have a street lighting plan approved by the
City.
            h.   All manufactured home parks shall have at least 10% of the
land area developed for recreational use (tennis courts, children’s play
equipment, swimming pool, golf green, and the like) developed and maintained at
the owner/operator’s expense.
         (8)   Responsibilities of park management.
            a.   The person to whom the State Health Department issues a
license for a manufactured home park shall operate the park in compliance with
the Subsection and regulations issued hereunder and shall provide adequate
supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair
and in a clean and sanitary condition.
            b.   The park management shall notify park occupants of all
applicant provisions of this Subsection and inform them of their duties and
responsibilities under this Code and regulations issued hereunder.
Subd. 9   Agricultural Districts (A-1) and Special Agricultural District (SA)
         (1)   Intent. The A-1 and SA zones are intended for agricultural use
in areas that are not served by public sewer and water. The SA zone is for
long-term agriculture and enrollment in the State Agricultural Preserve
Program. Owners of at least 40 acres of agricultural land or 10 acres of land,
devoted to agricultural use and contiguous to at least 40 acres of special
agricultural land, may petition the City to zone the property Special
Agriculture. The City will review the Dayton Comprehensive Plan, sanitary sewer
phasing, the suitability of the land and other factors to determine the
suitability of rezoning actions to SA and A-1.
         (2)   Permitted uses. See
Table 5.1 for a list of permitted uses.
         (3)   Permitted accessory uses. Uses such as those listed below that
are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to the permitted or approved
conditional use. Also see
Table 5.1 for a list of other permitted accessory uses.
            a.   Private garages and agricultural accessory buildings, in
accordance with district requirements.
            b.   The renting of rooms in a single-family detached dwelling by a
resident family for lodging purposes only and for the accommodation of not more
than 2 roomers.
            c.   Private swimming pools and tennis courts.
         (4)   Conditional uses. See
Table 5.1 for a listing of conditional/interim uses.
         (5)   District requirements.
 
                                    A-1 & SA
Minimum lot size                    40 acres
Minimum lot frontage                300 feet
Minimum corner lot front frontage   300 feet
Minimum lot width at setback        300 feet
Minimum lot depth                   330 feet
Maximum impervious surface coverage 10%/lot
Setbacks
Dwelling
Front, side or rear to a street*    30 feet
   Side                          10 feet
   Rear                          20 feet
 
         (6)   Essential Services Agricultural District (A-1E). The maximum lot
size of a single lot shall be 5 acres if zoned A-1E (Essential Services). The
only use on a lot zoned A-1E shall be essential services. All other
requirements of the A-1 zone shall apply.
Subd. 10   Special Homestead Agricultural District (A-2)
         (1)   Intent. A special homestead subdivision and rezoning to A-2 is
permitted to subdivide a homestead existing prior to January 1, 2004 from the
remainder of a nominally 40 acre or larger parcel (including road right-of-way)
when meeting the requirements outlined in this chapter of the City Code. The
intent is to allow subdivision of the homestead of a parcel from the remaining
acreage while maintaining a density of 1 unit per 40 acres by creating a
homestead parcel and a non-buildable outlot for the remainder of the nominally
40 acre or larger parcel. The homestead parcel will be required to result in
not less than 2.5 acres in size, and the remaining acreage, which is non-
buildable, would be required to result in not less than 20 acres in size and
platted as an outlot. The A-2 zone is intended for agricultural use in areas
that are not served by public sewer and water. The homestead parcel may be
reduced to 1.0 acre in size if the property has access to municipal sewer and
water services. The City will review the Dayton Comprehensive Plan, sanitary
sewer phasing, the suitability of the land and other factors to determine the
suitability of rezoning actions to A-2.
         (2)   Permitted uses. See
Table 5.1 for a list of permitted uses.
         (3)   Permitted accessory uses. Uses such as those listed below that
are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to the permitted or approved
conditional use. Also see
Table 5.1 for a list of other permitted accessory uses.
            a.   Private garages and agricultural accessory buildings, in
accordance with district requirements.
            b.   The renting of rooms in a single-family detached dwelling by a
resident family for lodging purposes only and for the accommodation of not more
than 2 roomers.
            c.   Private swimming pools and tennis courts.
         (4)   Conditional uses. See
Table 5.1 for a listing of conditional/interim uses.
         (5)   General district requirements.
 
                      Homestead Parcel Homestead Parcel  Non-Buildable Outlot
                                       (Sewer and Water)
                      The original parcel is required to be nominally 40 acres
Minimum district size including right-of-way if any, prior to the homestead and
                      non-buildable parcel lot split.
Minimum lot size      2.5 acres        1.0 acres         20 acres - required to
                                                         be an outlot
Minimum lot frontage  300 feet         180 feet          300 feet
Minimum corner lot    300 feet         300 feet          300 feet
front frontage
Minimum lot width at  300 feet         240 feet          300 feet
setback
Minimum lot depth     330 feet         120 feet          330 feet
Maximum impervious    30%/lot          30%/lot           Not applicable-no new
surface coverage                                         buildings permitted
 
            a.   Additional requirements.
               1.   The original parcel is required to be equal to or greater
than 40 acres including right-of-way if any, prior to the homestead and non-
buildable parcel lot split. A non-buildable outlot is required to be created
that is not less than 20 acres in size, and a homestead parcel is required to
be created that is not less than 2.5 acres in size or 1.0 acre in size if the
property has access to municipal sewer and water services.
               2.   If the homestead parcel created has been assessed for
public sewer and water the homestead parcel must connect to public sewer and
water.
               3.   Development restriction on non-buildable outlot. Remaining
acreage outlot shall not be homestead nor permitted any building permit until
the time as 1 of the following occurs:
                  (a)   The minimum lot size requirement of the zoning district
is reduced to allow subdivision; or
                  (b)   City sewer and water is available and proper rezoning
is completed.
               4.   Future road access requirement.
                  (a)   There shall be proof, submitted by the applicant and
subject to the review and approval of the City, that there is sufficient space
for at least 2 future 66 foot wide road right-of-way corridors, located in a
manner to allow efficient access points for future subdivision of the non-
buildable outlot and at least 250 feet apart, preferably further apart. Two
access points shall not be required when environmental conditions, as
determined by the City, prohibit 2 access points to a portion of the lot.
               5.   Required agreements/easements.
                  (a)   The applicant shall be required to enter into
agreements and documents drafted by the City Attorney, including, but not
limited to, restrictive covenants on the non-buildable outlot parcel, covenants
on the homesteaded parcel, and an agreement with the City that binds current
and future landowners. The above-mentioned agreements and documents shall
include, but are not limited to, the following terms:
                     i.   No further subdivision shall be permitted of the
homestead parcel and the non-buildable outlot until either:
                        1.   The minimum lot size requirement of the zoning
district is reduced to allow subdivision; or
                        2.   City sewer and water is available and proper
rezoning is completed.
                  (b)   The non-buildable outlot parcel shall be unbuildable
and no building permits shall be issued until the conditions in item 5.(a)
above are met.
               6.   Park dedication. The homestead parcel shall count as 1
dwelling unit, and park dedication and/or fees shall be due on the remaining
acreage parcel if and when either approval for the construction of a principal
dwelling is granted by the City on the non-buildable outlot, or approval for
subdivision of the non-buildable outlot is granted by the City. No park
dedication credit shall be given for the non-buildable outlot being a separate
legal parcel.
               7.   Other requirements. All other A-2 zoning and City, state
and federal rules and regulations shall be met.
               8.   Application processing.
                  (a)   Applicants shall submit a request for administrative
approval of the lot split, in accordance with Subsection
1002.02, including the required application, fees and escrow.
                  (b)   If the land is to be conveyed by metes and bounds,
applicants shall submit a request for a waiver allowing the conveyance in
accordance with Subsection
1002.09, Subd. 3. Information shall be submitted detailing how the future road
access requirement noted above will be met.
         (6)   Dwelling setbacks: A-2 Homestead Parcel only.   
 
Front, side or rear to a street* 30 feet
Side                             10 feet
Rear                             20 feet
* Minimum setback to an arterial street is 50 feet.
 
         (7)   Dwelling - maximum height. 35 feet.
Subd. 11   Historic Village Residential District (RO)
         (1)   Intent. The RO zone is intended for residential development and
redevelopment within and immediately adjacent to the Historic Village Area
(vicinity of the CSAH 13 and CSAH 12 intersection and the Crow and Mississippi
River confluence). Development and redevelopment of the area should be based on
the Historic Village Plan. The village area is anticipated to be a low-density
neighborhood of predominantly single-family residences, low-density multi
family residences and senior housing surrounding a main street style commercial
core centered on Robinson Street. The RO zone is intended for areas that are
served by public sewer and water.
         (2)   Permitted uses. See
Table 5.1 for a list of permitted uses.
         (3)   Permitted accessory uses. Uses such as those listed below that
are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to the permitted or approved
conditional use. See
Table 5.1 for a list of other permitted accessory uses.
            a.   Private garages and accessory storage buildings in conformance
with district requirements.
            b.   The renting of rooms in a single-family detached dwelling by a
resident family for lodging purposes only and for the accommodation of not more
than 2 roomers.
            c.   Private swimming pools and tennis courts.
         (4)   Conditional uses. See
Table 5.1 for a listing of conditional/interim uses.
         (5)   District requirements.
 
Minimum district size                                      1 acre
Minimum lot size - detached single-family                  9,000 sq. ft.
Minimum lot size - attached single-family and townhouse    6,000 sq. ft.
Minimum lot area - non-residential                         4,500 sq. ft.
Minimum land area per multi-family unit                    4,500 sq. ft.
Minimum lot frontage - detached single-family              60 feet
Minimum lot frontage - non-residential                     40 feet
Minimum corner lot front frontage - detached single-family 80 feet
Minimum lot depth - detached single-family                 120 feet
 
         (6)   Dwelling setbacks.
 
Front, side or rear to a street    30 feet
Side*                              10 feet dwelling and 5 feet non-dwelling
Rear*                              20 feet
Decks and attached open structures
Front, side or rear to a street    20 feet
Side                               5 feet
Rear                               10 feet
* May be reduced to 0 feet for attached single-family, townhomes and non-
residential uses when approved as part of a final site and building plan or
part of an approved planned development.
 
         (7)   Non-residential buildings.
 
Front (Robinson St.) 0-5 feet required build-to line for new construction
Side (other streets) 10 feet
Side                 10 feet
 
         (8)   Sign regulations. Refer to Subsection
1001.20.
         (9)   Parking regulations.
            a.   For single-family and townhouses:
               1.   Two spaces shall be provided per dwelling unit in a garage
or at a location where a garage can be constructed.
               2.   Two surface parking spaces shall be provided in a driveway
location.
               3.   Additional guest parking areas may be required for
townhouse development.
            b.   For multi-family and non-residential uses, parking shall be as
specified in Subsection
1001.19.
         (10)   Special provisions and performance standards.
            a.   Refer to Subsection
1001.14.
            b.   All lots must front on a public street or be part of an
approved planned development.
            c.   No more than 1 principal use shall be permitted on a platted
lot or parcel of record.
            d.   All developed properties shall display the street address on
at least 1 street frontage.
            e.   All dwellings must be connected to municipal water and
sanitary sewer.
            f.   Attached town homes and multi-family development of 4 or more
units in the RO zone must be:
               1.   Part of an approved final site plan and building plans or
development plan;
               2.   Be part of a homeowners association; and
               3.   The association is responsible for all exterior maintenance
and repair.
Subd. 12   Allowable Uses; Table 5.1
 
Table 5.1                               N-Not Permitted
Residential - Agricultural Use          P-Permitted
Classifications                         C-Conditional or Interim Use Permit
                                        A-Accessory
                                 Zoning District
                                 SA A-1 A-2 RO
Accessory buildings              A  A   A   A
Agriculture                      P  P   P   N
Bed and breakfast                N  C   C   C
Boarding houses                  N  C   C   C
Bus/transit station              N  C   C   C
Cemeteries                       N  C   C   N
Commercial composting and        C  C   C   N
landspreading
Commercial recreation            N  C   C   N
Day care 13 or fewer persons1    A  A   A   A
Day care 14 or more persons1     C  C   C   C
Essential services               P  P   P   P
Fences*                          A  A   A   A
Feedlots and poultry facilities1 C  C   C   N
Golf courses/driving ranges      N  N   N   N
 
 
Table 5.1                                   N-Not Permitted
Residential - Agricultural Use              P-Permitted
Classifications                             C-Conditional or Interim Use Permit
                                            A-Accessory
                                     Zoning District
                                     SA A-1 A-2 RO
Home occupation                      A  A   A   A
Home extended business               C  C   C   C
Horse boarding and riding facilities C  C   C   N
Junk yards                           N  N   N   N
Kennels                              C  C   C   N
Mining                               C  C   C   N
Mobile home park                     N  N   N   N
Multi-family attached residences     N  N   N   C
Nursery wholesale                    C  C   C   N
Nursing homes                        N  N   N   C
Park and public uses                 P  P   P   P
Public utility stations              P  P   P   C
Religious institutions               N  C   C   C
Residential care facility serving 6  A  A   A   A
or fewer people1
Residential care facility serving 7  N  N   N   N
or more people2
Restaurants and liquor establishment N  N   N   N
(accessory)
Schools                              N  N   N   C
Senior citizen housing               N  N   N   C
Single-family attached residences    N  N   N   C
Single-family detached residences    P  P   P   P
 
 
Table 5.1                                      N-Not Permitted
                                               P-Permitted
Residential - Agricultural Use Classifications C-Conditional or Interim Use
                                               Permit
                                               A-Accessory
                       Zoning District
                      SA A-1                  A-2 RO
Towers - amateur radio C  C                    C   C
Two-family dwellings   N  N                    N   C
NOTE: Any use not listed above as a permitted or conditional use is not
permitted; however uses that are not listed and are intrinsically similar
to a use listed above may be allowed when specifically approved by the City
Council.
Must be licensed by the State of Minnesota.
When part of a PUD.
*   For fences see fence guidelines in Section
1001.24 Subd. 7.
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-13-2010; Am. Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-26-2010; Am. Ord.
2012-06, passed 4- 24-2012; Am. Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-8-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-
04, passed 3-25-2014; Am. Ord. 2014-17, passed 11-24-2014; Am. Ord. 2016-03,
passed 1-12-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-05, passed 2-13-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed
4-10-2018)
1001.06   BUSINESS DISTRICT SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS.
Subd. 1   Special Requirements and Performance Standards in all Business
Districts
         (1)   Building design and materials. The architectural appearance,
including building character, permanence, massing, density and composition,
scale, construction materials, and functional plan of all principal buildings
shall comply with the Comprehensive Plan. Building materials shall be
attractive in appearance, of a durable finish, and be of a quality that is
compatible and designed to enhance the lot, the neighborhood and the community.
All buildings shall be of good aesthetic and architectural quality to ensure
they will maintain and enhance the property values of neighboring properties
and not adversely impact the community’s public health, safety and general
welfare.
      a.   Design elements. The building design must include architectural
interest through the use of a minimum of 3 of the following elements:
         1.   Accent materials;
         2.   A visually pleasing front entry that, in addition to doors, shall
be accented a minimum of 150 square feet around the door entrance for single
occupancy buildings and a minimum of 300 square feet total for the front of
multi-tenant buildings (this area shall be counted as 1 element);
         3.   Twenty-five percent window coverage on each front that faces a
street;
         4.   Contrasting, yet complementary material colors;
         5.   A combination of horizontal and vertical design features;
         6.   Irregular building shapes; or
         7.   Other architectural features in the overall architectural
concept.
      b.   Other design requirements.
         1.   All principal buildings shall have an entry on a street;
         2.   Buildings shall provide a base and top to their architecture;
         3.   The tops of buildings shall be articulated to minimize “box” like
images;
         4.   Buildings shall be architecturally unique and shall not be of a
corporate architecture (including roof patterns, corporate colors,
architectural elements, and similar treatments).
      c.   Accent materials. Accent materials shall be wrapped around walls
visible from public view. Painting shall not be substituted for visual relief,
accenting, or a required element. Walls shall be articulated thus no wall shall
exceed 100 feet in length without visual relief. Visual relief may be defined
as the incorporation of design features such as windows, horizontal and
vertical patterns, contrasting material colors, or varying wall depths. Use of
fiber cement trim, soffit and fascia shall be allowed as accent materials.
      d.   Major exterior materials. Major exterior materials of all walls
including face brick, stone, glass, stucco, synthetic stucco, fiber cement
vertical panel siding, architectural concrete and precast panels shall be
acceptable as the major exterior wall surface when they are incorporated into
an overall design of the building. Stucco, synthetic stucco or fiber cement
vertical panel siding shall not be allowed within 24 inches from grade.
Architectural metal may be considered with matte finish and with neutral or
earth tone colors. Fiber cement seam lines shall be architecturally integrated
into the building design so that they are not visible.
      Seam lines can be filled, covered by other accent material or other
method thereby making the seam lines invisible. Color impregnated decorative
block shall also be allowed as a major exterior wall material, and shall be
required to be sealed. All materials shall be color impregnated with the
exception of allowing architectural concrete precast panel systems and fiber
cement siding to be painted. Painting shall not be allowed on color
impregnated, major exterior materials. Request for approval of cast in place
systems shall be through a conditional use permit or Planned Unit Development,
whichever is deemed appropriate by City staff. If the architectural precast
panel systems are painted, they shall be properly prepared and maintained
regularly to prevent peeling, stripping, shading or any other form of
deterioration or discoloration. Proof of manufacturer’s painting specifications
shall be supplied prior to issuance of a building permit.
      e.   Restricted exterior materials. Unadorned pre-stressed concrete
panels whether smooth or raked, nondecorative concrete block, sheet metal,
corrugated metal or unfinished metal shall not be used as exterior materials.
This restriction shall apply to all principal structures and to all accessory
buildings except those accessory buildings not visible from any property line.
No more than 25% of any exterior wall on a building shall be fiber cement
siding, wood or metal accent material.
      f.   Roofs. Roofs which are exposed or an integral part of the building
aesthetics shall be constructed only of commercial grade asphalt shingles, wood
shingles, standing seam metal, slate, tile, or copper. Flat roofs, which are
generally parallel with the first floor elevation, are not subject to these
material limitations.
      g.   Building and roofing materials. All building and roofing materials
shall meet current accepted industry standards, and tolerances, and shall be
subject to review and approval by the City Planner for quality, durability, and
aesthetic appeal. For all new buildings and building exterior renovations, the
applicant shall submit to the City product samples, color building elevations,
and associated drawings which illustrate the construction techniques to be used
in the installation of such materials. Building and roofing materials not
specifically approved in this section may be allowed by a conditional use
permit or Planned Unit Development only after it is demonstrated that the
proposed material is equal to or better than approved materials. The long-range
maintenance of the proposed material shall be incorporated as a condition of
the approval and filed on the property.
   (2)   Trash and recyclable materials. All trash, recyclable materials, and
trash and recyclable materials handling equipment shall be stored within the
principal structure; 100% screened from public view by the principal building;
or stored within an accessory structure constructed of building materials
compatible with the principal structure enclosed by a roof, and overhead door
on tracks. Compactors shall be 100% screened from eye level view from public
streets and adjacent properties. Existing uses shall comply with the enclosure
requirements listed in this section within 6 months of receiving notice from
the City. For the purposes of this section, “trash” means “mixed municipal
solid waste” as defined under Subsection
1001.03, Subd. 2 of the City Code.
   (3)   Off street parking. Design and maintenance of off street parking areas
in accordance with Subsection
1001.19 of this Code.
   (4)   Accessory structures. Garages, accessory structures, screen walls and
exposed areas of retaining walls shall be of a similar type, quality and
appearance as the principal structure.
   (5)   Building mechanical equipment. The view of all rooftop equipment and
related piping, ducting, electrical and mechanical utilities abutting a street
on buildings constructed after January 1, 2010 shall be screened from the
ground level view. Screening may include parapet walls, penthouses, or other
architecturally integrated elements. Wood fencing or chain link with slats
shall not be used for screening. The term “ground level view” shall be defined
as the view of the building from the furthest point of the width of the right-
of-way from the property line(s) that abut a street. A cross-sectional drawing
shall be provided that illustrates the sight lines from the ground level view.
For buildings constructed prior to January 1, 2010 replacement of existing
units, remodeling, and building expansions, the ground level view of all
rooftop equipment and related piping, ducting, electrical and mechanical
utilities shall be painted to match the building, designed to be compatible
with the architectural treatment of the principal structure or screened by the
use of parapet walls. Wood fencing shall not be used for screening.
   (6)   Ground mechanical equipment. Ground mechanical equipment shall be 100%
screened from contiguous properties and adjacent streets by opaque landscaping,
or a screen wall shall be provided to be compatible with the architectural
treatment of the principal structure.
   (7)   Outdoor storage. There shall be no outdoor storage of either materials
or products, except through the issuance of an interim use permit.
   (8)   External loading and service areas. External loading and service areas
must be 100% screened from the ground-level view from contiguous residential or
commercial properties and adjacent streets, except at access points.
   (9)   Abutting districts. Wherever a B Business District abuts, or is across
the street from an R Residential District, a berm, fence or compact evergreen
trees or hedge or combination thereof, not less than 90% opaque at time of
installation, nor less than 6 feet in height, except adjacent to a street where
it shall be not less than 3 feet nor more than 4 feet in height shall be
erected and maintained. All screening shall comply with Subsection
1001.24.
   (10)   Headlight screening. The light from automobile headlights and other
sources shall be 100% screened whenever it may be directed onto adjacent
residential window.
   (11)   Pedestrian environment. Pedestrian connections to the surrounding
neighborhood shall be incorporated into neighborhood commercial development.
      a.   Pedestrian amenities shall be included in places where people
typically gather, including but not limited to, transit stops, building
entrances or street corners or abutting bike or pedestrian trail connections.
These spaces must include at least 2 of the following:
         1.   Patterned materials on walkways;
         2.   Shelters;
         3.   Trash receptacles;
         4.   Drinking fountains;
         5.   Pedestrian lighting;
         6.   Fountains, sculptures, mobiles, kiosks, or banners;
         7.   Street trees, flower boxes, or container landscaping.
      b.   Sidewalk connections shall be provided to and through the
development to existing and planned bus stops, trails, sidewalks, and adjacent
properties, where access exists or reasonable connections are possible. If a
parking lot lies between the building entry and an adjacent public street, a
pedestrian walkway at least 6 feet wide shall be provided between them. Clear
internal pedestrian circulation routes shall be provided on the site.
Subd. 2   Special Requirements and Performance Standards in B-2, B-3, and B-
4 Districts (where use is listed)
   (1)   Motor fuel stations shall be subject to the following standards:
      a.   Motor fuel facilities shall be installed in accordance with state
and City standards. Additionally, adequate space shall be provided to access
gas pumps and to allow maneuverability around the pumps. Underground storage
tanks are to be positioned to allow adequate access by motor fuel transports
and unloading operations which do not conflict with circulation, access and
other activities on site. Fuel pumps shall be installed on pump islands.
      b.   The total height of any overhead canopy or weather protection shall
not exceed 20 feet in height.
      c.   No sales or rental of motor vehicles or trailers or campers shall be
permitted.
      d.   All goods for sale by a motor fuel station convenience store other
than petroleum based products required for the operation and maintenance of
motor vehicles shall be displayed within the principal motor fuel station
structure.
      e.   Each motor fuel station shall be compatible with the area in which
it is located.
      f.   A minimum 10 foot landscaped yard shall be planted and maintained
behind the property line along all public streets. A landscaped yard not less
than 5 feet wide shall be maintained along exterior property lines.
      g.   Motor fuel dispensers shall be located at least 30 feet from a
property line, and 100 feet from R- District property lines.
      h.   1.   Structures shall be set back:
            (a)   Front: 30 (60) feet;
            (b)   Side: 30 (50) feet;
            (c)   Rear: 30 (50) feet.
         2.   Setbacks in parentheses apply to lot lines adjacent R-Districts.
      i.   All canopy lighting for motor fuel station pump islands shall be
recessed or fully shielded. Illumination levels for pump islands shall comply
with the lighting standards of Subsection
1001.14.
      j.   Litter control. The operation shall be responsible for litter
control within 300 feet of the premises and litter control is to occur on a
daily basis. Trash receptacles must be provided at a convenient location on
site to facilitate litter control.
      k.   The hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
for motor fuel stations located in the B-2 District unless extended by the City
Council as part of the conditional use permit.
   (2)   Accessory car wash and vacuums.
      a.   No more then 1 car wash bay shall be allowed.
      b.   The car wash shall be designed to be an integral part of the
principal building, and may not be a separate freestanding structure.
      c.   The site shall provide stacking space for the car wash. The amount
of stacking space shall take into account the type of car wash and the amount
of time it takes to wash a vehicle. Stacking spaces shall not interfere with
parking spaces or traffic circulation.
      d.   The exit from the car wash shall have a drainage system which is
subject to the approval of the City and gives special consideration to the
prevention of ice build-up during winter months.
      e.   Neither the car wash or accessory vacuum shall be located within 300
feet of any residentially zoned or guided property, unless completely screened
by a building or located across an arterial or major collector roadway from
residentially zoned or guided property.
      f.   Both the car wash and accessory vacuum shall conform to noise
regulations as defined in Subsection
1001.14.
   (3)   Multiple tenant retail sales and service facilities shall be subject
to the following standards:
      a.   The physical design may include more than 1 building. If there is an
open space between 2 buildings, the space shall not be less than 1/2 the sum of
the heights of the 2 buildings.
      b.   No building shall be nearer than 60 feet to any exterior lot line
except when abutting or across the street from an R District in which case the
minimum distance shall be 100 feet.
      c.   The design shall include adequate internal circulation drives not
less than 24 feet in width which are exclusive of the required parking areas.
      d.   The driveway curb cuts to the development shall not exceed 26 feet
in width and be located not less than 60 feet from all intersecting streets.
   (4)   Incidental outdoor seating for food service businesses.
      a.   Food service businesses, including but not limited to, bakeries,
delicatessens, coffee and/or tea shops, and restaurants, may provide outdoor
temporary seating for their patrons, provided that the following requirements
are met and an annual incidental outdoor seating permit is approved by the City
Planner:
         1.   The seating shall be located on private property.
         2.   The seating shall be of good patio or café type furniture that
enhances the appearance of the business.
         3.   The outdoor seating area shall be defined with the use of
landscaping, temporary fencing or other means that contains the tables and
chairs for the use as demonstrated on a site plan and approved by City staff.
         4.   No alcoholic beverages or food shall be served to persons outside
of the designated outdoor seating area. Signage shall be posted that restricts
consumption of alcohol outside of the designated outdoor seating area as
approved by City staff.
         5.   Patrons shall access the outdoor seating area through the main
entrance or host station and shall be seated by a staff person and all full
service restaurants with wait staff service.
         6.   The seating shall be located so as not to compromise safety.
Seating shall not obstruct the entrance or any required exits or be located on
landscaping or parking areas.  If located on private sidewalks or walkways,
seating shall be located so as to leave a minimum of a 4 foot wide passageway
for pedestrians.
         7.   No additional parking is required for 30 seats or less. If public
parking is available either in a ramp or adjacent on-street, then no additional
parking is required. Any additional seating over 30 seats shall provide
required parking based on 1 space per 3 seats. Shared parking will be
considered and may be approved by staff.
         8.   Any proposed outdoor seating plan over 50 or more seats shall be
by conditional use permit.
         9.   All exterior sound equipment shall be shutoff at 10:00 p.m. as
regulated in Subsection
1001.14.
         10.   Lighting shall be permitted to the extent that it only
illuminates the designed area. Lighting cannot shine or cause a glare upon
other public or private property outside the designated area or as permitted in
Subsection
1001.14.
         11.   Any proposed outdoor seating area on property abutting an R-
Residential Zoning District shall be by conditional use permit.
         12.   The business owner shall regularly clean the seating area so
that it is litter-free.
Subd. 3   Special Requirements and Performance Standards in all B-3 and B-
4 Districts (where use is listed)
   (1)   Office-warehouse facilities, office and wholesale showroom and multi-
tenant warehouse facilities shall be subject to the following standards:
      a.   The facility must front on and have direct access onto a minor
arterial or higher classification level street.
      b.   No such use shall be allowed in an office-warehouse or tenant space
of an office-warehouse facility where noise associated with loading activities
or business operations is audible from adjacent residential areas.
      c.   Each office-warehouse or wholesale showroom building shall be
architecturally designed and constructed with permanent finished building
materials so as to be compatible with adjacent development and the City’s
building standards. The overall appearance of the building shall be that of an
office rather than a warehouse.
      d.   The allowable percentage of floor area devoted to the office
function shall be established at the time of approval and ample space be
allotted on the site to accommodate the parking area required to service it.
      e.   All loading and service areas should be 100% screened from public
view and service traffic separated from employee/visitor traffic. Whenever such
developments abut Residential Districts, their interior road patterns shall be
arranged in such a way as to route service vehicle traffic away from
residential neighborhoods.
   (2)   Outdoor storage in the B-4 district which is accessory to the
principal use shall be subject to the following standards:
            a.   The area devoted to outdoor storage shall be limited to 30% of
the gross area of the lot and is limited to the rear yard.
            b.   Shall have a permanent structure on the parcel.
            c.   Shall be 100% screened, at a minimum of 6 feet in height, at
time of installation from street level view around the perimeter of the open
storage area by means of a combination of fencing, landscaping, berming, and
building placement. When fencing is used, landscaping shall be placed outside
and along the perimeter of the fence to soften the appearance of the fence.
Landscaping shall consist of a minimum of 2 trees and 5 to 10 shrubs per 100
feet of fence.
            d.   Developer shall submit site plans and sections illustrating
sightlines from grade level view of properties and public view through the
interim use permit process.
            e.   All lighting shall comply with the requirements in Subsection
1001.14.
            f.   The site plan for the outdoor storage area shall be subject to
review by the City Engineer for applicable stormwater management requirements.
            g.   All non-storage parking area shall comply with the parking lot
landscape requirements in Subsection
1001.19.
            h.   Delivery and loading hours shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m. for all open storage lots abutting a residential property line.
Delivery trucks shall not be left idling for long periods of time.
   (3)   Open sales lots (motor vehicles sales, recreational vehicle sales lot)
shall be subject to the following standards:
      a.   Shall have permanent structure on parcel.
      b.   Headlights shall be 100% screened from adjacent property lines.
      c.   Parking lot landscaping shall comply with Subsection
1001.19.
      d.   Shall be 100% screened, at a minimum of 6 feet in height, at time of
installation, from abutting residential property lines, by means of a
combination of fencing, landscaping, berming, and building placement.
      e.   Open rental and sales lots shall only be considered for vehicles of
a noncommercial nature.
      f.   No car auctions shall be permitted on site.
      g.   No outdoor speaker systems shall be permitted.
      h.   All parking spaces in excess of minimum required, including sale
display and sales storage areas shall be pervious pavement if soils permit
based on City Engineer review.
      i.   All lighting shall comply with the requirements in Subsection
1001.14.
      j.   Delivery and loading hours shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m. for all open storage lots abutting a residential property line. Delivery
trucks shall not be left idling for long periods of time.
   (4)   Mini storage facilities.
      a.   All loading and service areas should be 100% screened, at a minimum
of 6 feet in height, from public view. Whenever such developments abut
Residential Districts, their interior road patterns shall be arranged in such
as way as to route traffic away from Residential Districts.
      b.   All dock, service and other business doors of the storage facility
shall be kept closed during all hours of business operations.
Subd. 4   Special Requirements and Performance Standards in B-2 Neighborhood
District
   (1)   Maximum building height: 30 feet.
   (2)   Maximum building size: 15,000 square feet. More than 1 building may be
built on a site. Maximum building size of up to 30,000 square feet allowed by
conditional use permit.
   (3)   Roofs shall be pitched, mansard, or other roof types commonly found in
the adjacent residential area.
   (4)   Freestanding signs - monument signs only, with a maximum height of 6
feet allowable.
(Ord. 2010-13, passed 7-13-2010; Am. Ord. 2018-12, passed 5-23-2018)
1001.061   BUSINESS DISTRICTS.
Subd. 1   Office Business District (B-1)
   (1)   Intent. The purpose of the B-1, Office Business District is to provide
areas appropriate for office and service uses and uses that are compatible with
commercial offices. A range of public, medical, and educational uses shall be
available in the B-1 areas.
   (2)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted uses in the B-
1 District:
      a.   Agricultural uses existing at the time of adoption this Subsection.
      b.   Antennas mounted on an existing structure, not exceeding 15 feet
above the highest point of the structure, as regulated by Subsection
1001.21 of this Code.
      c.   Art studio, interior decorating studio, photographic studio, music
studio provided no retail sales are made of products not manufactured on the
site.
      d.   Banks, credit unions and other financial institutions without drive-
up tellers.
      e.   Day care or preschool center.
      f.   Essential services including, but not limited to, buildings such as
telephone exchange stations, booster or pressure stations, elevated tanks,
wells and pumping stations, lift stations and electric power substations.
      g.   Funeral homes and mortuaries.
      h.   Government buildings where the use conducted is customarily
considered to be an office use.
      i.   Health/athletic clubs (within a principal building).
      j.   Laboratories - medical and dental.
      k.   Offices, administrative/commercial.
      l.   Offices/clinics for medical, dental or chiropractic services.
      m.   Private clubs/lodges.
      n.   Religious institutions.
      o.   Research centers.
      p.   Schools, academies, colleges, universities, libraries.
      q.   Therapeutic massage.
   (3)   Permitted accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory
uses in the B-1 District:
      a.   Any incidental repair or processing necessary to conduct a permitted
principal use.
      b.   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the
premises for a period not to exceed time necessary to complete construction.
      c.   Essential service structure.
      d.   Bus/transit stations.
      e.   Private garages, off-street parking and loading spaces as regulated
in this Code.
      f.   Public telephone booths.
      g.   Signs as regulated in this Code.
      h.   Single satellite earth station antenna 2 meters or less in diameter
and single antenna designed to receive direct broadcast services or
multichannel multipoint distribution services 1 meter or less in diameter and
antennas designed to receive television broadcast signals, as regulated in
Subsection
1001.21 of this Code.
      i.   Tenant restaurants, cafeterias, and retail service limited to
tenants of the building, provided that they be essentially limited to providing
service to the users of the permitted use, and that no signs or other evidence
of these uses are visible from the exterior of the building.
   (4)   Conditional uses. Within any B-1 District, no structure or land shall
be used for the following uses except by conditional use permit:
      a.   Antennas/towers - cellular and communication as regulated by
Subsection
1001.21 of this Code.
      b.   Bank/financial institution with drive-through.
      c.   Historical buildings, museums, art institutions, galleries and
theaters.
      d.   Motels/hotels.
      e.   Nursing home, intermediate care facility, long-term care facility,
and residential health care facility, provided the site shall contain not less
than 600 square feet of lot area for each person to be accommodated and that no
building be located less than 50 feet from the lot line; hospitals for human
care, provided that all buildings are not located less than 60 feet from the
lot line of an abutting R District.
      f.   Radio and television studios or towers.
      g.   Restaurant Class I and II, no drive-through.
      h.   Special event and catering centers.
      i.   Towers - cellular and communications as regulated in Subsection
1001.21 of this Code.
      j.   Veterinary clinic and related indoor kennel; and pet grooming.
   (5)   Interim uses. Within any B-1 District, no structure or land shall be
used for the following purposes except by interim use permit.
      a.   Private and public outdoor sports and recreational uses such as:
         1.   Archery, driving, target, and trap and skeet shooting ranges.
         2.   Athletic fields, not including stadiums and sports arenas.
         3.   Boat launch ramps.
         4.   Fishing, hunting and swimming areas, not including swimming
pools.
         5.   Horseback trails.
   (6)   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed subject to additional requirements, exceptions
and modifications as set forth in this Subsection
1001.06 (Special Requirements for Business Districts) of this Code:
 
Minimum lot size1                   1 acre
Minimum lot width1                  100 feet
Minimum lot depth1                  100 feet
Maximum impervious surface coverage 75%
Maximum building footprint coverage 50%
Structure height limit              35 feet or 2 stories, whichever is less
Setbacks 2
Building - Principal Structure
                                    40 (60) feet - Plus 1 foot for every 1 foot
   Front yard                    of building height over 30 feet (maximum
                                    setback of 80 feet)
   Side yard                     15 (40) feet
   Side yard (street)            15 (40) feet
   Rear yard                     15 (40) feet
Parking
   Front, side, or rear to a stre20 (20) feet
   Side interior                 10 (20) feet
   Rear yard                     10 (20) feet
   To residential                20 (20) feet
1Minimum lot size, width, depth and the like shall not include area of street
easements, right-of-way, or common areas.
2Setbacks in parentheses apply adjacent to R-1 - RH Residential Districts. A 20
foot setback is required for any structure or parking adjacent to any other
Residential District.
 
Subd. 2   Neighborhood Commercial District (B-2)
   (1)   Intent. The purpose of the B-2, Neighborhood Business District is to
provide for the establishment of highly limited scale neighborhood commercial
centers that officer basic, convenience-type goods and services to the
immediately surrounding areas in which they are located.
   (2)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted uses in the B-
2 District:
      a.   Agriculture - existing at the time of the adoption of this
Subsection.
      b.   Antique or gift shop.
      c.   Appliance store.
      d.   Art and school supply store.
      e.   Athletic club, freestanding.
      f.   Banks, credit unions and other financial institutions without drive-
up tellers.
      g.   Bakery goods sales and baking of goods for the retail sales on
premises.
      h.   Beauty salons, day spas and barber shops.
      i.   Bicycle sales and repair.
      j.   Book store.
      k.   Candy, ice cream, popcorn, nuts, frozen dessert and soft drink shop,
but not of the drive-in type.
      l.   Clothing store.
      m.   Coffee shop/delicatessen.
      n.   Convenience grocery store without motor fuel sales.
      o.   Copy services but not including printing press or newspaper.
      p.   Day care or preschool center.
      q.   Drug store.
      r.   Dry cleaning and laundry pickup stations including incidental
pressing and repair.
      s.   Essential services including, but not limited to, buildings such as
telephone exchange stations, booster or pressure stations, elevated tanks,
wells and pumping stations, lift stations and electric power substations.
      t.   Florist.
      u.   Grocery store, fruit or vegetable store.
      v.   Hardware store.
      w.   Health/athletic clubs, freestanding.
      x.   Hobby store including handicraft classes not to exceed 10 students.
      y.   Jewelry sales and jewelry repair store.
      z.   Laundromat, self-service.
      aa.   Library.
      bb.   Locksmith.
      cc.   Meat market but not including processing for a locker.
      dd.   Music store.
      ee.   Newsstand.
      ff.   Offices, administrative/commercial.
      gg.   Office supply and stationery store.
      hh.   Paint, wallpaper sales.
      ii.   Photographic studio.
      jj.   Pipe and tobacco shop.
      kk.   Post office.
      ll.   Record shop.
      mm.   Rugs and floor covering sales.
      nn.   Shoe sales and repair.
      oo.   Small appliance repair shop.
      pp.   Sporting goods store.
   (3)   Permitted accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory
uses in the B-2 District:
      a.   Any accessory use permitted in the B-1 District.
      b.   Any incidental repair, processing or storage necessary to conduct a
permitted principal use so long as it does not occupy more than 30% of the
gross floor area of the principal building.
      c.   Essential service structure.
   (4)   Conditional uses. Within any B-2 District, no structure or land shall
be used for the following uses except by conditional use permit:
      a.   Bank/financial institution with drive-through.
      b.   Car wash.
      c.   Motor fuel stations.
      d.   Offices/clinics for medical, dental or chiropractic services.
      e.   Religious institutions provided that the principal structure and any
accessory structures used for assembly shall be located at least 50 feet from
any lot line adjacent to a Residential Zoning District. This Subsection shall
apply even if the religious use does not occupy the entire structure. For the
purposes of this Subsection, the 50 foot setback shall not apply to any
property line adjacent to an arterial roadway, including an interstate freeway.
      f.   Restaurants Class I and II.
      g.   Schools, academies, colleges, universities, libraries.
      h.   Tavern or liquor store.
      i.   Towers - cellular and communications as regulated in Subsection
1001.21 of this Code.
      j.   Veterinary clinic and related indoor kennel; and pet grooming.
   (5)   Interim uses. Within any B-2 District, no structure or land shall be
used for the following purposes except by interim use permit.
      a.   Interim uses permitted in the B-1 District.
      b.   Farmers market.
   (6)   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed subject to additional requirements, exceptions
and modifications as set forth in Subsection
1001.06 (Special Requirements for Business Districts) of this Code:
 
Minimum lot size1                   1 acre
Minimum lot width1                  100 feet
Minimum lot depth1                  100 feet
Maximum impervious surface coverage 75%
Maximum building footprint coverage 50%
Structure height limit              30 feet or 1 stories, whichever is less
Setbacks2
Building - Principal Structure
                                    35 (60) feet - Plus 1 foot for every 1 foot
   Front yard                    of building height over 30 feet (maximum
                                    setback of 80 feet)
   Side yard                     15 (40) feet
   Side yard (street)            15 (40) feet
   Rear yard                     15 (40) feet
Parking
   Front, side, or rear to a stre20 (20) feet
   Side interior                 10 (20) feet
   Rear yard                     10 (20) feet
   To residential                20 (20) feet
1Minimum lot size, width, depth and the like shall not include area of street
easements, right-of-way, or common areas.
2Setbacks in parentheses apply adjacent to R-1 - RH Residential Districts. A 20
foot setback is required for any structure or parking adjacent to any other
Residential District.
 
Subd. 3   General Business District (B-3)
   (1)   Intent. The purpose of the B-3, General Business District is to
provide for the establishment of areas devoted to high intensity retailing and
service activity primarily oriented toward motorists and requiring higher
volumes of traffic and visibility from major roads. Uses will serve a City-wide
and multi-community consumer market.
   (2)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted uses in the B-
3 District:
      a.   Any use permitted in the B-1 and B-2 Districts.
      b.   Auto/marine repair (minor).
      c.   Boats and marine sales when conducted entirely within a building.
      d.   Commercial greenhouse provided it is conducted entirely within a
building.
      e.   Furniture sales.
      f.   Garden supply store, provided it is conducted entirely within a
building.
      g.   Home improvement stores, provided it is conducted entirely within a
building.
      h.   Hotel/motels.
      i.   Interior decorating studio.
      j.   Newspaper and publishing office.
      k.   Optical and jewelry manufacturing.
      l.   Pet shop provided the operation shall not include the boarding of
pets on the site, the maintaining of pens or cages outside the building or the
creation of an offensive odor or noise.
      m.   Photographic supplies and processing of film and prints.
      n.   Picture framing.
      o.   Printing shop.
      p.   Radio and television repair.
      q.   Seat cover, upholstery and drapery shop.
   (3)   Permitted accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory
uses in the B-3 District:
      a.   Any accessory use permitted in the B-1 and B-2 Districts.
      b.   Any incidental repair, processing or storage necessary to conduct a
permitted principal use so long as it does not occupy more than 30% of the
gross floor area of the principal building.
      c.   Essential service structure.
   (4)   Conditional uses. Within any B-3 District, no structure or land shall
be used for the following uses except by conditional use permit:
      a.   Any conditional use allowed in the B-1 and B-2 Districts.
      b.   Animal hospital or clinic; kennel.
      c.   Armories, convention halls, sports arenas and stadiums.
      d.   Automobile and other vehicles of transportation sales with an
outdoor sales lot.
      e.   Auto/marine repair (major).
      f.   Boats and marine sales when conducted entirely with an outdoor sales
lot.
      g.   Bowling alleys, electronic game rooms, billiard and pool rooms,
drive-in theaters, skating rinks, gymnasiums, night clubs, and fraternal
organizations.
      h.   Commercial recreation facility.
      i.   Hospitals and other regional medical facilities.
      j.   Mini-storage subject to the requirements herein - minimum
requirements.
      k.   Nursery.
      l.   Open sales lot, open rental lot subject to the requirements in
Subsection
1001.06.
      m.   Restaurant - Class III (fast food).
      n.   Restaurant - Class IV (with drive-through).
      o.   Stone and monument sales.
      p.   Theatres.
      q.   Television and radio stations.
      r.   Towers - cellular and communications as regulated in Subsection
1001.21 of this Code.
   (5)   Interim uses. Within any B-3 District, no structure or land shall be
used for the following purposes except by interim use permit.
      a.   Interim uses permitted in the B-2 District.
      b.   Land reclamation, mining and soil processing.
      c.   Recycling and reclamation of nonhazardous materials, when conducted
entirely within a building.
      d.   Outdoor theaters, including drive-ins.
   (6)   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed subject to additional requirements, exceptions
and modifications of Subsection
1001.06 (Special Requirements for Business Districts) of this Code:
 
Minimum lot size1                   1 acre
Minimum lot width1                  150 feet
Minimum lot depth1                  150 feet
Maximum impervious surface coverage 80%
Maximum building footprint coverage 50%
Structure height limit              45 feet or 3 stories, whichever is less
Setbacks 2
Building - Principal Structure
                                    40 (60) feet - Plus 1 foot for every 1 foot
   Front yard                    of building height over 30 feet (maximum
                                    setback of 80 feet)
   Side yard                     25 (40) feet
   Side yard (street)            25 (40) feet
   Rear yard                     25 (40) feet
Parking
   Front, side, or rear to a stre20 (20) feet
   Side interior                 10 (20) feet
   Rear yard                     10 (20) feet
1Minimum lot size, width, depth and the like shall not include area of street
easements, right-of-way, or common areas.
2Setbacks in parentheses apply adjacent to R-1 - RH Residential Districts. A 20
foot setback is required for any structure or parking adjacent to any other
Residential District.
 
Subd. 4   Commercial/Industrial District (B-4)
   (1)   Intent. The purpose of this zoning district is to provide areas for
businesses that have both commercial and industrial characteristics. The
district will include a mixture of commercial, office, and light industrial
land uses, made mutually compatible through the enforcement of performance
standards, to encourage and accommodate high quality, large scale development
opportunities along intermediate arterial roadways within the City.
   (2)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted uses in the B-
4 District:
      a.   Art studio.
      b.   Appliance repair and service.
      c.   Auto repair - major and minor.
      d.   Auto sales and rental, provided it is conducted entirely within the
building.
      e.   Auto washing.
      f.   Bicycle sales and repair.
      g.   Boat sales.
      h.   Home improvement store.
      i.   Bus terminal.
      j.   Camera and photographic supply and processing store.
      k.   Commercial off-street parking.
      l.   Exterminating services.
      m.   Equipment rental with no outdoor storage or display.
      n.   Garden supply store with no outdoor storage or display.
      o.   Governmental and public utility buildings and structure, including
public works type facilities, excluding outdoor storage.
      p.   Kennel.
      q.   Landscape nurseries.
      r.   Laboratories - medical, dental.
      s.   Motel and hotel.
      t.   Motor fuel station.
      u.   Music studio.
      v.   Newspaper and publishing facility.
      w.   Office building.
      x.   Office warehouse, where the operations include manufacturing or
processing on the site.
      y.   Optical and jewelry manufacturing.
      z.   Printing shop.
      aa.   Radio and television studios.
      bb.   Research center.
      cc.   Seat cover and upholstery shop.
      dd.   Tavern.
      ee.   Veterinary services.
   (3)   Permitted accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory
uses in the B-4 District:
      a.   Essential service structure.
      b.   Radio and television studios.
      c.   Retail sales related to the processing of product on site so long as
it does not exceed 30% of the floor space of the principal building.
      d.   Tenant restaurants, cafeterias, and retail service limited to
tenants of the building, provided that they be essentially limited to providing
service to the users of the permitted use, and that no signs or other evidence
of these uses are visible from the exterior of the building.
   (4)   Conditional uses. Within any B-4 District, no structure or land shall
be used for the following uses except by conditional use permit:
      a.   HVAC (heating, ventilation and air conditioning) dealer.
      b.   Mini-storage.
      c.   Open sales lot, and open rental lot subject to the requirements in
Subsection
1001.06.
      d.   Plumbing contractor.
      e.   Recreational vehicle sales.
      f.   Recycling facility - indoor.
      g.   Towers - cellular and communications as regulated in Subsection
1001.21 of this Code.
      h.   Wholesale showrooms.
   (5)   Interim uses. Within any B-4 District, no structure or land shall be
used for the following purposes except by interim use permit.
      a.   Interim uses permitted in the B-3 District.
      b.   Auto auction.
      c.   Miniature golf courses.
      d.   Outdoor storage established after May 23, 2018 that is accessory to
the principal use subject to the requirements of this Section and Business
District Special Requirements Section
1001.06.
   (6)   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed subject to additional requirements, exceptions
and modifications as set forth in Subsection
1001.06 (Special Requirements for Business Districts) of this Code:
 
Minimum lot size1                   1 acre
Minimum lot width1                  150 feet
Minimum lot depth1                  150 feet
Maximum impervious surface coverage 80%
Maximum building footprint coverage 50%
Setbacks2
Building - Principal Structure
                                    50 (60) feet - Plus 1 foot for every 1 foot
   Front yard                    of building height over 30 feet (maximum
                                    setback of 80 feet)
   Side yard                     25 (40) feet
   Side yard (street)            40 (40) feet
   Rear yard                     20 (60) feet
 
 
Parking
   Front, side, or rear to a street                          20 (20) feet
   Side interior                                             5 (20) feet
   Rear yard                                                 15 (20) feet
   To residential                                            5 (20) feet
1Minimum lot size, width, depth and the like shall not include
area of street easements, right-of-way, or common areas.
2Setbacks in parentheses apply adjacent to R-1 - RH Residential
Districts. A 20 foot setback is required for any structure or
parking adjacent to any other Residential District.
 
(Ord. 2010-13, passed 7-13-2010; Am. Ord. 2018-12, passed 5-23-2018)
1001.062  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS IN ALL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
Subd. 1   Special Requirements and Performance Standards in all Industrial
Districts
   (1)   Building design and materials. The architectural appearance, including
building character, permanence, massing, density and composition, scale,
construction materials, and functional plan of all principal buildings shall
comply with the Comprehensive Plan. Building materials shall be attractive in
appearance, of a durable finish, and be of a quality that is compatible and
designed to enhance the lot, the neighborhood and the community. All buildings
shall be of good aesthetic and architectural quality to ensure they will
maintain and enhance the property values of neighboring properties and not
adversely impact the community’s public health, safety and general welfare.
      a.   Design elements. The building design must include architectural
interest through the use of a minimum of 3 of the following elements:
         1.   Accent materials;
         2.   A visually pleasing front entry that, in addition to doors, shall
be accented a minimum of 150 square feet around the door entrance for single
occupancy buildings and a minimum of 300 square feet total for the front of
multi-tenant buildings (this area shall be counted as 1 element);
         3.   Twenty-five percent window coverage on each front that faces a
street;
         4.   Contrasting, yet complementary material colors;
         5.   A combination of horizontal and vertical design features;
         6.   Irregular building shapes; or
         7.   Other architectural features in the overall architectural
concept.
      b.   Other design requirements.
         1.   All principal buildings shall have an entry on a street;
         2.   Buildings shall provide a base and top to their architecture;
         3.   The tops of buildings shall be articulated to minimize “box” like
images;
         4.   Buildings shall be architecturally unique and shall not be of a
corporate architecture (including roof patterns, corporate colors,
architectural elements, and similar treatments).
      c.   Accent materials. Accent materials shall be wrapped around walls
visible from public view. Painting shall not be substituted for visual relief,
accenting, or a required element. Walls shall be articulated thus no wall shall
exceed 100 feet in length without visual relief. Visual relief may be defined
as the incorporation of design features such as windows, horizontal and
vertical patterns, contrasting material colors, or varying wall depths. Use of
fiber cement trim, soffit and fascia shall be allowed as accent materials.
      d.   Major exterior materials. Major exterior materials of all walls
including face brick, stone, glass, stucco, synthetic stucco, fiber cement
vertical panel siding, architectural concrete and precast panels shall be
acceptable as the major exterior wall surface when they are incorporated into
an overall design of the building. Stucco, synthetic stucco or fiber cement
vertical panel siding shall not be allowed within 24 inches from grade.
Architectural metal may be considered with matte finish and with neutral or
earth tone colors. Fiber cement seam lines shall be architecturally integrated
into the building design so that they are not visible. Seam lines can be
filled, covered by other accent material or other method thereby making the
seam lines invisible. Color impregnated decorative block shall also be allowed
as a major exterior wall material, and shall be required to be sealed. All
materials shall be color impregnated with the exception of allowing
architectural concrete precast panel systems and fiber cement siding to be
painted. Painting shall not be allowed on color impregnated, major exterior
materials. Request for approval of cast in place systems shall be through a
conditional use permit or Planned Unit Development, whichever is deemed
appropriate by City staff. If the architectural precast panel systems are
painted, they shall be properly prepared and maintained regularly to prevent
peeling, stripping, shading or any other form of deterioration or
discoloration. Proof of manufacturer’s painting specifications shall be
supplied prior to issuance of a building permit.
      e.   Restricted exterior materials. Unadorned pre-stressed concrete
panels, whether smooth or raked, nondecorative concrete block, sheet metal,
corrugated metal or unfinished metal shall not be used as exterior materials.
This restriction shall apply to all principal structures and to all accessory
buildings except those accessory buildings not visible from any property line.
No more than 25% of any exterior wall on a building shall be fiber cement
siding, wood or metal accent material.
      f.   Roofs. Roofs which are exposed or an integral part of the building
aesthetics shall be constructed only of commercial grade asphalt shingles, wood
shingles, standing seam metal, slate, tile, or copper. Flat roofs, which are
generally parallel with the first floor elevation, are not subject to these
material limitations.
      g.   Building and roofing materials. All building and roofing materials
shall meet current accepted industry standards, and tolerances, and shall be
subject to review and approval by the City Planner for quality, durability, and
aesthetic appeal. For all new buildings and building exterior renovations, the
applicant shall submit to the City product samples, color building elevations,
and associated drawings which illustrate the construction techniques to be used
in the installation of such materials. Building and roofing materials not
specifically approved in this section may be allowed by a conditional use
permit or Planned Unit Development only after it is demonstrated that the
proposed material is equal to or better than approved materials. The long-range
maintenance of the proposed material shall be incorporated as a condition of
the approval and filed on the property.
   (2)   Trash and recyclable materials. All trash, recyclable materials, and
trash and recyclable materials handling equipment shall be stored within the
principal structure; 100% screened from public view by the principal building;
or stored within an accessory structure constructed of building materials
compatible with the principal structure enclosed by a roof, and overhead door
on tracks. Compactors shall be 100% screened from eye level view from public
streets and adjacent properties. Existing uses shall comply with the enclosure
requirements listed in this section within 6 months of receiving notice from
the City. For the purposes of this section, “trash” means “mixed municipal
solid waste” as defined under Subsection
1001.03 of the City Code.
   (3)   Off street parking. Design and maintenance of off street parking areas
in accordance with Subsection
1001.19 of this Code.
   (4)   Accessory structures. Garages, accessory structures, screen walls and
exposed areas of retaining walls shall be of a similar type, quality and
appearance as the principal structure.
   (5)   Building mechanical equipment. The view of all rooftop equipment and
related piping, ducting, electrical and mechanical utilities abutting a street
on buildings constructed after January 1, 2010 shall be screened from the
ground level view. Screening may include parapet walls, penthouses, or other
architecturally integrated elements. Wood fencing or chain link with slats
shall not be used for screening. The term “ground level view” shall be defined
as the view of the building from the furthest point of the width of the right-
of-way from the property line(s) that abut a street. A cross-sectional drawing
shall be provided that illustrates the sight lines from the ground level view.
For buildings constructed prior to January 1, 2010, for replacement of existing
units, remodeling, and building expansions, the ground level view of all
rooftop equipment and related piping, ducting, electrical and mechanical
utilities shall be painted to match the building, designed to be compatible
with the architectural treatment of the principal structure or screened by the
use of parapet walls. Wood fencing shall not be used for screening.
   (6)   Ground mechanical equipment. Ground mechanical equipment shall be 100%
screened from contiguous properties and adjacent streets by opaque landscaping,
or a screen wall shall be provided to be compatible with the architectural
treatment of the principal structure.
   (7)   Outdoor storage. There shall be no outdoor storage of either materials
or products, except through the issuance of an interim use permit.
   (8)   External loading and service areas. External loading and service areas
must be 100% screened from the ground-level view from contiguous residential or
commercial properties and adjacent streets, except at access points.
   (9)   Abutting districts. Wherever an Industrial District abuts, or is
across the street from an R Residential District, a berm, fence or compact
evergreen trees or hedge or combination thereof, not less than 90% opaque at
time of installation, nor less than 6 feet in height, except adjacent to a
street where it shall be not less than 3 feet nor more than 4 feet in height
shall be erected and maintained. All screening shall comply with Subsection
1001.24.
   (10)   Headlight screening. The light from automobile headlights and other
sources shall be 100% screened whenever it may be directed onto adjacent
residential window.
   (11)   Pedestrian environment. Pedestrian connections to the surrounding
neighborhood shall be incorporated into industrial development.
      a.   Pedestrian amenities shall be included in places where people
typically gather, including but not limited to, transit stops, building
entrances or street corners or abutting bike or pedestrian trail connections.
These spaces must include at least 2 of the following:
         1.   Patterned materials on walkways.
         2.   Shelters.
         3.   Trash receptacles.
         4.   Drinking fountains.
         5.   Pedestrian lighting.
         6.   Fountains, sculptures, mobiles, kiosks, or banners.
         7.   Street trees, flower boxes, or container landscaping.
      b.   Sidewalk connections shall be provided to and through the
development to existing and planned bus stops, trails, sidewalks, and adjacent
properties, where access exists or reasonable connections are possible. If a
parking lot lies between the building entry and an adjacent public street, a
pedestrian walkway at least 6 feet wide shall be provided between them. Clear
internal pedestrian circulation routes shall be provided on the site.
Subd. 2   Special Requirements and Performance Standards in I-1, I-2 and BP
Districts (where use is listed)
   (1)   Retail sales as principal use, minimum requirements:
      a.   Retail sales approved by conditional use permit as the principal use
of a single tenant building shall have a minimum sales floor area of 10,000
square feet. The minimum sales floor area in a multi-tenant building shall be
5,000 square feet per business tenant.
      b.   All off-street parking and loading shall be provided as required for
retail uses in this Code.
   (2)   Outdoor accessory merchandise display by conditional use permit. In I-
1 and I-2 Districts, no outdoor merchandise display shall be allowed except by
conditional use permit when such outdoor display is specifically intended to be
accessory to the primary use(s) of the premises. A conditional use permit may
be issued for accessory outdoor merchandise display in I-1 and I-2 Districts,
provided the following standards are considered and satisfactorily met on a
continuous basis:
      a.   The outdoor merchandise display area shall be limited to 1 surface
area per building. The display area shall be limited in size to 15% of the
gross floor area of the principal structure. The maximum dimension of a display
area shall be 30 feet, and in no case shall the larger dimension of the display
area be more than 2 times the lesser dimension. In no case shall the outdoor
merchandise display area exceed a total of 600 square feet per site. For the
purpose of these standards, the term “site” shall be defined as a lot or group
of lots contained within a unified development project.
      b.   The outdoor display area shall be clearly identified upon an
approved site plan for the property. The display area shall meet the required
side and rear yard setbacks for the district in which it is located, and shall
be set back no less than 10 feet from the front property line. No outdoor
display activities shall occur in a traffic visibility triangle as provided for
by Subsection
1001.03 of this Code. The display area surface may be elevated up to 3 feet
above the adjacent ground surface. The appropriate height of the display area
shall be determined by considering the size of the item(s) to be displayed, the
proportion of the display area to the building, and the location of the display
area on the site.
      c.   No displayed merchandise shall exceed a maximum height of 12 feet
above the display surface.
      d.   Outdoor display areas shall be 100% screened, at a minimum of 8 feet
in height, from view of adjoining Residential Zoning Districts and uses. For
the purpose of this standard, the term “adjoining” shall not include property
across a street.
      e.   No additional lighting shall be installed to illuminate the display
area.
      f.   The display area shall be surfaced with concrete or an approved
equivalent to control dust and erosion. The surface shall be properly
maintained to prevent deterioration. The display area shall be architecturally
compatible with the principle structure of the site through the use of similar
building materials or fencing around the perimeter of the display area. The
display area shall be enhanced with appropriate, year-round landscaping.
      g.   The display area shall not take up required parking spaces or
landscaping areas. No outdoor display shall be permitted upon a sidewalk.
      h.   The square footage of outdoor display areas shall be included in the
calculation of required off-street parking for the principal use of the
property.
      i.   All display of merchandise shall occur in a neat and orderly fashion
without signage. The display of wearing apparel, highly flammable materials,
and merchandise with wind-moveable parts and appendages shall be prohibited.
      j.   Any power equipment and vehicles that are displayed shall be
disabled to prevent them from being started and operated while they are on
display.
      k.   The provisions of Section 10-5-5 shall be considered and
satisfactorily met.
   (3)   Office-warehouse facilities, office and wholesale showroom and multi-
tenant office-warehouse facility requirements:
      a.   The facility must front on and have direct access onto a minor
arterial or high classification level street.
      b.   No such use shall be allowed in an office-warehouse or tenant space
of an office-warehouse facility where noise associated with loading activities
or business operations is audible from adjacent residential areas.
      c.   Each office-warehouse or wholesale showroom buildings shall be
architecturally designed and constructed with permanent finished building
materials so as to be compatible with adjacent development and the City’s
building standards. The overall appearance of the building shall be that of an
office rather than a warehouse.
      d.   The allowable percentage of floor area devoted to the office
function shall be established at the time of approval and ample space be
allotted on the site to accommodate the parking area required to service it.
      e.   All loading and service areas should be 100% screened from public
view and service traffic separated from employee/visitor traffic. Whenever such
developments abut Residential Districts, their interior road patterns shall be
arranged in such a way as to route service vehicle traffic away from
residential.
   (4)   Outdoor storage, which is accessory to the principal use, shall be
subject to the following standards:
            a.   The area devoted to outdoor storage shall be limited to 30% of
the gross area of the lot.
            b.   Shall have a permanent structure on the parcel.
            c.   Shall be 100% screened, at a minimum of 8 feet in height, at
time of installation from street level view around the perimeter of the open
storage area by means of a combination of fencing, landscaping, berming, and
building placement. When fencing is used, landscaping shall be placed outside
and along the perimeter of the fence to soften the appearance of the fence.
Landscaping shall consist of a minimum of 2 trees and 5 to 10 shrubs per 100
feet of fence.
            d.   Developer shall submit site plans and sections illustrating
sightlines from grade level view of properties and public view through the
conditional use permit process.
            e.   Pole mounted lighting shall be limited to 20 feet in height.
All light fixtures shall be downcast style fixtures. Reflected glare or spill
light from all exterior lighting shall not exceed 0.1 foot-candle measurement
on the property line when adjoining residential zoned and 1 foot-candle measure
on the property line when such line adjoins a similar zone and land use.
            f.   The site plan for the outdoor storage area shall be subject to
review by the City Engineer for applicable stormwater management requirements.
            g.   All non-storage parking area shall comply with the parking lot
landscape requirements in Subsection
1001.19.
            h.   Delivery and loading hours shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m. for all open storage lots abutting a residential property line.
Delivery trucks shall not be left idling for long periods of time.
   (5)   Open sales lots shall be subject to the following standards:
      a.   Shall have permanent structure on parcel.
      b.   Headlights shall be 100% screened from adjacent property lines.
      c.   Parking lot landscaping shall comply with Subsection
1001.19.
      d.   Shall be 100% screened, at a minimum of 8 feet in height, at time of
installation, from abutting residential property lines, by means of a
combination of fencing, landscaping, berming, and building placement.
      e.   Open rental and sales lots shall only be considered for vehicles of
a noncommercial nature.
      f.   No car auctions shall be permitted on site.
      g.   No outdoor speaker systems shall be permitted.
      h.   All parking spaces in excess of minimum required, including sale
display and sales storage areas shall be pervious pavement if soils permit
based on City Engineer review.
            i.   Pole mounted lighting shall be limited to 30 feet in height.
All light fixtures shall be downcast style cutoff shielded fixtures. Reflected
glare or spill light from all exterior lighting shall not exceed 0.1 foot
candle measurement on the property line when adjoining residential zoned and 1
foot-candle measure on the property line when such line adjoins a similar zone
and land use.
      j.   Delivery and loading hours shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m. for all open storage lots abutting a residential property line. Delivery
trucks shall not be left idling for long periods of time.
   (6)   Mini storage.
      a.   All loading and service areas should be 100% screened, at a minimum
of 8 feet in height, from public view. Whenever such developments abut
Residential Districts, their interior road patterns shall be arranged in such a
way as to route traffic away from Residential Districts.
      b.   All dock, service and other business doors of the storage facility
shall be kept closed during all hours of business operations.
Subd. 3   Special Requirements and Performance Standards in I-1 and I-
2 Districts (where use is listed)
   (1)   Motor fuel stations shall be subject to the following standards:
      a.   Motor fuel facilities shall be installed in accordance with state
and City standards. Additionally, adequate space shall be provided to access
gas pumps and to allow maneuverability around the pumps. Underground storage
tanks are to be positioned to allow adequate access by motor fuel transports
and unloading operations which do not conflict with circulation, access and
other activities on site. Fuel pumps shall be installed on pump islands.
      b.   The total height of any overhead canopy or weather protection shall
not exceed 20 feet in height.
      c.   No sales or rental of motor vehicles or trailers or campers shall be
permitted.
      d.   All goods for sale by a motor fuel station convenience store other
than petroleum based products required for the operation and maintenance of
motor vehicles shall be displayed within the principal motor fuel station
structure.
      e.   Each motor fuel station shall be compatible with the area in which
it is located.
      f.   A minimum 10 foot landscaped yard shall be planted and maintained
behind the property line along all public streets. A landscaped yard not less
than 5 feet wide shall be maintained along exterior property lines.
      g.   Motor fuel dispensers shall be located at least 30 feet from a
property line, and 100 feet from R-District property lines.
      h.   1.   Structures shall be set back:
            (a)   Front: 30 (60) feet;
            (b)   Side: 30 (50) feet;
            (c)   Rear: 30 (50) feet.
         2.   Setbacks in parentheses apply to lot lines adjacent R-Districts.
      i.   All canopy lighting for motor fuel station pump islands shall be
recessed or fully shielded. Illumination levels for pump islands shall comply
with Subsection
1001.14.
      j.   Litter control. The operation shall be responsible for litter
control within 300 feet of the premises and litter control is to occur on a
daily basis. Trash receptacles must be provided at a convenient location on
site to facilitate litter control.
      k.   The hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
for motor fuel stations located in I-1 Business Districts unless extended by
the City Council as part of the conditional use permit.
   (2)   Accessory car wash and vacuums.
      a.   No more then 1 car wash bay shall be allowed.
      b.   The car wash shall be designed to be an integral part of the
principal building, and may not be a separate freestanding structure.
      c.   The site shall provide stacking space for the car wash. The amount
of stacking space shall take into account the type of car wash and the amount
of time it takes to wash a vehicle. Stacking spaces shall not interfere with
parking spaces or traffic circulation.
      d.   The exit from the car wash shall have a drainage system which is
subject to the approval of the City and gives special consideration to the
prevention of ice build-up during winter months.
      e.   Neither the car wash or accessory vacuum shall be located within 300
feet of any residentially zoned or guided property, unless completely screened
by a building or located across an arterial or major collector roadway from
residentially zoned or guided property.
      f.   Both the car wash and accessory vacuum shall conform to noise
regulations as defined in Subsection
1001.14.
(Ord. 2010-13, passed 7-13-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-10, passed 4-12-2016; Am. Ord.
2018-12, passed 5-23-2018)
1001.063   INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
Subd. 1   Light Industrial District (I-1)
   (1)   Intent. The purpose of the I-1, Light Industrial District is providing
for the establishment of warehousing and light industrial development. The
overall character of the I-1 District is intended to have a low impact
manufacturing/warehouse character. Industrial uses allowed in this district
shall be limited to those which can compatibly exist adjacent to both lower
intensity business uses and high intensity manufacturing uses and which have
limited amounts of truck traffic in comparison to higher intensity Industrial
Districts. Because I-1 may abut residential uses the I-1 uses are regulated in
height, lot coverage, setbacks, landscaping, loading and use type so as to
facilitate compatibility between these uses and residential development.
   (2)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted uses in the I-
1 District:
      a.   Adult uses.
      b.   Agricultural uses existing at the time of the adoption of this
Subsection.
      c.   Antennas mounted on an existing structure, not exceeding 15 feet
above the highest point of the structure, as regulated by Subsection
1001.21 of this Code.
      d.   Automobile detailing shops.
      e.   Automobile repair, major.
      f.   Bus/transit station with vehicle storage.
      g.   Business/trade schools.
      h.   Day care accessory to business use.
      i.   Contractors operations.
      j.   Convenience/gas station.
      k.   Equipment rental.
      l.   Indoor sports and recreation or entertainment, provided the
structure and use is located at least 100 feet from any Residential Zoning
District.
      m.   Laboratories - medical and dental.
      n.   Light industrial fully contained within the building including:
conducting a process, fabricating, wholesale operation, assembly, packaging,
warehouse, distribution, manufacturing, treatment or providing a service
including, but not limited to, any of the following uses completely contained
within a building, unless otherwise noted, and meeting the performance
standards applicable to the I-1 District.
         1.   Paper products from previously processed paper.
         2.   Batteries (wet cell).
         3.   Brick, ceramic, and glass operations.
         4.   Computers and accessories including circuit boards and software.
         5.   Electronic components and accessories.
         6.   Glass cutting and sales.
         7.   Measuring, analyzing, and controlling instruments.
         8.   Medical technologies/manufacturing.
         9.   Metal working such as stamping, welding, machining, extruding,
plating, grinding, polishing and cleaning.
         10.   Millworking.
      o.   Lumber yards/building material sales.
      p.   Machine shops.
      q.   Mini-storage facilities.
      r.   Office building.
      s.   Office warehouse, where operations include manufacturing or
processing on the site.
      t.   Outdoor sports, recreation, or entertainment facilities.
      u.   Printing and publishing.
      v.   Radio and television studios.
      w.   Research centers/laboratories.
      x.   Recycling facility - indoor.
      y.   Schools, academies, colleges, universities, libraries.
      z.   Wholesale showrooms.
   (3)   Permitted accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory
uses in the I-1 District:
      a.   Any incidental repair or processing necessary to conduct a permitted
principal use.
      b.   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the
premises for a period not to exceed time necessary to complete construction.
      c.   Essential service structure.
      d.   Private garages, off-street parking and loading spaces as regulated
in this Code.
      e.   Public telephone booths.
      f.   Retail sales related to the processing of product on site so long as
it does not exceed 30% of the floor space of the principal building.
      g.   Signs as regulated in this Code.
      h.   Single satellite earth station antenna 2 meters or less in diameter
and single antenna designed to receive direct broadcast services or
multichannel multipoint distribution services 1 meter or less in diameter and
antennas designed to receive television broadcast signals, as regulated in
Subsection
1001.21 of this Code.
      i.   Tenant restaurants, cafeterias, and retail service limited to
tenants of the building, provided that they be essentially limited to providing
service to the users of the permitted use, and that no signs or other evidence
of these uses are visible from the exterior of the building.
   (4)   Conditional uses. Within any I-1 District, no structure or land shall
be used for the following uses except by conditional use permit:
      a.   Antennas/towers - cellular and communication as regulated by
Subsection
1001.21 of this Code.
      b.   Bank/financial institution with drive-through.
      c.   Heliports.
      d.   Hospitals.
      e.   Pawnshop provided that any such use shall not be located closer than
1 mile to any other uses, measured at the property lines, and that such use
shall not be open to the public between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
      f.   Public parking facility.
      g.   Mining.
      h.   Motor vehicle terminal and maintenance garage.
      i.   Outdoor display area.
      j.   Restaurant Class III and IV, with drive-through.
      k.   Special event and catering centers.
      l.   Towers - cellular and communications as regulated in Subsection
1001.21 of this Code.
      m.   Warehouse and distribution center.
      n.   Veterinary clinic and related indoor kennel; and pet grooming.
   (5)   Interim uses. Within any I-1 District, no structure or land shall be
used for the following purposes except by interim use permit.
      a.   Auto auction.
      b.   Land reclamation, mining and soil processing.
      c.   Miniature golf courses.
      d.   Outdoor storage established after May 23, 2018 when accessory to
principle use of the property, subject to the special requirements in Section
1001.062.
   (6)   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed subject to additional requirements, exceptions
and modifications as set forth in this chapter and Subsection
1001.062 (Special Requirements for Industrial Districts) of this Code:
 
Minimum lot size1                   1 acre
Minimum lot width1                  150 feet
Minimum lot depth1                  150 feet
Maximum impervious surface coverage 80%
Maximum building footprint coverage 50%
Structure height limit              45 feet
Setbacks 2
Building - Principal Structure
                                    50 (60) feet - Plus 1 foot for every 1 foot
   Front yard                    of building height over 30 feet (maximum
                                    setback of 80 feet)
   Side yard                     25 (40) feet
   Side yard (street)            40 (40) feet
   Rear yard                     20 (60) feet
Parking
   Front, side, or rear to a stre20 (20) feet
   Side interior                 5 (20) feet
   Rear yard                     15 (20) feet
   To residential                5 (20) feet
1Minimum lot size, width, depth and the like shall not include area of street
easements, right-of-way, or common areas.
2Setbacks in parentheses apply adjacent to R-1 - RH Residential Districts. A 20
foot setback is required for any structure or parking adjacent to any other
Residential District.
 
Subd. 2   Heavy Industrial District (I-2)
   (1)   Intent. The purpose of the I-2, Heavy Industrial District is to
provide areas suitable for the location of general industrial activities,
including heavy manufacturing and other such activities which, because of the
nature of the product or character of operation, require more isolation from or
special protections for non-industrial uses.
   (2)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted uses in the I-
2 District:
      a.   Any use permitted in the I-1 District as regulated therein.
      b.   Crude oil, gasoline or other liquid storage tanks.
      c.   Manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment or
storage of the following products or materials: brewing, cement, concrete,
stone cutting, brick, glass, batteries (wet cell), ceramic products, mill
working, metal polishing and plating, paint (pigment manufacturing), rubber
products, plastics, meat packing, flour, feed, grain milling, sawmill, lime,
plaster of paris, cloth, adhesives.
      d.   Heavy industrial.
   (3)   Permitted accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory
uses in the I-2 District:
      a.   Any accessory use permitted in the I-1 District.
   (4)   Conditional uses. Within any I-2 District, no structure or land shall
be used for the following uses except by conditional use permit:
      a.   Acid manufacture.
      b.   Adult uses.
      c.   Any conditional use permitted in the I-1 District.
      d.   Auto towing business with outdoor tow yard provided that the
business is at least 500 feet from any residential property.
      e.   Auto wrecking, junk yard, used auto parts (open storage).
      f.   Bus/transit stations with vehicle storage.
      g.   Contractors operations.
      h.   Explosives including all uses, storage or manufacture of materials
or products such as TNT or dynamite which would decompose by detonation.
      i.   Firearm range.
      j.   Incineration or reduction of waste material other than customarily
incidental to a principal use.
      k.   Indoor sports and recreation or entertainment, provided the
structure in which the use is located is at least 100 feet from any Residential
Zoning District.
      l.   Kilns or other heat processes fired by means other than electricity.
      m.   Rail unloading facility.
   (5)   Interim uses. Within any I-2 District, no structure or land shall be
used for the following purposes except by interim use permit.
      a.   Interim uses permitted in the I-1 District.
      b.   Outdoor storage established after May 23, 2018 when accessory to the
principal use of the property, subject to the special requirements in Section
1001.062.
   (6)   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed subject to additional requirements, exceptions
and modifications as set forth in this chapter and Subsection
1001.062 (Special Requirements for Industrial Districts) of this Code:
 
Minimum lot size1                   1 acre
Minimum lot width1                  100 feet
Minimum lot depth1                  100 feet
Maximum impervious surface coverage 80%
Maximum building footprint coverage 50%
Structure height limit              45 feet
Setbacks2
Building - Principal Structure
                                    50 (75) feet - Plus 1 foot for every 1 foot
   Front yard                    of building height over 30 feet (maximum
                                    setback of 80 feet)
   Side yard                     15 (75) feet
   Side yard (street)            40 (50) feet
   Rear yard                     15 (75) feet
Parking
   Front, side, or rear to a stre10 (20) feet
   Side interior                 5 (20) feet
   Rear yard                     10 (20) feet
   To residential                5 (20) feet
1Minimum lot size, width, depth and the like shall not include area of street
easements, right-of-way, or common areas.
2Setbacks in parentheses apply adjacent to R-1 - RH Residential Districts. A 20
foot setback is required for any structure or parking adjacent to any other
Residential District.
 
Subd. 3   Business Park District (B-P)
   (1)   Intent. The purpose of the B-P, Business Park District is to provide
for multi-use building and/or the establishment of business offices, wholesale
showrooms, and related uses in an environment which provides a high level of
amenities, including landscaping, preservation of natural features, increased
architectural design, pedestrian facilities and other features.
   (2)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted uses in the B-
P District:
      a.   Agricultural uses existing at the time of the adoption of the
Subsection.
      b.   Bank or financial institution with drive-through.
      c.   Cafeterias not open to the general public.
      d.   Coffee shops and cafeterias located within the principal structure.
      e.   Commercial printing.
      f.   Data processing.
      g.   Health care facilities.
      h.   Higher technology business uses including, but not limited to: the
manufacturing, or assembly, of medical devices and equipment,
telecommunications equipment, pharmaceuticals, computer or electronic products
and software, aeronautical equipment or components.
      i.   Manufacturing, processing, packaging, cleaning, storage, assembling,
servicing, repair or testing of materials, goods or products, (including
machine shop) when wholly contained within a building and which meet and
maintain all applicable standards established by the state.
      j.   Office and office/warehouse.
      k.   Public utilities and essential government services.
      l.   Research and development (including laboratories).
      m.   Restaurant - full service (no drive-thru) sit down.
      n.   Schools including technical, vocational and business schools,
colleges, universities and libraries.
      o.   Telecommuting center.
      p.   Travel agencies.
      q.   Warehousing used in conjunction with offices or manufacturing
facilities.
      r.   Wholesale showroom.
      s.   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section as determined
by the Planning Commission and the City Council.
   (3)   Permitted accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory
uses in the B-P District:
      a.   Any incidental repair or processing necessary to conduct a permitted
principal use.
      b.   Bicycle and transit shelters.
      c.   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the
premises for a period not to exceed time necessary to complete construction.
      d.   Day care accessory to business use.
      e.   Essential service structure.
      f.   Gate security detached building.
      g.   Information kiosks.
      h.   Private garages, off-street parking and loading spaces as regulated
in this Code.
      i.   Public telephone booths.
      j.   Retail sales related to the processing of product on site so long as
it does not exceed 30% of the floor space of the principal building.
      k.   Signs as regulated in this Code.
      l.   Single satellite earth station antenna 2 meters or less in diameter
and single antenna designed to receive direct broadcast services or
multichannel multipoint distribution services 1 meter or less in diameter and
antennas designed to receive television broadcast signals, as regulated in
Subsection
1001.21 of this Code.
      m.   Tenant restaurants, cafeterias, and retail service limited to
tenants of the building, provided that they be essentially limited to providing
service to the users of the permitted use, and that no signs or other evidence
of these uses are visible from the exterior of the building.
   (4)   Conditional uses. Within any B-P District, no structure or land shall
be used for the following uses except by conditional use permit:
      a.   Day care.
      b.   Financial institutions and banks with drive-thru facilities.
      c.   Health and fitness centers.
      d.   Hotels and motels.
      e.   Marine vehicle repair, minor.
      f.   Park and ride lots and transit hubs.
      g.   Public facilities and public utility substations.
      h.   Outdoor storage tanks and equipment for products that are used in
conjunction with the primary use.
      i.   Radio and TV studios, sound stages, multi-media, post production
studio and support facilities and equipment.
      j.   Restaurant - fast food (no drive-thru), full service (no drive-
thru).
      k.   Contractors operations.
      l.   Other uses similar to those permitted in this section as determined
by the Planning Commission and the City Council.
   (5)   Interim uses. Within any BP District, no structure or land shall be
used for the following purposes except by interim use permit.
      a.   Archery, driving, target, and trap and skeet shooting ranges.
      b.   Athletic fields, not including stadiums and sports arenas.
      c.   Boat launch ramps.
      d.   Fishing, hunting and swimming areas, not including swimming pools.
      e.   Horseback trails.
      f.   Land reclamation, mining and soil processing.
      g.   Miniature golf courses.
      h.   Outdoor theaters, including drive-ins.
      i.   Outdoor sports, recreation, or entertainment facilities.
      j.   Private and public outdoor sports and recreational uses.
      k.   Auto vehicle sales, not including auto auctions, of no more than 5
vehicles for sale at the same time.
   (6)   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed subject to additional requirements, exceptions
and modifications as set forth in this chapter and Subsection
1001.062 (Special Requirements for Industrial Districts) of this Code:
 
Minimum lot size1                   1 acre
Minimum lot width1                  150 feet
Minimum lot depth1                  150 feet
Maximum impervious surface coverage 80%
Maximum building footprint coverage 50%
Structure height limit              45 feet or 3 stories, whichever is less
Setbacks2
Building - Principal Structure       
                                    40 (60) feet - Plus 1 foot for every 1 foot
   Front yard                    of building height over 30 feet (maximum
                                    setback of 80 feet)
   Side yard                     20 (40) feet
   Side yard (street)            40 (40) feet
   Rear yard                     20 (60) feet
Parking
   Front, side, or rear to a stre20 (20) feet
   Side interior                 15 (20) feet
   Rear yard                     15 (20) feet
   To residential                15 (20) feet
1Minimum lot size, width, depth and the like shall not include area of street
easements, right-of-way, or common areas.
2Setbacks in parentheses apply adjacent to R-1 - Residential Districts. A 20
foot setback is required for any structure or parking adjacent to any other
Residential District.
 
(Ord. 2010-13, passed 7-13-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 3-22-2011; Am. Ord.
2012-07, passed 5-22-2012; Am. Ord. 2013-02, passed 2-12-2013; Am. Ord. 2016-
10, passed 4-12-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-12, passed 5-23-2018)
1001.064   ADDITIONAL NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
Subd. 1   Village-Mixed Use District (VM)
   (1)   Intent. To provide for and encourage integrated and appropriate scale
mixed use development within certain areas of the Historic Village area.
Require high quality site and architectural design in conformance with the
unique character and scale of the Village.
   (2)   Permitted uses. See table at Subdivision 3.
   (3)   Permitted accessory uses.
      a.   Uses listed as accessory uses in table at Subdivision 3 and item 1
listed below which are customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to the
permitted or approved conditional use. All accessory uses, except for those
listed below are to be contained wholly within a lawfully erected principal
building.
         1.   Any outdoor display of goods or materials shall be as approved as
part of the final site plan and building plan approval process.
   (4)   Conditional uses. See table at Subdivision 3 for a list of
conditional/interim uses.
   (5)   District requirements.
 
                                    Sanitary Sewer
Minimum lot size                    6,000 square feet
Minimum lot width                   40 feet
Minimum lot depth                   100 feet
Maximum impervious surface coverage 90%
Maximum building footprint coverage 75%
Structure height limit              30 feet
 
   (6)   Setbacks.
 
Building
Front                 0 - 10 feet*
Side to a street      0 - 10 feet*
Side                  5 feet
Rear                  10 feet
To a residential zone 30 feet
* New buildings shall be constructed at a build-to-line of between 0 and 10
feet from the public street right-of-way to create a uniform streetscape.
* Parking - No parking is allowed in front of the primary building. All off-
street parking shall be located to the side or rear of the building.
To a street           15 feet
Side                  5 feet**
Rear                  5 feet**
To a residential zone 10 feet
* Minimum lot size, width, depth, and the like shall not include area of
street easements, right-of-way or common areas.
* Setbacks to street frontages shall be measured from the edge of the right-
of-way as dedicated in conformance with City, county or state requirements and
the Dayton Comprehensive Plan.
** May be reduced to 0 feet when abutting another parking lot and covered by a
joint access and circulation agreement between the 2 parcels, subject to
review and approval of the City.
 
   (7)   Special provisions.
      a.   See the exterior building material requirements as provided in the
Zoning Code.
      b.   Final site and building plan approval is required prior to issuance
of a permit for construction, expansion or exterior remodeling. See Subsection
1001.28, Subd. 3 for the final site and building plan requirements.
      c.   All new development is required to be connected to municipal
utilities.
   (8)   Sign regulations. Refer to Subsection
1001.20.
   (9)   Parking regulations. Refer to Subsection
1001.19.
   (10)   Other performance standards. Refer to Subsection
1001.14.
Subd. 2   Public Recreation District (PR)
   (1)   Permitted uses. See table at Subdivision 3.
   (2)   Permitted accessory uses. Uses listed as accessory uses in table at
Subdivision 3 when customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to the
permitted or approved conditional use. Accessory uses are to be contained
wholly within a lawfully erected principal building, except designated
accessory structures approved as a conditional use.
   (3)   Conditional uses. See table at Subdivision 3 for a listing of
conditional/interim uses.
   (4)   District requirements.
 
Minimum district size                  none
Minimum lot area - non-residential     20 acres
Minimum lot depth - non-residential    330 feet
Minimum lot width - non-residential    500 feet
Maximum lot coverage of all structures 2%
 
   (5)   Setbacks.
 
Front, side or rear to a street*        30 feet
Maximum dwelling front setback          500 feet
Interior side yard, minimum             50 feet
Interior side yard, abutting residences 50 feet
Rear yard, minimum*                     50 feet
Rear yard, abutting residences          50 feet
Rear yard, detached accessory uses      50 feet
* Street setback abutting an arterial street shall be a minimum of 50 feet
 
   (6)   Other requirements.
 
Principal structure height limit                             25 feet
Accessory structure height limit                             25 feet
Minimum distance between principal buildings on the same lot 35 feet
 
Subd. 3   Table of Uses
 
N-Not Permitted
P-Permitted
C-Conditional/Interim Use Permit
A-Accessory
Use                                   Zoning District
                                      VM RP
Accessory buildings                   N  F
Adult use                             N  N
Agriculture                           N  C
Auto and marine sales                 N  N
Auto and marine services major repair N  N
Auto and marine services minor repair C  N
Boarding houses                       C  N
 
 
N-Not Permitted
P-Permitted
C-Conditional/Interim Use Permit
A-Accessory
Use                                Zoning District
                                   VM RP
Bus/transit station                C  N
Business/trade schools             C  N
Clinics/medical offices            P  N
Commercial recreation              C  C
Convenience/gas station            C  N
Day care                           C  C
Day care accessory to business use A  A
Essential services                 P  P
Equipment rental                   C  N
Financial institutions             P  N
Financial institutions w/ drive up C  N
Heavy manufacturing                N  N
Hospitals                          N  N
Industrial, heavy                  N  N
Industrial, light                  C  N
Industrial, medium                 P  N
Laboratories - medical, dental     C  N
Mining                             N  N
Mini-storage, commercial           N  N
Mortuaries, funeral homes          C  N
Motels, hotels                     N  N
Nurseries, retail                  C  N
Off sale liquor store              C  N
On sale liquor establishment       C  C
 
 
N-Not Permitted
P-Permitted
C-Conditional/Interim Use Permit
A-Accessory
Use                                   Zoning District
                                      VM RP
Offices                               P  N
Outdoor display area                  C  N
Outdoor storage area                  N  N
Private clubs                         C  C
Public parking facility               C  N
Recreational vehicle sale             N  N
Recycling facility indoor             N  N
Recycling and salvage outdoor         N  N
Religious institutions                C  N
Restaurant - Class I (sit down)       C  C
Restaurant - Class II (with alcohol)  C  C
Restaurant -  Class III (fast food)  C  N
Restaurant - Class IV (with drive up) N  N
Retail shops and services             P  A
Schools                               C  C
Theatres (indoors)                    N  N
Towers - cellular and communication   C  C
Truck terminal                        N  N
Warehouse and distribution centers    N  N
Wholesaling                           C  N
Veterinary clinics                    C  N
NOTE: Any use not listed above as a permitted or conditional use is not
permitted, however uses that are not listed and are intrinsically similar to
a use listed above may be allowed when specifically approved by action of the
City Council.
 
(Ord. 2010-13, passed 7-13-2010)
1001.065   GENERAL MIXED USE DISTRICTS.
Subd. 1   General Mixed Use District-1 (GMU-1): Highway 81 Corridor
   (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the General Mixed Use District-1 (GMU-1) is
to provide an area for compact, walkable, mixed-use development along key
community corridors and to support high quality development and site
flexibility due to the unique site conditions in these areas. The mixture of
land uses within the district is essential to establishing the level of
vitality and intensity needed to support retail and service uses. A combination
of retail, office, service and residential land uses are encouraged although
not required. New residential uses may also be entirely residential. The mix of
uses can occur vertically and horizontally. The placement of buildings and the
relationship of the building, parking, landscaping, and pedestrian spaces is
essential to creating the pedestrian-friendly environment envisioned for the
GMU-1 District.
   (2)   Design character.  The character of the GMU-1 District shall reflect
high quality design due to the high visibility of these areas. Although
development in this mixed-use district will be more auto-oriented in design
than a traditional downtown area, pedestrian connections and amenities will
still be required to provide connections to existing to use, future transit
while providing for safe pedestrian circulation within the site and between
sites. Landscaping, signage, and architectural details shall be used to unify
sites within the GMU-1 District area.
   (3)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted uses in the GMU-
1 District:
Agricultural uses existing at the time of adoption of this section amendment.
Antique or gift shop
Art, decorating and music studios
Bakery goods sales and baking of goods for retail sales on premises
Bank, credit unions and other financial institutions without drive-up tellers
Beauty salons, day spas and barbershops
Book store
Coffee shop/delicatessen
Clothing store
Copy services but not including printing press or newspaper
Dwelling, multiple family (apartment, condominium, cooperative, townhouse) at a
minimum of 8 units per acre
Florist
Government buildings where the use conducted is primarily for office uses
Hardware store
Health/athletic clubs (within a principle building)
Hobby store including handicraft classed not to exceed 10 students
Jewelry sales and jewelry repair store
Liquor store
Meat market or specialty grocery store
Music store
Offices, administrative/commercial
Offices/clinics for medical, dental, or chiropractic services
Pharmacy, no drive-through
Restaurants Class 1 and II, no drive-through
Shoe sales/repair
Therapeutic massage
Tavern
Tobacco shop
   (4)   Permitted accessory-uses.  The following uses are permitted accessory
uses in the GMU-1 District:
Any incidental repair or processing necessary to conduct a permitted principal
use as long as it does not occupy more than 30% of the gross floor area of the
principal building.
Bus/transit and Park and Ride facilities
Essential service structure
Outdoor seating accessory to a restaurant meeting the requirements in
subsection (14) below;
Private garages, off-street parking and loading spaces as regulated in this
Title
Public open space plaza, square or other related uses
Signs as regulated in this Title
Trash enclosure service structure
Attached smoking facility associated with a principal use
Structured parking
   (5)   Conditional uses. Within any GMU-1 District, no structure or land
shall be used for the following uses except by conditional use permit:
Drive-through lanes for permitted uses (restaurants, banks) if provisions for
vehicle stacking, vehicle maneuvering, outdoor speaker devices, appearance and
lighting of outdoor menu boards and other related matters can be shown to be in
keeping with the intent and character of the GMU-1 District and compatible with
surrounding uses.
Hotel/motels
Schools, specialty
Theatres
Towers- cellular and communications as regulated in Section 1001.21 of this
Title
      (6)   Lot size, setback, site design and height requirements:
         a.   Minimum lot size requirements: The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in the GMU-1 District subject to additional requirements,
exceptions, and modifications set forth in this Chapter.
         1.   Minimum lot requirements:
            (a)   Lot size: 25,000 square feet
            (b)   Lot width: 150 feet
         2.   Setbacks:
            (a)   Front- 20 feet from public roadways and 30 feet from Highway
81.
            (b)   Side: No setback is required .unless abutting a Residential
District; a setback of 35 feet shall then be required.
            (c)   Rear: No setback is required unless abutting a Residential
District; a setback of 35 feet shall, then be required.
      b.   Site design:
         1.   Orient and consolidate structures to compliment existing,
adjacent development to create a coordinated and visually attractive mixed use
setting.
         2.   Site planning shall respect the relationship of the site to the
existing and proposed buildings and streets and major roadways including
Highway 81.
         3.   Buildings with frontage on a primary street shall orient front
facades parallel to the primary street.
         4.   Align the building front facade with adjacent buildings to
promote visual continuity from the public right-of-way, unless site, or .use
constraints are prohibitive.
         5.   Buildings shall have a clearly defined primary pedestrian
entrance at street level.
         6.   Wherever a surface parking area faces a street frontage, such
frontage shall be screened with a decorative wall, railing, hedge, or a
combination of these elements to a minimum height of 2 1/2 feet and a maximum
height of 3 1/2 feet above the level of the parking lot at the build to line.
         7.   Drive-through or drive-in lanes are not allowed within the front
of any buildings. They must be located-to the side or rear of a building.
         8.   Maximum impervious coverage. The total lot coverage shall not
exceed 80% impervious.
      c.   Building heights:
         1.   Maximum height on all buildings shall be 45 feet or 4 stories.
         2.   Where multiple buildings are proposed on a single site the
buildings shall be designed with varying heights while meeting the following
minimum standards:
            (a)   Buildings at the front setback line along Highway 81 shall
have a minimum height of 15 feet for 60% of the building length with a maximum
height of 25 feet. Buildings, set back from Highway 81 (not meeting the minimum
front yard setback to Highway 81) shall have a minimum height of 25 feet for
60% of the building length in order to provide visibility.
   (7)   Parking requirements.
      a.   Parking for residential units in the GMU-1 District shall be
calculated as required in Section
1001.19 with a preference for at least 50% of the required spaces provided
underground. The residential parking spaces shall be specifically reserved for
the use of residents and visitors only, separate from any commercial, office or
other uses on-site or nearby and shall not be counted as part of any shared
parking or joint parking arrangement.
      b.   Parking for non-residential uses in the GMU-1 District shall be
calculated under Section
1001.19. Shared parking arrangements as provided in
1001.19 are encouraged provided that such shared parking is fully connected
between sites for automobiles and pedestrians. On-street parking shall count
towards required parking.
   (8)   Building design requirements. To maintain the character of the mixed
use area the GMU-1 District is subject to the following standards to reflect
the character of the District.
      a.   All new building fronts (single story or multi-story) shall include
a minimum of 4 of the following elements:
         1.   Architectural detailing, such as cornice, awning, parapet, or
columns;
         2.   A visually pleasing primary front entrance that, in addition to
doors, shall be accented a minimum of 150 square feet around the door entrance
for single occupancy buildings and a minimum of 300 square feet total for the
front of multi-tenant buildings (this area shall be counted as one element).
Entrances shall be clearly articulated and obvious from the street;
         3.   A minimum of 30% window coverage on each front that faces a
street;
         4.   Contrasting, yet complementary material colors;
         5.   A combination of horizontal and vertical design features;
         6.   Irregular building shapes;
         7.   Horizontal offsets of at least 4 feet in depth;
         8.   Vertical offsets in the roofline of at least four feet;
         9.   Fenestration at the first floor level which is recessed
horizontally at least 1 foot into the facade;
         10.   Other architectural features in the overall architectural
concept.
      b.   Multi-story buildings shall have the ground floor distinguished from
the upper floors by having one or more the following:
         1.   Awning
         2.   Trellis
         3.   Arcade
         4.   Window lintels
         5.   Intermediate cornice line
         6.   Brick detailing such as quoins or corbels
      c.   Residential uses on first floors: Whenever residential uses are
included on the first floor of a building the. first floor elevation shall
stepped up above sidewalk, elevations immediately adjacent to the front of the
residential unit to ensure the residential unit is raised from the public
space. In addition, each first floor unit must have an individual private
entrance at the street level with private courtyard enclosure.
      d.   Any exterior building wall adjacent to or visible from a public
street, public open space or abutting property may not exceed 50 feet in length
without significant visual relief consisting of 1 of the following:
         1.   The facade shall be divided architecturally by means of
significantly different materials or textures;
         2.   Horizontal offsets of at least four feet in depth;
         3.   Vertical offsets in the roofline of at least four feet; or
         4.   Fenestration at the first floor level that is recessed
horizontally at least 1 foot into the facade.
      e.   Other design requirements.
         1.   All principal buildings shall have an entry on a street.
         2.   Buildings shall provide a base and top to their architecture.
         3.   The tops of buildings shall be articulated to minimum the "box"
like images.
         4.   Buildings shall be architecturally unique and shall not be of a
corporate architecture (including roof patterns, corporate colors,
architectural elements, and similar treatments).
      f.   Accent materials: Accent materials shall be wrapped around walls
visible from public view. Where a mixed use building is visible from a public
road all elevations shall be architecturally treated; accent material shall
consist of materials comparable in grade and quality to the primary exterior
material. Such materials may include glass, prefinished decorative metal and
fiber cement trim within soffit and fascia areas.
      g.   Major exterior materials of all walls including face brick, stone,
glass, stucco, synthetic stucco, fiber cement vertical panel siding,
architectural concrete and precast panels shall be acceptable as the major
exterior wall surface when they are incorporated into an overall design of the
building. Major materials must cover at least 60% of the exterior.
      h.   Fiber cement seam lines shall be architecturally integrated into the
building design so that they are not visible. Seam lines can be filled, covered
by other accent material or other method thereby making the seam lines
invisible. Color impregnated decorative block shall also be allowed as a major
exterior wall material and shall be required to be sealed. All materials shall
be color impregnated with the exception of architectural concrete precast panel
systems and fiber cement siding that may be painted.
      i.   Restricted exterior materials. Unadorned pre-stressed concrete
panels, whether smooth or raked, non-decorative concrete block, sheet metal,
unfinished metal and/or galvanized and unfinished aluminum surfaces (walls or
roofs) shall not be used as exterior materials. This restriction shall apply to
all principal structures and to all accessory buildings except those accessory
buildings not visible from any property line. No more than 25% of any exterior
wall on a building shall be fiber cement siding, wood or metal accent material.
      j.   Building roofs. Mansard or mansard style roofs are not permitted
except for mansard style cornices. Acceptable designs include flat, pitched or
curved. Building roof styling shall incorporate a minimum of 1 of the following
elements:
         1.   Parapets or cornices;
         2.   Varying building height and variety of roof lines while (meeting
requirements in Section (6)c. Building Heights).
   (9)   Screening.
      a.   Building mechanical equipment. The view of all roof-top equipment
and related piping, ducting, electrical and mechanical utilities abutting a
street shall be screened from ground level view. Screening may include parapet
walls, penthouses, or other architecturally integrated elements. Wood fencing
or chain link with slats shall not be used for screening. The term "ground
level view" shall be defined as the view of the building from the furthest
point of the width of the right-of-way from the property line(s) that abut a
street. A cross-sectional drawing shall be provided that illustrates the sight
lines from the ground level view.
      b.   Ground mechanical equipment: Ground mechanical equipment shall be
100% screened from contiguous properties and adjacent streets by opaque
landscaping, or screen wall compatible with the architectural treatment of the
principal structure.
      c.   Trash enclosure service structure: All exterior trash enclosures or
other accessory structures shall be constructed of the same materials and
colors as the principal building.
      d.   Outdoor storage. There shall be no outdoor storage of either
materials or products, except through the issuance of a conditional use permit.
      e.   External loading and service areas. External loading and service
areas must be 100% screened from the ground-level view from contiguous
residential or commercial properties and adjacent streets, except at access
points.
      f.   Abutting districts. Wherever a GMU-1 District, or is across the
street from an R Residential District, a berm, fence or screening consisting of
compact evergreen trees or hedge or a combination thereof, not less than 90%
opaque at time of installation, nor less than 6 feet in height, except adjacent
to a street where it shall be not less than 3 feet nor more than 4 feet in
height shall be erected or installed and maintained. All screening shall comply
with Section
1001.24.
      g.   Headlight screening. The light from automobile headlights and other
sources shall be 100% screened whenever it may be directed onto adjacent
residential windows.
   (10)   Lighting: In addition to the lighting requirements presented in
Section
1001.14, lighting in the GMU-1 District shall also be subject to the following
requirements:
      a.   Decorative style lighting a maximum of 14 feet in height shall be
used to illuminate all site areas with the exception of parking areas.
      b.   Shoe-box style lighting shall only be permitted in parking areas.
      c.   Lighting fixtures shall be compatible with the architecture of the
building.
      d.   Wall-mounted lighting shall be used on building fronts to illuminate
entry points and highlight architectural features.
   (11)   Landscape design. In addition to the landscape requirements presented
in Section
1001.24 all plant materials shall be used to create a unified and attractive
mixed use environment.
      a.   Planting areas should be located and designed to avoid visual
interference with public signage and private commercial communication.
      b.   Plant materials shall, be arranged to provide focal points on the
site, and concentrated to signify key site locations such as the primary
building entrance, site entrance, around signage, along pedestrian walkways,
and along the perimeter of the building.
   (12)   Signage. In addition to the sign requirements presented in Section
1001.20, signs in the GMU-1 District shall also be subject to the following
requirements:
      a.   To reduce visual sign clutter, signage shall be distinct and
minimal.
      b.   Wall signs shall be located in a designated area located between 12
feet and 16 feet above grade.
      c.   Attached wall signage shall consist of individual letters or script
logos mounted on the building.
      d.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to monument style signs on a
solid base that are a maximum often feet in height and 100 square feet in area,
including the sign base. Monument sign bases shall be constructed of similar
materials, style, and color as that of the principal building.
      e.   Projecting signs are permitted with the following requirements:
         1.   Projecting signs may extend 5 feet into a required yard setback.
         2.   Projecting signs must be at least 8 feet above a sidewalk.
         3.   The maximum area of a projecting sign is 8 square feet.
   (13)   Pedestrian environment. Pedestrian connections to the surrounding
neighborhood shall be incorporated into the neighborhood commercial
development.
      a.   Pedestrian amenities shall be included in places where people
typically gather, including but not limited to, transit stops, building
entrances or street corners or abutting bike or pedestrian trail connections.
These amenities shall benefit the intended users and be located in places that
are highly visible. These spaces must include at least two of the following
(master planned developments shall provide two elements in a central location):
         1.   Patterned materials on walkways
         2.   Shelters
         3.   Trash receptacles
         4.   Drinking fountains
         5.   Pedestrian lighting
         6.   Fountains, sculptures, or kiosks
         7.   Street trees, flower boxes or container landscaping
      b.   Sidewalk connections shall be provided to and through the
development to existing and planed bus stops, trails, sidewalks and adjacent
properties, where access exists or reasonable connections are possible. If a
parking lot lies between the building entry and an adjacent public street, a
pedestrian walkway at least six feet wide shall be provided between them. Clear
internal pedestrian circulation routes shall be provided on the site.
   (14)   Outdoor seating for food service businesses.
      a.   Food service businesses, including but not limited to, bakeries,
delicatessens, coffee and/or tea shops, and restaurants, may provide outdoor
temporary seating for their patrons, provided that the following requirements
are met and an annual incidental outdoor seating permit is approved by the
Zoning Administrator:
         1.   The seating shall be located on private property.
         2.   The seating shall be of good patio or café type furniture that
enhances the appearance of the business.
         3.   The outdoor seating area shall be defined with the use of
landscaping, temporary fencing or other means that contains the tables and
chairs for the use as demonstrated on a site plan and approved by City staff.
         4.   No alcoholic beverages or food shall be served to persons outside
of the designated outdoor seating area. Signage shall be posted that restricts
consumption of alcohol outside of the designated outdoor seating area as
approved by City staff.
         5.   Patrons shall access the outdoor seating area through the main
entrance or host station and shall be seated by a staff person and all full
service restaurants with wait staff service.
         6.   The seating shall be located so as not to compromise safety.
Seating shall not obstruct the entrance or any required exits or be located on
landscaping or parking areas. If located on private sidewalks or walkways,
seating shall be located so as to leave a minimum of a 4-foot wide passageway
for pedestrians.
         7.   No additional parking is required for 30 seats or less. If public
parking is available either in a ramp or adjacent on-street, then no additional
parking is required. | Any additional seating over 30 seats shall provide
required parking based on 1 space per  3 seats. Shared parking will be
considered and may be approved by City staff.
         8.   Any proposed outdoor seating plan over 50 or more seats shall be
by Conditional Use Permit.
         9.   All exterior sound equipment shall be shutoff at 10:00 p.m. as
regulated in Section
1001.14.
         10.   Lighting shall be permitted to the extent that it only
illuminates the designed area. Lighting cannot shine or cause a glare upon
other public or private property outside the designated area or as permitted in
Section
1001.14.
         11.   Any proposed outdoor seating-area on property abutting an R-
Residential zoning district shall be by Conditional Use Permit.
         12.   The business owner shall regularly clean the seating area so
that it is litter-free.
Subd. 2   General Mixed Use District-2 (GMU-2): City Center.
   (1)   Purpose. The purpose of the General Mixed Use District-2 (GMU-2) is to
provide an area for compact, walkable, mixed-use development that also provides
for the establishment of a community focal point with a blend of cultural,
recreational, entertainment, commercial retail and office uses along key
community corridors. The mixture of land uses within the district is essential
to establishing the level of vitality and intensity needed to support retail
and service uses. A combination of retail, office, service and residential land
uses are encouraged although not required. New residential uses may also be
entirely residential. The mix of uses can occur vertically and horizontally.
The placement of buildings and the relationship of the building, parking,
landscaping, and pedestrian spaces is essential to creating the pedestrian-
friendly environment envisioned for the GMU-2 District.
   (2)   Design character. The character of the GMU-2 District shall reflect
high quality design due to the high visibility of these areas along county
roadways. New development in this district shall create a unifying identity and
transition between different uses through high quality design, pedestrian
amenities, compact development, and connections to public spaces.
   (3)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted uses in the GMU-
2 District:
Agricultural uses existing at the time of adoption of this section amendment.
Amphitheaters
Antique or gift shop
Appliance store, but no fabricating or manufacturing
Art, decorating and music galleries and studios
Bakery goods sales and baking of goods for retail sales on premises
Bank, credit unions and other financial institutions without drive-up tellers
Beauty salons, day spas and barber shops
Bicycle sales and repair
Book store
Coffee shop/delicatessen
Convenience grocery store without motor fuel sales
Community centers
Clothing store
Copy services but not including printing press or newspaper
Dwelling, multiple family (apartment, condominium, cooperative, townhouse) at a
minimum of 8 units per acre
Florist
Grocery, supermarkets
Grocery, superstores
Hardware store
Health/athletic clubs (freestanding)
Hobby store including handicraft classed not to exceed 10 students
Hotel/Motel
Jewelry sales and jewelry repair store
Liquor store
Music store
Offices, administrative/commercial
Offices/clinics for medical, dental, or chiropractic services
Pharmacy, no drive-through
Publicly owned civic or cultural buildings such as city offices, libraries,
auditoriums, public administration buildings
Restaurants Class I and II, no drive-through
Shoe sales/repair
Tailoring services
Tanning salon
Therapeutic massage
Tavern
Tobacco shop
Video rental and sales
   (4)   Permitted accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory
uses in the GMU-2 District:
Any incidental repair or processing necessary to conduct a permitted principal
use as long as it does not occupy more than 30% of the gross floor area of the
principal building. Bus/Transit and Park and Ride facilities Essential service
structure
Outdoor seating accessory to a restaurant meeting the requirements in Section
15 below;
Private garages, off-street parking and loading spaces as regulated in this
Title
Public open space plaza, square or other related uses
Signs as regulated in this Title
Small appliance repair
Sporting goods store
Trash enclosure service structure
Attached smoking facility associated with a principal use
Structured parking
   (5)   Conditional Uses. Within any GMU-2 District, no structure or land
shall bemused for the following uses except by conditional use permit:
Bowling alleys, electronic game-rooms, billiard and pool rooms, skating rinks,
gymnasiums, night clubs.
Drive-through lanes for permitted uses (restaurants, banks) if provisions for
vehicle stacking, vehicle maneuvering, outdoor speaker devices, appearance and
lighting of outdoor menu boards and other related matters can be shown to be in
keeping with the intent and character of the GMU-2 district and compatible with
surrounding uses
Hospital and other regional medical facilities
Restaurant- Class III (fast food)
Restaurant- Class IV (with drive-through)
Schools, specialty
Theatres
Towers- cellular and communications as regulated in Section
1001.21 of this Title
   (6)   Interim Uses. Within any GMU-2 District, no structure or land shall be
used for the following purposes except by Interim Use Permit.
Farmers Market
Special Events (except Carnivals).
      a.   Such activity is directed towards the general public and includes
grand openings, craft shows, flea markets, mechanical and animal rides and
displays of materials that are typically not sold or serviced on the site.
      b.   The event shall not exceed the period specified in the
administrative permit and in no case shall exceed 3 consecutive calendar days-
per event.
      c.   There shall be no more than 2 special events per calendar year per
property. However, each tenant in a multi-tenant building shall be permitted 1
special event per year. Multi-tenant buildings with less than 5 lease-spaces
shall be considered as a single property for purposes of this provision.
   (7)   Lot size, setback, site design and height requirements:
      a.   Minimum Lot Size Requirements: The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in the GMU-2 District subject to additional requirements,
exceptions, and modifications set forth in this Chapter.
         1.   Minimum lot requirements:
            (a)   Lot size: no minimum for non-residential uses
            (b)   Residential parcels shall maintain a lot width that is
adequate for the design of the structure.
         2.   Setbacks:
            (a)   Front-build-to-line (0-15 feet, depending on future road
design). In the GMU-2 District in the front yard a build-to-line is established
which provides a minimum and maximum front setback for buildings and other
structures, from the right-of-way or property line. The minimum front building
setback shall be 0 feet and the maximum shall be 10 feet.
            (b)   Side. No setback is required unless abutting a Residential
District, a setback of 20 feet shall then be required.
            (c)   Rear: No setback is required unless abutting a Residential
District; a setback of 20 feet shall then be required.
         3.   Site design:
            (a)   Building frontage: At least 65% of the street frontage of any
lot shall be occupied by building facades at the build-to- line. In addition,
on corner lots, a minimum of the first 50 feet of the lot frontage on either
side of a street intersection must be occupied by buildings set at the property
line. Parking or other space open to the sky is not allowed within this first
50 feet.
            (b)   On lots with more then one street frontage (corners), the
building shall be located to meet the 65% street frontage requirement on both
streets.
            (c)   The building frontage requirement may be met either with an
enclosed building or an arcade constructed with a permanent roof of the same
materials as the remainder of the building.
            (d)   At least the first and second floor must meet the building
frontage requirement. Arcades at street level and terracing of building facades
above the second floor are encouraged.
            (e)   Buildings with frontage on a primary street shall orient
front facades parallel to the primary street.
            (f)   Align the building front facade with adjacent buildings to
promote visual continuity from the public right-of-way, unless site or use
constraints are prohibitive.
            (g)   Buildings shall have a clearly defined primary pedestrian
entrance at street level.
            (h)   Drive-through or drive-in lanes are not allowed within the
front of any buildings. They must be located to the side or rear of a building.
            (i)   Maximum impervious coverage. The total lot coverage shall not
exceed 80% impervious.
      b.   Building heights.
         1.   The minimum building height shall be 25 feet or two stories while
the maximum building height on all buildings shall be 45 feet or four stories.
   (8)   Parking requirements.
      a.   Parking for residential units in the GMU-2 District shall be
calculated as required in Section
1001.19 with a preference for a minimum of 50 of the required spaces provided
underground (or tuck under in townhomes with a minimum of480 square foot
garage). The residential parking spaces shall be specifically reserved for the
use of residents and visitors only, separate from any commercial, office or
other uses on-site or nearby and shall not be counted as part of any shared
parking or joint parking arrangement,
      B.   Parking for non-residential uses in the GMU-2 District shall be
calculated under Section
1001.19. Shared parking arrangements as provided in
1001.19are encouraged provided that such shared parking is fully connected
between sites for automobiles and pedestrians. On-street parking shall count
towards required parking.
      c.   No parking spaces shall be located between the front of the
principal structure and the abutting front lot line.
      d.   Wherever a surface parking area faces a street frontage, such
frontage shall be screened with a decorative wall, railing, hedge, or a
combination of these elements to a minimum height of 2 1/2 feet and a maximum
height of 3 1/2 feet above the level of the parking lot at the build to line.
      e.   A reduction of up to 10% in the number of required off-street
parking spaces may be approved by the Zoning Administrator in the case of
shared parking areas between abutting uses.
      f.   On-street parking shall count towards required parking.
   (9)   Building design requirements.  To maintain the character of the mixed
use area the GMU-2 District is subject to the following standards to reflect
the character of the District.
      a.   All new building fronts (single story or multi-story) shall include
a minimum of 4 of the following elements:
         1.   Architectural detailing, such as cornice, awning, parapet, or
columns;
         2.   A visually pleasing primary front entrance that, in addition to
doors, shall be accented a minimum of 150 square feet around the door entrance
for single occupancy buildings and a minimum of 300 square feet total for the
front of multi-tenant buildings (this area shall be counted as one element).
Entrances shall be clearly articulated and obvious from the street;
         3.   A minimum of 30% window coverage on each front that faces a
street;
         4.   Contrasting, yet complementary material colors;
         5.   A combination of horizontal and vertical design features;
         6.   Irregular building shapes;
         7.   Horizontal offsets of at least 4 feet in depth;
         8.   Vertical offsets in the roofline of at least four feet;
         9.   Fenestration at the first floor level which is recessed
horizontally at least 1 foot into the facade;
         10.   Other architectural features in the overall architectural
concept.
      b.   Multi-story buildings shall have the ground floor distinguished from
the upper floors by having one or more the following:
         1.   Awning
         2.   Trellis
         3.   Arcade
         4.   Window lintels
         5.   Intermediate cornice line
         6.   Brick detailing such as quoins or corbels
      c.   Residential uses on first floors: Whenever residential uses are
included on the first floor of a building the first floor elevation shall be
stepped up from sidewalk elevations immediately adjacent to the front of the
residential unit to ensure the residential unit is raised from the public
space. In addition, each first floor unit must have an individual private
entrance at the street level with private courtyard enclosure.
      d.   Any exterior building wall adjacent to or visible from a public
street, public open space or abutting property may not exceed 50 feet in length
without significant visual relief consisting of one of the following:
         1.   The facade shall be divided architecturally by means of
significantly different materials or textures;
         2.   Horizontal offsets of at least four feet in depth;
         3.   Vertical offsets in the roofline of at least four feet; or
         4.   Fenestration at the first floor level that is recessed
horizontally at least 1 foot into the facade.
      e.   Other design requirements.
         1.   All principal buildings shall have an entry on a street.
         2.   Buildings shall provide a base and top to their architecture.
         3.   The tops of buildings shall be articulated to minimum the "box"
like images.
         4.   Buildings shall be architecturally unique and shall not be of a
corporate architecture (including roof patterns, corporate colors,
architectural elements, and similar treatments).
      f.   Accent materials: Accent materials shall be wrapped around walls
visible from public view. Where a mixed use building is visible from a public
road all elevations shall be architecturally treated. Accent material shall
consist of materials comparable in grade and quality to the primary exterior
material. Such materials may include glass, prefinished decorative metal and
fiber cement trim within soffit and fascia areas.
      g.   Major exterior materials of all walls including face brick, stone,
glass, stucco, synthetic stucco, fiber cement vertical panel siding,
architectural concrete and precast panels shall be acceptable as the major
exterior wall surface when they are incorporated into an overall design of the
building. Major materials must cover at least 60% of the exterior.
      h.   Fiber cement seam lines shall be architecturally integrated into the
building design so that they are not visible. Seam lines can be filled, covered
by other accent material or other method thereby making the seam lines
invisible. Color impregnated decorative block shall also be allowed as a major
exterior wall material and shall be required to be sealed. All materials shall
be color impregnated with the exception of architectural concrete precast panel
systems and fiber cement siding that may be painted.
   (10)   Screening.
      a.   Building mechanical equipment. The view of all roof-top equipment
and related piping, ducting, electrical and mechanical utilities abutting a
street shall be screened from ground level view. Screening may include parapet
walls, penthouses, or other architecturally integrated elements. Wood fencing
or chain link with slats shall not be used for screening. The term "ground
level view shall be defined as the view of the building from the furthest point
of the width of the right-of-way from the property line(s) that abut a street.
A cross-sectional drawing shall be provided that illustrates the sight lines
from the ground level view.
      b.   Ground mechanical equipment: Ground mechanical equipment shall be
100% screened from contiguous properties and adjacent streets by opaque
landscaping, or screen wall compatible with the architectural treatment of the
principal structure.
      c.   Trash enclosure service structure: All exterior trash enclosures or
other accessory structures shall be constructed of the same materials and
colors as the principal building.
      d.   Outdoor storage. There shall be no outdoor storage of either
materials or products, except through the issuance of a conditional use permit.
      e.   External loading and service areas. External loading and service
areas must be 100% screened from the ground-level view from contiguous
residential or commercial properties and adjacent streets, except at access
points.
      f.   Abutting districts.  Wherever a GMU-1 district, or is across the
street from an R Residential District, a berm, fence or screening consisting of
compact evergreen trees or hedge or a combination thereof, not less than 90%
opaque at time of installation, nor less than 6 feet in height, except adjacent
to a street where it shall be not less than 3 feet nor more than 4 feet in
height shall be erected or installed and maintained. All screening shall comply
with Section
1001.24.
      g.   Headlight screening. The light from automobile headlights and other
sources shall be 100% screened whenever it may be directed onto adjacent
residential windows.
   (11)   Lighting. In addition to the lighting requirements presented in
Section
1001.14, lighting in the GMU-2 District shall also be subject to the following
requirements:
      a.   Decorative style lighting a maximum of 14 feet in height shall be
used to illuminate all site areas with the exception of parking areas.
      b.   Shoe-box style lighting shall only be permitted in parking areas.
      c.   Lighting fixtures shall be compatible with the architecture of the
building.
      d.   Wall-mounted lighting shall be used on building fronts to illuminate
entry points and highlight architectural features.
   (12)   Landscape design. In addition to the landscape requirements presented
in Section
1001.24 all plant materials shall be used to create a unified and attractive
mixed use environment.
      a.   Planting areas should be located and designed to avoid visual
interference with public signage and private commercial communication.
      b.   Plant materials shall be arranged to provide focal points on the
site, and concentrated to signify key site locations such as the primary
building entrance, site entrance, around signage, along pedestrian walkways,
and along the perimeter of the building.
      c.   Water quality ponding areas shall be designed and landscaped in a
park-like character consistent with the character throughout the development.
      d.   Landscaping of areas along pedestrian corridors shall have a
consistent character throughout the development. Edges of trails and sidewalks
shall be reinforced with street trees, plantings and pedestrian-scale lights
and similar amenities.
   (13)   Plazas.
      a.   All properties with principal buildings in excess of 30,000 square
feet shall be required to have a public plaza area(s).
      b.   The design of the plaza shall include special paving, benches, trash
receptacles, lighting fixtures and other similar type features which comply
with the Comprehensive Plan and City specifications.
   (14)   Signage. In addition to the sign requirements presented in Section
1001.20, signs in the GMU-2 District shall also be subject to the following
requirements:
      a.   To reduce visual sign clutter, signage shall be distinct and
minimal.
      b.   Wall signs shall be located in a designated area located between 12
feet and 16 feet above grade.
      c.   Attached wall signage shall consistent of individual letters or
script logos mound on the building.
      d.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to monument style signs on a
solid base that are a maximum of ten feet in height and 100 square feet in
area, including the sign base. Monument sign bases shall be constructed of
similar materials, style, and color as that of the principal building.
      e.   Projecting signs are permitted with the following requirements:
         1.   Projecting signs may extend 5 feet into a required yard setback.
         2.   Projecting signs must be at least 8 feet above a sidewalk.
         3.   The maximum area of a projecting sign is 8 square feet.
   (15)   Pedestrian environment.  Pedestrian connections to the surrounding
neighborhood shall be incorporated into the neighborhood commercial
development.
      a.   Pedestrian amenities shall be included in places where people
typically gather, including but not limited to, transit stops, building
entrances or street corners or abutting bike or pedestrian trail connections.
These amenities shall benefit the intended users and be located in places that
are highly visible. These spaces must include at least two of the following
(master planned developments shall provide two elements in a central location):
         1.   Patterned materials on walkways
         2.   Shelters
         3.   Trash receptacles
         4.   Drinking fountains
         5.   Pedestrian lighting
         6.   Fountains, sculptures, or kiosks
         7.   Street trees, flower boxes or container landscaping
      b.   Sidewalk connections shall be provided to and through the
development to existing and planed bus stops, trails, sidewalks and adjacent
properties, where access exists or reasonable connections are possible. If a
parking lot lies between the building entry and an adjacent public street, a
pedestrian walkway at least six feet wide shall be provided between them. Clear
internal pedestrian circulation routes shall be provided on the site.
   (16)   Outdoor seating for food service businesses.
      a.   Food service businesses, including but not limited to, bakeries,
delicatessens, coffee and/or tea shops, and restaurants, may provide outdoor
temporary seating for their patrons, provided that the following requirements
are met and an annual incidental outdoor seating permit is approved by the
Zoning Administrator:
         1.   The seating shall be located on private property.
         2.   The seating shall be of good patio or café type furniture that
enhances the appearance of the business.
         3.   The outdoor seating area shall be defined with the use of
landscaping, temporary fencing or other means that contains the tables and
chairs for the use as demonstrated on a site plan and approved by City staff.
         4.   No alcoholic beverages or food shall be served to persons outside
of the designated outdoor seating area. Signage shall be posted that restricts
consumption of alcohol outside of the designated outdoor seating area as
approved by City staff.
         5.   Patrons shall access the outdoor seating area through the main
entrance or host station and shall be seated by a staff person and all full
service restaurants with wait staff service.
         6.   The seating shall be located so as not to compromise safety.
Seating shall not obstruct the entrance or any required exits or be located on
landscaping or parking areas. If located on private sidewalks or walkways,
seating shall be located so as to leave a minimum of a 4-foot wide passageway
for pedestrians.
         7.   No additional parking is required for 30 seats or less. If public
parking is available either in a ramp or adjacent on-street, then no additional
parking is required. Any additional seating over 30 seats shall provide
required parking based on 1 space per 3 seats. Shared parking will be
considered and may be approved by staff.
         8.   Any proposed outdoor seating plan over 50 or more seats shall be
by Conditional Use Permit.
         9.   All exterior sound equipment shall be shutoff at 10:00 p.m. as
regulated in Section
1001.14.
         10.   Lighting shall be permitted to the extent that it only
illuminates the designed area. Lighting cannot shine or cause a glare upon
other public or private property outside the designated area or as permitted in
Section
1001.14.
         11.   Any proposed outdoor seating area on property abutting an R-
Residential zoning district shall be by Conditional Use Permit.
         12.   The business owner shall regularly clean the seating area so
that it is litter-free.
Subd. 3   General Mixed Use District-3 (GMU-3): Historic Village.
   (1)   Purpose. The purpose of the General Mixed Use District-3 (GMU-3) is to
provide an area for compact, walkable, mixed-use development that is
appropriately scaled with high quality architecture in conformance with the
unique character of the Historic Village. This district also provides for the
establishment of a community focal point utilizing the access and views of the
river together with a blend of cultural, historical, residential and commercial
retail. The mixture of land uses within the district is essential to
establishing the level of vitality and intensity needed to support retail and
service uses. Future development within the district shall follow the Framework
Plan as included in Chapter 5 of the 2030 Comprehensive Plan that is intended
to guide public and private development, streetscaping and public realm
improvements. The placement of buildings and the relationship of the building,
parking, landscaping, and pedestrian spaces shall be guided by the Framework
Plan and requirements of this chapter.
   (2)   Design character. The character of the GMU-3 District shall reflect
high quality design due to the historic nature of the area, high visibility of
these areas along county roadways and as the northwest gateway into the City.
New development in this district shall create a unifying identity and
transition between different uses through high quality design, pedestrian
amenities, compact development, and connections to public spaces.
   (3)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted uses in the GMU-
3 District:
Amphitheaters
Antique or gift shop
Art, decorating and music galleries and studios
Bakery goods sales and baking of goods for retail sales on premises
Bank, credit unions and other financial institutions without drive-up tellers
Beauty salons, day spas and barber shops
Bicycle sales and repair
Book store
Coffee shop, deli, wine bars or similar gathering places serving food and drink
Convenience grocery store without motor fuel sales (not exceed 3,000 sq ft)
Clothing store
Copy services but not including printing press or newspaper
Dwelling, multiple family (apartment, condominium, cooperative, townhouse) at a
minimum of 8 units per acre
Florist
Grocery store, meat market or other specialty foods market (not exceeding
10,000 sq. ft.)
Hardware store
Hobby store including handicraft classed not to exceed 10 students
Hotel, inns and bed-and-breakfast establishments (no more than 4 guest rooms)
Jewelry sales and jewelry repair store
Liquor store
Music store
Offices, administrative/commercial
Offices/clinics for medical, dental, or chiropractic services
Pharmacy, no drive-through
Publicly owned civic or cultural buildings such as city offices, libraries,
auditoriums, public administration buildings.
Restaurants Class I and II, no drive-through
Shoe sales/repair
Tailoring services
Tanning salon
Therapeutic massage
Tavern
Tobacco shop
Video rental and sales
   (4)   Permitted accessory uses. The following uses are permitted accessory
uses in the GMU-3 District:
Any incidental repair or processing necessary to conduct a permitted principal
use as long as it does not occupy more than 30% of the gross floor area of the
principal building.
Bus/Transit and Park and Ride facilities
Essential service structure
Outdoor seating accessory to a restaurant meeting the requirements in
Subdivision (16) below
   Private garages, off-street parking and loading spaces as regulated in this
Title
Public open space plaza, square or other related uses
Signs as regulated in this Title
Trash enclosure service structure
Structured parking
   (5)   Conditional uses. Within any GMU-3 District, no structure or land
shall be used for the following uses except by conditional use permit:
Drive-through lanes for permitted uses (restaurants, banks) if provisions for
vehicle stacking, vehicle maneuvering, outdoor speaker devices, appearance and
lighting of outdoor menu boards and other related matters can be shown to be in
keeping with the intent and character of the GMU-3 District and compatible with
surrounding uses.
Restaurant- Class IV (with drive-through)
Schools, specialty
Theatres
Towers- cellular and communications as regulated in Section
1001.21 of this Title
   (6)   Interim uses. Within any GMU-3 District, no structure or land shall be
used for the following purposes except by Interim Use Permit.
Farmers market
Special events (except carnivals).
      a.   Such activity is directed towards the general public and includes
grand openings, craft shows, flea markets, mechanical and animal rides and
displays of materials that are typically not sold or serviced on the site.
      b.   The event shall not exceed the period specified in the
administrative permit and in no case shall exceed 3 consecutive calendar days
per event.
      c.   There shall be no more than 2 special events per calendar year per
property. However, each tenant in a multi-tenant building shall be permitted 1
special event per year. Multi-tenant buildings with less than 5 lease-spaces
shall be considered as a single property for purposes of this provision.
   (7)   Setback, lot size, site design and height requirements.
      a.   Setback - principal structure
         Front yard: build-to line (see below)
         Side yard/interior: 0 feet minimum
         Side yard/corner: same as front
         Rear yard: 20 feet minimum
      b.   Setback - accessory structure
         Front yard: build-to line (see below)
         Side yard: 0 feet minimum
         Side yard (street): same as front
         Rear yard: 5 feet minimum
      c.   Setback - parking
         Front yard: build-to line (see below)
         Side yard: 0 feet minimum
         Side yard (street): same as front
         Rear yard: 5 feet minimum
      d.   Front yard build-to line established. In the GMU-3 District in the
front yard, a build-to line is established which provides a minimum and maximum
front setback for buildings and other structures, from the right-of-way or
property line. For parking, the minimum setback applies, but not the maximum.
There are 3 build-to line conditions depending on the streets as described
below. The location of these build-to line conditions for various streets
corresponds with the illustrated Framework Plan contained in the 2030
Comprehensive Plan.
         1.   Build-to line, Baxter Avenue. The minimum setback shall be 15
feet and the maximum shall be 20 feet from the right-of-way or property line,
for all properties located on Baxter Parkway (to accommodate for pedestrian
promenade, streetscaping)
         2.   Build-to line, Robinson Avenue. The minimum setback shall be 0
feet and the maximum shall be 10 feet from the right-of-way, for all properties
located on Baxter Parkway (to accommodate Main Street feel buildings should be
located at the right -of-way)
         3.   Build-to line, secondary roads. The minimum setback may range
from 0 feet to 10 feet with 10 feet serving as the maximum from the right-of-
way or property line, for all properties on remaining secondary streets not
identified in items 1 and 2 above.
      e.   Minimum lot size requirements. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in the GMU-3 District subject to additional requirements,
exceptions, and modifications set forth in this Chapter.
         1.   Minimum lot requirements:
            (a)   Lot size: no minimum for non-residential uses
            (b)   Residential parcels shall maintain a lot width that is
adequate for the design of the structure.
      f.   Site design:
         1.   Building frontage. At least 65% of the street frontage of any lot
shall be occupied by building facades at the build-to- line. In addition, on
corner lots, a minimum of the first 50 feet of the lot frontage on either side
of a street intersection must be occupied by buildings set at the property
line. Parking or other space open to the sky is not allowed within this first
50 feet.
         2.   On lots with more then one street frontage (corners), the
building shall be located to meet the 65% street frontage requirement on both
streets.
         3.   The building frontage requirement may be met either with an
enclosed building or an arcade constructed with a permanent roof of the same
materials as the remainder of the building.
         4.   At least the first and second floor must meet the building
frontage requirement. Arcades at street level and terracing of building facades
above the second floor are encouraged.
         5.   Buildings with frontage on a primary street shall orient front
facades parallel to the primary street.
         6.   Align the building front facade with adjacent buildings to
promote visual continuity from the public right-of-way, unless site or use
constraints are prohibitive.
         7.   Buildings shall have a clearly defined primary pedestrian
entrance at street level.
         8.   Drive-through or drive-in lanes are not allowed within the front
of any buildings. They must be located to the side or rear of a building.
         9.   Maximum impervious coverage. The total lot coverage shall not
exceed 80% impervious.
      g.   Building heights
         1.   The minimum building height shall be 25 feet or two stories while
the maximum building height on all buildings shall be 45 feet or 4 stories.
   (8)   Parking requirements.
      a.   Parking for residential units in the GMU-3 District shall be
calculated as required in Section
1001.19 with a preference for. a minimum of 50% be provided underground (or
tuck under in townhomes with a minimum of 480 square foot garage). The
residential parking spaces shall be specifically reserved for the use of
residents and visitors only, separate from any commercial, office or other uses
on-site or nearby and shall not be counted as part of any shared parking or
joint parking arrangement.
      b.   Parking for non-residential uses in the GMU-3 District shall be
calculated under Section
1001.19: Shared parking arrangements as provided in
1001.19 are encouraged provided that such shared parking is fully connected
between sites for automobiles and pedestrians. On-grade parking is prohibited
in the front yard directly in front of a building. Parking, shall be provided
to the side or rear of buildings in mid-block areas. On-street parking shall
count towards required parking.
      c.   Wherever a surface parking area faces a street frontage the maximum
width shall be 65 feet as measured at the lot frontage. In addition, such
frontage shall be screened with a decorative wall, railing, hedge, or a
combination of these elements to a minimum height of 2 1/2 feet and a maximum
height of 3 1/2 feet above the level of the parking lot at the build to line.
      d.   A reduction of up to 10% in the number of required off-street
parking spaces may be approved by the Zoning Administrator in the case of
shared parking areas between abutting uses.
      e.   On-street parking shall count towards required parking.
   (9)   Building design requirements. To maintain the character of the mixed
use area the GMU-3 District is subject to the following standards to reflect
the character of the District.
      a.   All new building fronts shall include a minimum of 5 of the
following elements:
         1.   Architectural detailing, such as cornice, awning, parapet, or
columns;
         2.   A visually pleasing primary front entrance that, in addition to
doors, shall be accented a minimum of 150 square feet around the door entrance
for single occupancy buildings and a minimum of 300 square feet total for the
front of multi-tenant buildings (this area shall be counted as one element).
Entrances shall be clearly articulated and obvious from the street;
         3.   A minimum of 30% window coverage on each front that faces a
street;
         4.   Contrasting, yet complementary material colors;
         5.   A combination of horizontal and vertical design features;
         6.   Irregular building shapes;
         7.   Horizontal offsets of at least 4 feet in depth;
         8.   Vertical offsets in the roofline of at least 4 feet;
         9.   Fenestration at the first floor level which is recessed
horizontally at least 1 foot into the facade;
         10.   Other architectural features in the overall architectural
concept.
      b.   Multi-story buildings shall have the ground floor distinguished from
the upper floors by having 1 or more the following:
         1.   Awning
         2.   Trellis
         3.   Arcade
         4.   Window lintels
         5.   Intermediate cornice line
         6.   Brick detailing such as quoins or corbels
      c.   Residential uses on first floors.  Whenever residential uses are
included on the first floor of a building the first floor elevation shall be
stepped up from sidewalk elevations immediately adjacent to the front of the
residential unit to ensure the residential unit is raised from the public
space. In addition, each first floor unit must have an individual private
entrance at the street level with private courtyard enclosure.
      d.   Any exterior building wall adjacent to or visible from a public
street, public open space or abutting property may not exceed 50 feet in length
without significant visual relief consisting of one of the following:
         1.   The facade shall be divided architecturally by means of
significantly different materials or textures;
         2.   Horizontal offsets of at least 4 feet in depth;
         3.   Vertical offsets in the roofline of at least four feet; or
         4.   Fenestration at the first floor level that is recessed
horizontally at least 1 foot into the facade.
      e.   Other design requirements.
         1.   All principal buildings shall have an entry on a street.
         2.   Buildings shall provide a base and top to their architecture.
         3.   The tops of buildings shall be articulated to minimum the "box"
like images.
         4.   Buildings shall be architecturally unique and shall not be of a
corporate architecture (including roof patterns, corporate colors,
architectural elements, and similar treatments).
      f.   Accent materials. Accent materials shall be wrapped around walls
visible from public view. Where a mixed use building is visible from a public
road all elevations shall be architecturally treated. Accent material shall
consist of materials comparable in grade and quality to the primary exterior
material. Such materials may include glass, prefinished decorative metal and
fiber cement trim within soffit and fascia areas.
      g.   Major exterior materials of all walls including face brick, stone,
glass, stucco, synthetic stucco, fiber cement vertical panel siding,
architectural concrete and precast panels shall be acceptable as the major
exterior wall surface when they are incorporated into an overall design of the
building. Major materials must cover at least 60% of the exterior.
      h.   Fiber cement seam lines shall be architecturally integrated into the
building design so that they are not visible. Seam lines can be filled, covered
by other accent material or other method thereby making the seam lines
invisible. Color impregnated decorative block shall also be allowed as a-major
exterior wall material and shall be required to be sealed. All materials shall
be color impregnated with the exception of architectural concrete precast panel
systems and fiber cement siding that may be painted.
   (10)   Screening.
      a.   Building mechanical equipment. The view of all roof-top equipment
and related piping, ducting, electrical and mechanical utilities abutting a
street shall be screened from ground level view. Screening may include parapet
walls, penthouses, or other architecturally integrated elements. Wood fencing
or chain link with slats shall not be used for screening. The term "ground
level view" shall be defined as the view of the building from the furthest
point of the width of the right-of-way from the property line(s) that abut a
street. A cross-sectional drawing shall be provided that illustrates the sight
lines from the ground level view.
      b.   Ground mechanical-equipment. Ground mechanical equipment shall be
one 100% screened from contiguous properties and adjacent streets by opaque
landscaping, or screen wall compatible with the architectural treatment of the
principal structure.
      c.   Trash enclosure service structure. All exterior trash enclosures or
other accessory structures shall be constructed of the same materials and
colors as the principal building.
      d.   Outdoor storage. There shall be no outdoor storage of either
materials or products, except through the issuance of a conditional use permit.
      e.   External loading and service areas. External loading and service
areas must be 100% screened from the ground-level view from contiguous
residential or commercial properties and adjacent streets, except at access
points.
      f.   Abutting districts. Wherever a GMU-3 District is across the street
from an R Residential District, a berm, fence or screening consisting of
compact evergreen trees or hedge or a combination thereof, not less than 90%
opaque at time of installation, nor less than 6 feet in height, except adjacent
to a street where it shall be not less than 3 feet nor more than 4 feet in
height shall be erected or installed and maintained. All screening shall comply
with Section
1001.24.
      g.   Headlight screening. The light from automobile headlights and other
sources shall be 100% screened whenever it may be directed onto adjacent
residential windows.
   (11)   Lighting. In addition to the lighting requirements presented in
Section
1001.14, lighting in the GMU-3 District shall also be subject to the following
requirements:
      a.   Decorative style lighting a maximum of 14 feet in height shall be
used to illuminate all site areas with the exception of parking areas.
      b.   Shoe-box style lighting shall only be permitted in parking areas.
      c.   Lighting fixtures shall be compatible with the architecture of the
building.
      d.   Wall-mounted lighting shall be used on building fronts to illuminate
entry points and highlight architectural features.
   (12)   Landscape design. In addition to the landscape requirements presented
in Section
1001.24 all plant materials shall be used to create a unified and attractive
mixed use environment based on the following requirements.
      a.   All land area not occupied by buildings, parking, driveways,
sidewalks, or other hard surface shall be sodded or mulched and landscaped with
approved ground cover, flowers, shrubbery and trees.
      b.   At least 10% of the total land area within the perimeter of private
parking and driveway areas shall be landscaped. Landscaped areas provided
within the build-to line may be credited toward this 10% landscaping
requirement on a square-foot-for-square-foot basis, for up to half of the 10%
requirement, or  5%.
      c.   Parking lot landscaped islands shall be a minimum of 150 square feet
in area and include at least 1 overstory or evergreen tree meeting the
requirements of this Chapter.
      d.   Where parking abuts the site perimeter there shall be provided at
least 1 overstory tree per 25 feet of site perimeter.
      e.   At least 1 overstory tree shall be provided for every 500 square
feet of landscaped area on the entire site.
      f.   The landscape plan shall include a full complement of overstory,
ornamental and evergreen trees, shrubbery, and ground covers that are hardy and
appropriate for the locations in which they are planted, and which provide
year-round color and interest.
   (13)   Plazas.
      a.   All properties with principal buildings in excess of 30,000 square
feet shall be required to have a public plaza area(s).
      b.   The design of the plaza shall include special paving, benches, trash
receptacles, lighting fixtures and other similar type features which comply
with the Comprehensive Plan and City specifications.
   (14)   Signage. In addition to the sign requirements presented in Section
1001.20, signs in the GMU-3 District shall also be subject to the following
requirements:
      a.   Wall signs:
         1.   Wall signage is allowed on buildings in the GMU-3 District within
a horizontal band no more than 3 feet in height, at least 10 feet and no more
than 15 feet above the ground.
         2.   Wall signage may be either:
            (a)   Attached: flat and parallel to the surface of the building
and projecting no more than 1 foot from it; or
            (b)   Projecting: perpendicular to the surface of the building and
no more than 1 foot in thickness.
         3.   Attached wall signage shall consist of individual letters or
script logos mounted on the building.
         4.   Projecting signs may project no more than 4 feet from the front
edge of the building and be no more than 12 square feet in area.
         5.   Projecting signs may not extend over a public right-of-way or
public property unless by conditional use permit. Projecting signs may not
extend over a designated parking space or loading area.
         6.   Box signs or cabinet signs, whether on a wall, projecting or on
canopies, are prohibited, except for logo signs as approved as part of the
overall signage plan.
         7.   Signs on canopies are allowed only if they are on a surface
perpendicular to the ground and if all other requirements of this section as to
area and location are adhered to.
         8.   Allowable area of wall signs is 1 1/2 square feet of signage per
lineal foot of building frontage on a public street, public open space, or
private parking area. Each wall shall be calculated individually and sign area
may not be transferred to another side of the building. In calculating the
total allowable area of wall signage, only one side of a 2 sided projecting
sign shall be counted.
      b.   Freestanding signs are prohibited in the GMU-3 District, except
directional signs at driveways and within parking areas, if no more than 5 feet
in height and no more than 6 square feet in area. Directional signs must be
setback at least 2 feet  from right-of-way, lot lines, and parking spaces.
   (15)   Pedestrian environment. Pedestrian connections to the surrounding
neighborhood shall be incorporated into the neighborhood commercial
development.
      a.   Pedestrian amenities shall be included in places where people
typically gather, including but not limited to, transit stops, building
entrances or street corners or abutting bike or pedestrian trail connections.
These amenities shall benefit the intended users and be located in places that
are highly visible. These spaces must include at least two of the following
(master planned developments shall provide two elements in a central location):
         1.   Patterned materials on walkways.
         2.   Shelters.
         3.   Trash receptacles.
         4.   Drinking fountains.
         5.   Pedestrian lighting.
         6.   Fountains, sculptures, or kiosks.
         7.   Street trees, flower boxes or container landscaping.
      b.   Sidewalk connections shall be provided to and through the
development to existing and planed bus stops, trails, sidewalks and adjacent
properties, where access exists or reasonable connections are possible. If a
parking lot lies between the building entry and an adjacent public street, a
pedestrian walkway at least six feet wide shall be provided between them. Clear
internal pedestrian circulation routes shall be provided on the site.
   (16)   Outdoor seating for food service businesses.
      a.   Food service businesses, including but not limited to, bakeries,
delicatessens, coffee and/or tea shops, and restaurants, may provide outdoor
temporary seating for their patrons, provided that the following requirements
are met and an annual incidental outdoor seating permit is approved by the
Zoning Administrator:
         1.   The seating shall be located on private property.
         2.   The seating shall be of good patio or café type furniture that
enhances the appearance of the business.
         3.   The outdoor seating area shall be defined with the use of
landscaping, temporary fencing or other means that contains the tables and
chairs for the use as demonstrated on a site plan and approved by City staff.
         4.   No alcoholic beverages or food shall be served to persons outside
of the designated outdoor seating area. Signage shall be posted that restricts
consumption of alcohol outside of the designated outdoor seating area as
approved by City staff.
         5.   Patrons shall access the outdoor seating area through the main
entrance or host station and shall be seated by a staff person and all full
service restaurants with wait staff service.
         6.   The seating shall be located so as not to compromise safety.
Seating shall not obstruct the entrance or any required exits or be located on
landscaping or parking areas. If located on private sidewalks or walkways,
seating shall be located so as to leave a minimum of a 4 foot wide passageway
for pedestrians.
         7.   No additional parking is required for 30 seats or less. If public
parking is available either in a ramp or adjacent on-street, then no additional
parking is required. Any additional seating over 30 seats shall provide
required parking based on 1 space per 3 seats. Shared parking will be
considered and may be approved by-staff.
         8.   Any proposed outdoor seating plan over 50 or more seats shall be
by Conditional Use Permit.
         9.   All exterior sound equipment shall be shutoff at 10:00 p.m. as
regulated in Section
1001.14.
         10.   Lighting shall be permitted to the extent that it only
illuminates the designed area. Lighting cannot shine or cause a glare upon
other public or private property outside the designated area or as permitted in
Section
1001.14.
         11.   Any proposed outdoor seating area on property abutting an R-
Residential zoning district shall be by Conditional Use Permit.
         12.   The business owner shall regularly clean the seating area so
that it is litter-free.
(Ord. 2011-02, passed 2-22-2011)
Subd. 4   General Mixed Use District-4  (GMU-4): Balsam Lane.
         (1)   Purpose. The purpose of the General Mixed Use-4 (GMU-4) District
is to provide an area for mixed-use development in a manner consistent with the
goals of the Comprehensive Plan and the Mixed Use land use designation on
Balsam Lane. A combination of retail, office, service and residential land uses
are encouraged although not required. New residential uses may also be entirely
residential. The mix of uses can occur vertically and horizontally. The
placement of buildings and the relationship of the building, parking,
landscaping, and pedestrian spaces is essential to creating the pedestrian-
friendly environment envisioned for the GMU-4 District.
         (2)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted uses in the
GMU-4 District:
            Existing uses at the time of adoption of this subsection
            Commercial day care center or pre-school
            Convenience store without motor fuel sales
            Convenience store with motor fuel sales meeting the following
standards:
            1.   Canopy height: The total height of any overhead canopy or
weather protection shall not exceed 20 feet in height.
            2.   Vehicle storage: No vehicle storage is permitted on site.
            3.   Sales, rentals prohibited: No sales or rental of motor
vehicles or trailers or campers shall be permitted.
            4.   Goods for sale: All goods for sale by a motor fuel station
convenience store other than commercial freezers for ice and petroleum based
products required for the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles shall be
displayed within the principal motor fuel station structure. No displays shall
be permitted in required parking or driveway areas, landscape areas, required
setback areas, or any right- of-way or other public property. Displays may be
permitted on sidewalks, only if they leave at least 4 feet of sidewalk width
available to pedestrians.
            5.   Landscaping: A minimum 10-foot landscaped yard shall be
planted and maintained behind the property line along all public streets, A
landscaped yard not less than 5 feet wide shall be maintained along exterior
property lines.
            6.   Motor fuel dispenser location: Motor fuel dispensers shall be
located at least 30 feet from a property line, and 100 feet from a residential
zoning district property property line.
            7.   Hours of operation: The hours of operation for a convenience
store shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., unless extended by the
Council as part of the conditional use permit.
            8.   All canopy lighting for motor fuel station pump islands shall
be recessed or fully shielded. Pole lighting shall be downcast shielded lights
on all faces. Reflected glare or spill light from all exterior shall not exceed
0.5 foot-candle measured on the property line when adjoining residential zones
and 1 foot-candle measured on the property line when such line adjoins a
similar zone and land use. Headlights shall be 100% screened at the property
lines.
            Dwelling, multiple family (apartment, condominium, cooperative,
townhome) at a minimum of 8 units per acre.
            Financial institutions (no drive-through)
            Fitness center, health club
            Food service uses (coffee shop, deli, and restaurant with no drive-
through)
            General office uses
            General retail and services (without drive-through)
            Lodging (Hotel)
            Personal services (such as beauty shops, barber, spa, tailoring)
            Professional and medical office and clinics
            Public uses and services (post office, municipal buildings, and
library)
            Specialty schools
         (3)   Permitted accessory uses. The following uses are permitted
accessory uses in the GMU-4 district:
            Any incidental repair or processing necessary to conduct a
permitted principal use as long as it does not occupy more than 30% of the
gross floor area of the principal building.
            Bus/Transit and Park and Ride facility
            Essential service structure
            Off-street parking and loading spaces as related in this Title
            Public open space plazas, square or other related uses
            Outdoor seating accessory to a restaurant, coffee shop or deli
meeting the requirements in Section 12 below
            Signs as related in this Title
            Trash enclosure service structure
            Structured parking
         (4)   Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted upon issuance
of a conditional use permit:
            Drive-through for permitted uses (food service uses, general retail
and financial institutions) if provisions for stacking, vehicle maneuvering,
outdoor speaker devices, appearance and lighting of outdoor menu boards and
other related matters can be shown to be in keeping with the intent and
character of the GMU-4 district and compatible with surrounding uses.
            Tavern or liquor store
            Theatre
            Veterinary clinic, indoor kennel, pet grooming
         (5)   Interim uses. The following uses are interim uses in the GMU-
4 district.
            Farmers market
         (6)   Lot size, setback, site design and height requirements:
            a.   Minimum lot size requirements: The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in the GMU-4 District subject to additional
requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this Chapter.
               1.   Minimum lot requirements:
                  (a)   Lot size: no minimum for non-residential uses.
                  (b)   Residential parcels shall maintain a lot size that is
adequate for the design of the structure and proposed density.
               2.   Setbacks:
                  (a)   Front-build-to-line. 15 feet minimum with a 30 feet
maximum.
                  (b)   Side. Non-residential uses: 10 feet; residential uses:
20 feet.
                  (c)   Rear. Non-residential uses: 10 feet; residential uses:
20 feet.
               3.   Site design:
                  (a)   Building frontage: At least 50% of the street frontage
of any lot shall be occupied by building facades at the build-to-line.
                  (b)   The building frontage requirement may be met either
with an enclosed building or an arcade constructed with a permanent roof of the
same materials as the remainder of the building.
                  (c)   Buildings with frontage on a primary street shall
orient front facades parallel to the primary street.
                  (d)   Buildings shall have a clearly defined primary
pedestrian entrance at street level. An exception will be permitted for
residential uses to orient the primary entrance to the parking area while a
secondary pedestrian entrance is provided at the street level.
                  (e)   Drive-through or drive-in lanes are not allowed within
the front of any buildings. They must be located to the side or rear of a
building.
               4.   Building heights.
                  (a)   The maximum building height shall be 3 stories
(excluding underground parking). Any building height over 2 stories shall be by
conditional use permit (CUP).
         (7)   Parking requirements.
            a.   Parking for residential units in the GMU-4 District shall be
calculated as required in Section
1001.19 with a minimum of 50% of the required spaces provided underground (or
tuck under in townhomes with a minimum of 480 square foot garage). The
residential parking spaces shall be specifically reserved for the use of
residents and visitors only, separate from any commercial, office or other uses
on-site or nearby and shall not be counted as part of any shared parking or
joint parking arrangement.
            b.   Parking for non-residential uses in the GMU-4 District shall
be calculated under Section
1001.19.
            c.   To the extent practical, parking spaces shall be located on
the side of structures opposite the primary street frontage or at the rear.
            d.   Sites must be designed to create interrelated vehicular and
pedestrian access to adjacent uses, properties and streets.
            e.   Parking and drive aisle setbacks for side and rear yards shall
be 5 feet.
         (8)   Building design requirements. To maintain the character of the
mixed use area the GMU-4 District is subject to the following standards to
reflect the character of the District.
            a.   All new building fronts (single story or multi-story) shall
include a minimum of 3 of the following elements:
               1.   Architectural detailing, such as cornice, awning, parapet,
or columns;
               2.   A visually pleasing primary front entrance that, in
addition to doors, shall be accented a minimum of 150 square feet around the
door entrance for single occupancy buildings and a minimum of 300 square feet
total for the front of multi-tenant buildings (this area shall be counted as
one element). Entrances shall be clearly articulated and obvious from the
street;
               3.   A minimum of 25% window coverage on each front that faces a
street;
               4.   Contrasting, yet complementary material colors;
               5.   A combination of horizontal and vertical design features;
               6.   Irregular building shapes;
               7.   Horizontal offsets of at least 4 feet in depth;
               8.   Vertical offsets in the roofline of at least 4 feet;
               9.   Fenestration at the first floor level which is recessed
horizontally at least 1 foot into the facade;
               10.   Other architectural features in the overall architectural
concept.
            b.   Non-residential multi-story buildings shall have the ground
floor distinguished from the upper floors by having 1 or more the following:
               1.   Awning;
               2.   Trellis;
               3.   Arcade;
               4.   Window lintels;
               5.   Intermediate cornice line;
               6.   Brick detailing such as quoins or corbels.
            c.   Large, uninterrupted exterior wall surfaces are not permitted.
No wall shall have an uninterrupted length exceeding 100 feet, without
including at least 2 of the following: changes in roof plane, changes in color,
texture, materials or masonry pattern, windows, or an equivalent element that
visually subdivides the wall. In addition to these aforementioned elements,
additional landscaping may be required.
            d.   Other design requirements.
               1.   Buildings shall provide a base and top to their
architecture.
               2.   The tops of buildings shall be articulated to minimize the
"box" like images.
               3.   Standard corporate style architecture shallbe minimized at
the discretion of the City Council.
            e.   Roof-mounted mechanical equipment, vents, and stacks shall be
minimized and positioned so that they will not be seen from public rights-of-
way or adjacent properties. If that is not possible, and the equipment is
visible from public rights-of-way or adjacent properties, the equipment shall
be screened with parapet walls or encasements colored similar to the building
in a manner that eliminates reflections.
            f.   Major exterior materials of all walls including face brick,
stone, glass, stucco, synthetic stucco, fiber cement vertical, horizontal or
lap panel siding architectural concrete and precast panels shall be acceptable
as the major exterior wall surface when they are incorporated into an overall
design of the building. Major materials must cover at least 60% of the
exterior.
            g.   Fiber cement seam lines shall be architecturally integrated
into the building design so that they are not visible. Seam lines can be
filled, covered by other accent material or other method thereby making the
seam lines invisible. Color impregnated decorative block shall also be allowed
as a major exterior wall material and shall be required to be sealed. All
materials shall be color impregnated with the exception of architectural
concrete precast panel systems and fiber cement siding that may be painted.
         (9)   Screening.
            a.   Ground mechanical equipment. Ground mechanical equipment shall
be 100% screened from contiguous properties and adjacent streets by opaque
landscaping, or screen wall compatible with the architectural treatment of the
principal structure.
            b.   Trash enclosure service structure. All exterior trash
enclosures or other accessory structures shall be constructed of the same
materials and colors as the principal building.
            c.   Outdoor storage. There shall be no outdoor storage of either
materials or products, except through the issuance of a conditional use permit.
            d.   External loading and service areas. External loading and
service areas must be 100% screened from the ground-level view from contiguous
residential or commercial properties and adjacent streets, except at access
points.
            e.   Headlight screening. The light from automobile headlights and
other sources shall be 100% screened whenever it may be directed onto adjacent
residential windows.
         (10)   Lighting.
            a.   Decorative style downcast lighting a maximum of 20 feet in
height shall be used to illuminate all site areas. Shoe-box style shall be
permitted in parking areas.
            b.   Lighting fixtures shall be compatible with the architecture of
the building.
            c.   Wall-mounted lighting shall be used on building fronts to
illuminate entry points and highlight architectural features.
         (11)   Signage. In addition to the sign requirements presented in
Section
1001.20, signs in the GMU-4 district shall also be subject to the following
requirements:
            a.   To reduce visual sign clutter, signage shall be distinct and
minimal.
            b.   Wall signs shall be located in a designated area located
between 12 feet and 16 feet above grade.
            c.   Attached wall signage shall consistent of individual letters
or script logos mound on the building.
            d.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to monument style signs on
a solid base that are a maximum of 10 feet in height and 100 square feet in
area, including the sign base. Monument sign bases shall be constructed of
similar materials, style, and color as that of the principal building.
            e.   Projecting signs are permitted with the following
requirements:
               1.   Projecting signs may extend 5 feet into a required yard
setback.
               2.   Projecting signs must be at least 8 feet above a sidewalk.
               3.   The maximum area of a projecting sign is 8 square feet.
         (12)   Outdoor seating for food service uses.
            a.   Food service businesses, including but not limited to,
bakeries, delicatessens, coffee and/or tea shops, and restaurants, may provide
outdoor temporary seating for their patrons, provided that the following
requirements are met and an annual incidental outdoor seating permit is
approved by the Zoning Administrator:
               1.   The seating shall be located on private property.
               2.   The seating shall be of good patio or cafe type furniture
that enhances the appearance of the business.
               3.   The outdoor seating area shall be defined with the use of
landscaping, temporary fencing or other means that contains the tables and
chairs for the use as demonstrated on a site plan and approved by City staff.
               4.   No alcoholic beverages or food shall be served to persons
outside of the designated outdoor seating area. Signage shall be posted that
restricts consumption of alcohol outside of the designated outdoor seating area
as approved by City staff.
               5.   Patrons shall access the outdoor seating area through the
main entrance or host station and shall be seated by a staff person and all
full service restaurants with wait staff service.
               6.   The seating shall be located so as not to compromise
safety. Seating shall not obstruct the entrance or any required exits or be
located on landscaping or parking areas. If located on private sidewalks or
walkways, seating shall be located so as to leave a minimum of a 4-foot wide
passageway for pedestrians.
               7.   No additional parking is required for 30 seats or less. If
public parking is available either in a ramp or adjacent on-street, men no
additional parking is required. Any additional seating over 30 seats shall
provide required parking based on 1 space per 3 seats. Shared parking will be
considered and may be approved by staff.
               8.   Any proposed outdoor seating plan over 50 or more seats
shall be by Conditional Use Permit.
               9.   All exterior sound equipment shall be shut-off at 10:00
p.m. as regulated in Section
1001.14.
               10.   Lighting shall be permitted to the extent that it only
illuminates the designed area. Lighting cannot shine or cause a glare upon
other public or private property outside the designated area or as permitted in
Section 1001.14.
               11.   Any proposed outdoor seating area on property abutting an
R-Residential zoning district shall be by Conditional Use Permit.
               12.   The business owner shall regularly clean the seating area
so that it is litter-free.
(Ord. 2011-02, passed 2-22-2011; Am. Ord. 2016-01, passed 1-12-2016)
1001.07   MISSISSIPPI RIVER CORRIDOR.
Subd. 1   General Provisions
   (1)   Findings.
      a.   The City of Dayton finds that the designated Mississippi River
Corridor within the metropolitan area and the City is a unique and valuable
local, state, regional and national resource.
      b.   The river is an essential element in the transportation, sewer and
water, and recreational systems and serves important biological and ecological
functions.
      c.   The prevention and mitigation of irreversible damage to this
resource, and the protection, preservation and enhancement of its outstanding
scenic, recreational, natural, aesthetic, cultural, historical and scientific
values is important to the health safety and general welfare of the City.
   (2)   Purpose and intent.
      a.   It is the purpose and intent of this Subsection of the Code to
prevent and mitigate irreversible damage to this unique resource.
      b.   The City desires to protect, preserve and enhance its outstanding
values to the public; to protect and preserve its biological and ecological
functions; and to protect and preserve the systems as an essential element in
the City’s transportation, sewer and water, and recreational systems in
accordance with the following policies:
         1.   The Mississippi River Corridor shall be managed as a multi-
purpose public resource by continuing use of the river channel for
transportation, by conserving the scenic, environmental, recreational, mineral,
economic, cultural, and historic resources and functions of the river corridor,
and by providing for the continuation and the development of a variety of urban
uses within the river corridor where appropriate.
         2.   The Mississippi River Corridor shall be managed in a manner
consistent with its natural characteristics and its existing development to
preserve its open, scenic and natural characteristics and ecological and
economic functions.
         3.   The Mississippi River Corridor shall be managed in accordance
with the Critical Areas Act of 1973; the Minnesota Wild and Scenic Rivers Act:
the Minnesota Environmental Policy Act of 1973; the standards and guidelines of
Executive Order No. 79-19 (as amended) dated February 26, 1979; and pursuant to
M.S. Chapters 103F and 116G, as may be amended from time to time, and other
applicable state and federal laws.
         4.   Designation of suitable land use districts along the bluffland
and shoreland of the Mississippi River.
   (3)   Establishment of Mississippi River Corridor Overlay District.
      a.   A Mississippi River Corridor Overlay District with its attendant
regulations is hereby established. This district shall overlay the zoning
districts established by this section, adopted by the Dayton City Council, and
as amended, so that any parcel of land lying in the Overlay District shall also
lay in 1 or more of the underlying established zoning districts.
      b.   The territory within the Overlay District shall be subject to the
requirements established in this Subsection as well as more restrictive
restrictions and requirements established by other applicable sections and
regulations.
      c.   Within the Overlay District, all uses shall be permitted in
accordance with the regulations for the underlying zoning district(s), provided
that these uses are in accordance with the additional requirements established
in this Subsection.
   (4)   District boundaries.
      a.   This overlay Subsection shall apply to the Mississippi River
Corridor District which is specifically delineated on the official Zoning Map
of Dayton, and in Executive Order 79-19.
      b.   This map shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk and shall
be available for inspection and copying.
         1.   Priority areas.
            (a)   The Mississippi River Corridor contains 3 planning areas
based on proximity and relationship to the river. The 3 priority areas are
listed below. They are generalized areas as the location and setbacks vary
based on topography and underlying zoning. Blufflines, as defined, may be found
throughout each of the priority areas in the corridor and are subject to
setbacks.
               i.   Area One (Bluff and Floodplain) - Priority area No. 1 is
the area below the 40 feet bluffline setback and within the 100 feet Ordinary
High Water Level (OHWL) setback (200 feet OHWL and 100 feet bluffline setback
in the AG & SA Zoning Districts). This priority area shall be preserved to
protect the natural, ecological, passive recreational and scenic properties of
the corridor. New development, other than passive recreational uses, will not
be allowed within priority area No. 1.
               ii.   Area Two (Bluff top) - Area No. 2 is between the bluffline
setback and Dayton River Road. Within this area, development will be reviewed
on a case by case basis in order to protect the corridor values, bluffs,
floodplain and associated ravines and steep slopes and meet the standards of
this Subsection.
               iii.   Area Three (South River Road) - Priority area No. 3 is
between Dayton River Road and the corridor boundary. All development within
area three shall also be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. In general, there
will be more consideration for flexibility and allowance for density of
development in area No. 3 than areas Nos. 1 and 2 because of the distance to
the river and the dividing line of the road, if in accordance with protection
of corridor values and the standards of this Subsection.
   (5)   Definitions.  The definitions in Subsection
1001.03, Definitions, of the Dayton Zoning Code shall define the terms used in
this chapter.
Subd. 2   Site Planning Requirements
   (1)   Site plan required.
      a.   All use changes require site plan submission and approval.
      b.   No building permit, zoning approval or subdivision approval permit,
conditional use permit, variance, certificate, or other approval shall be
issued for any action located in an area covered by this section until a site
plan has been prepared and approved in accordance with the provisions of this
Subsection
1001.07, Subd. 2 and other Subsection provisions.
      c.   All construction shall be done in accordance with the approved site
plan.
   (2)   Exceptions.  The City of Dayton City Council or its designee may waive
certain site plan contents requirements of Subsection
1001.07, Subd. 2, (4)(b)(4) through (19) of this Code for the extension,
enlargement, change, or alteration of either a detached single-family dwelling
or its accessory structures provided that the dwelling remains a detached
single-family dwelling.
   (3)   Site plan application.
      a.   A written application for site plan approval shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator containing evidence adequate to show that the proposed use
will conform to the standards set forth in this Subsection.
      b.   Three copies or drawings and required information shall be submitted
to the Building Inspector.
      c.   These shall be accompanied by a receipt from the Clerk indicating
that all required site plan fees or processing costs have been paid along with
evidence that any required escrow account or bond has been established.
   (4)   Site plan contents.
      a.   Site plans shall be prepared to a scale appropriate to the size of
the project and suitable for the review to be performed as determined by staff.
      b.   The following information shall be provided in the site plan:
         1.   Location of the property including the information as the name
and numbers of adjoining roads, railroads, existing subdivisions, or other
landmarks;
         2.   The name and address of the owner(s) or developer(s), legal
description, north point, date and scale of drawing, and number of sheets. In
addition, a blank space, 3 inches high and 3 inches wide shall be reserved for
use by the approving authority;
         3.   Existing topography as indicated on a contour map having a
contour interval no greater than 2 feet per contour. The topography map shall
also include a graphic scale and clearly delineate all blufflines, all streams,
including intermittent streams and swales, rivers, waterbodies, and wetlands
located on the site. The topography map shall indicate the floodway and/or
flood fringe lines and shall indicate the ordinary high water level of the
river;
         4.   A plan delineating existing drainage of the water by indicating
the direction, the volume, and at what rate the storm water is conveyed from
the site and indicating those areas of the site where storm water collects and
is gradually percolated into the ground or slowly released to stream or lake;
         5.   A description of soils with a map indicating soil types in the
areas to be disturbed. A soil report prepared by a soil scientist containing
information on the suitability of the soils for the type of development
proposed and describing any remedial steps to be taken by the developer to
render the soils suitable may be required by the City. All areas proposed for
grading shall be identified by soil type, both as to soil type of existing to
soil and soil type of the new contour. The location and extent of any erosion
areas shall be indicated. The stability of rock units along bluff lines and
faces shall be included in the soils description;
         6.   A description of the plant and animal species which occupy the
site or are occasionally found there and a detailed indication of those areas
where unique, threatened, or endangered plant or animal species may be found on
the site;
         7.   A description of any features, buildings or areas which are of
historic significance;
         8.   A plan, with a graphic scale, indicating proposed finished
grading shown at a contour interval of no greater than 2 feet or as required to
clearly indicate the relationship of proposed changes to existing topography
and remaining features;
         9.   A landscape plan at the appropriate scale with dimensions,
distances, and the location, type, and description of existing vegetation. This
shall clearly locate and describe vegetation proposed for removal; the
vegetation retained for buffering and landscaping; and proposed landscape
materials that will be added to the site as part of the development for
revegetation and buffering;
         10.   A proposed stormwater management plan of the developed site
delineating the minimization of runoff, the improvement of quality of runoff,
the direction, volume, and rate at which stormwater will be conveyed from the
site, and setting forth the areas of the site where stormwater will be allowed
to collect and gradually percolate into the ground or be slowly released to
stream or lake;
         11.   An erosion and sedimentation control plan indicating the type,
location and necessary technical information on prevention and control measures
to be taken both during and after construction;
         12.   Detailed site plans (with graphic scale) and elevations at a
scale approved by the City showing the proposed placement on the property,
size, alignment, height, setbacks, other proposal details, and intended use of
the proposed development or any structure to be erected or located on the site;
         13.   A clear delineation and size of all areas that shall be paved or
surfaced including a description of the surfacing material to be used;
         14.   A description of the method to provide vehicular and pedestrian
access to the proposed development and public access to the river and/or public
river view opportunities both before and after development; a description of
the development’s impact on existing views of and along the river;
         15.   A description of all parking facilities provided as part of the
development of the site including an analysis of parking needs generated by the
proposed development;
         16.   A delineation of any potential area or areas to be dedicated for
public use;
         17.   A delineation of the location and amounts of excavated soils to
be stored on the site during construction;
         18.   A description of activities undertaken to ensure consistency
with Subsection
1001.07 Subd. 1, (2) of this section and proposed measures which address
adverse environmental effects; and
         19.   Other information pertinent to the particular project which, in
the opinion of the City of Dayton or is necessary or helpful for the review of
the project.
   (5)   Site plan and development approval standards.  Site plans and
development shall comply with all applicable state, federal and local
regulations and the following standards for approval:
      a.   New development and expansion shall be permitted only after the
approval of site plans which adequately assess and minimize adverse effects and
maximize beneficial effects.
      b.   Submitted site plans shall include only plan elements that are in
accordance with the performance standards set forth in the Mississippi River
Corridor Plan and this section.
      c.   Site plans shall include standards to ensure that the development,
structures, roads, screening, landscaping, construction placement, maintenance,
and storm water runoff are compatible with purposes in Subsection
1001.07, Subd. 1(2) and the provisions of Subsection
1001.07.
      d.   Except for construction or modification of individual, detached
single-family structures, site plans shall provide opportunities for open space
establishment if feasible, and consider opportunities for public viewing of the
corridor.
      e.   Site plans shall contain specific conditions with regard to
buffering, landscaping, and revegetation.
      f   Preferred site plans will preserve existing vegetation, minimize
vegetative cutting of existing trees, and include new native species plantings
within the corridor.
      g.   Approval consideration will be given to site plans that preserve and
revegetate the landscape, especially bluff areas and large groupings of native
plantings.
      h.   Preferred site plans will include the clustering of structures in
order to preserve sensitive resources and promote open space and open views of
the corridor.
      i.   Site plans shall avoid impacting existing cultural and natural
resources.
Subd. 3   General Development Requirements
   (1)   The development shall minimize the removal of vegetation and
alteration of the natural topography, minimize runoff and improve the quality
of runoff, and provide erosion control through best management practices.
   (2)   The conduct of all development, grading, landscaping, structure
placement, and street routing shall be consistent with and, to the maximum
extent, in furtherance of the goals and policies for the development of the
river corridor as set forth in the Mississippi River Corridor Plan.
   (3)   Preserve, and when appropriate, restore native vegetation.
   (4)   The development shall comply with all regulations relating to
endangered, threatened, and rare species.
   (5)   Wildlife habitat in any development project shall be protected, and
restored whenever possible.
   (6)   The development shall be consistent with preservation of views of and
from the river, the reasonable preservation of the view of the river corridor
from other properties and by the public, buffering of the development, and
minimization of the walling off of views of the river corridor from other
properties and public rights-of-way.
   (7)   The proposed development shall not lessen existing public access to
and along the river bank, nor shall it lessen public opportunity to view the
river from within the corridor.
   (8)   The proposed development, both vehicular and pedestrian, shall be
adequate and consistent with local transportation and thoroughfare planning.
Subd. 4   Additional Dimensional Requirements
   (1)   All structure(s) shall be in compliance with the following minimum
setback distance requirements (in feet):
 
Zoning District     Ordinary High Water Level Blufflines
A-1                 200                       100
SA                  200                       100
All other districts 100                       40
 
   (2)   Lot requirements.  The following minimum requirements shall be
observed in the Mississippi River Corridor Overlay District subject to
additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Code:
 
Minimum lot size - Historic Village Underlying zoning
                                    80,000 sq. ft. unsewered**
Minimum lot size - Priority Area 1* 40,000 sq. ft. sewered riparian**
                                    20,000 sq. ft. sewered non-riparian**
                                    80,000 sq. ft. unsewered**
Minimum lot size - Priority Area 2* 40,000 sq. ft. sewered riparian**
                                    20,000 sq. ft. sewered non-riparian**
Minimum lot size - Priority Area 3* Underlying zoning
*   Variances may be considered for existing lots zoned R-l, Single  Family
Residential and RE, Single Family Residential (5-acre unsewered) as of January
1, 2012.
**   Mississippi River WSR Rules 6105.0870. Subd. 7.
 
   (3)   Maximum structure height shall be determined by the provisions of the
City Zoning Code, except that no height can exceed 35 feet.
   (4)   Impervious surface coverage of lots shall not exceed 25% of the lot
area, except in the RO, Historic Village Residential and VM, Village-Mixed Use
Districts where impervious surface shall not exceed 30%.
   (5)   Site plan approval is required prior to any use change, building
permit, zoning approval, subdivision approval or other approval or modification
as detailed in Subsection 1001.07, Subd. 2 of this section.
Subd. 5   Slope Protection and Soil Erosion Control
   (1)   In no case shall slopes in excess 18% be developed, except for
pipelines and transmission services.
   (2)   A bluff impact area within 40 feet of the bluff line will be
maintained in a natural state.
   (3)   Development activities must comply with the following conditions:
      a.   It can be demonstrated that the development can be accomplished
without increasing erosion or the rate of runoff, and meets all applicable
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) requirements;
      b.   Development activities are constructed and staged to prevent and
minimize soil erosion: the smallest practical area of land shall be developed
at any one time and that area shall be subjected to erosion for the shortest
practical period of time, not to exceed a single construction season;
      c.   During construction, and until the time as final control measures
are fully implemented and established, appropriate best management development
practices in accordance with MPCA’s “Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas”
as amended, or other professional soil conservation technical manuals, shall be
implemented and maintained to prevent erosion, trap sediment, and ensure a
minimum of soil loss. Permanent ground cover is to be established once
construction is completed;
      d.   Wetlands and other water bodies shall not be used as primary
sediment traps during or after construction;
      e.   Conditions on the site shall be stabilized within 30 days following
completion of the work;
      f.   All applicants for permits are encouraged to use best management
practices for riverbank erosion, first maximizing the use of native vegetation
measures through vegetative cover, restoration, or bioengineering. Riprap and
use of structural means should be used as a last resort and only if recommend
by the Department of Natural Resources Area Hydrologist or City Engineer; and
      g.   All erosion control methods shall be designed for suitable
maintenance and access.
   (4)   Development on land having a slope of greater than 12% before
alteration but not greater than 18% must be approved by the City and shall meet
the following conditions:
      a.   Demonstration that the soil types and geology are suitable for slope
development and there is proper management through best management practices
and site design to control erosion, minimize runoff and improve the quality of
runoff.
      b.   The development shall be screened by natural topography, retained
existing vegetation or additional planting of native vegetation.
      c.   The development shall minimize topographic and vegetative
alterations, and replace all removed vegetation with appropriate revegetation
and landscaping of similar species.
      d.   The foundation and underlying material of any structure, including
private roads, shall be adequate for the slope condition and soil type.
Adequate controls and protection exist uphill from the proposed development so
that there is no danger of structures or roads being struck by falling rocks,
mud, uprooted trees or other materials.
      e.   The proposed development presents no danger of falling rock, mud,
uprooted trees or other materials to structures downhill.
      f.   The view of the developed slope from the river and opposite
riverbank shall be consistent with the natural appearance of the undeveloped
slope, consistent with any historic areas nearby, and compatible with
surrounding architectural features.
      g.   Any lift stations required to service the slope development with
local sewer systems are to be designed in accordance with local design
standards and approved by the City Engineer. The applicant shall furnish a
satisfactory arrangement by which the cost of maintenance and operation of the
lift station are borne by those serviced by the facility.
   (5)   All septic systems shall be in conformance with Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency Chapter 7080.
   (6)   The applicant shall demonstrate that the types and densities of land
use proposed shall be suited to the site and soil conditions and shall not
present a threat to the maintenance of the groundwater quality; a potential
increase in maintenance cost of utilities, parking area or roads; and shall not
be subject to problems due to soil limitations, including but not limited to
soil bearing strength, shrink/swell potential and excessive frost movement.
   (7)   No hazardous waste disposal shall be permitted.
Subd. 6   Grading and Filling
   (1)   Grading or filling is prohibited within the bluff impact area or shore
impact zone or on slopes greater than 18% except for utilities and river access
with approved site plans.
   (2)   All grading or filling shall comply with Subsection
1001.07, subds. 5, 7, and 8 and sewage treatment and pollution prevention.
   (3)   A minimum amount of grading or filling may be allowed, when necessary
in compliance with the following requirements:
      a.   Any site alteration is the minimum area necessary for a structure or
development undertaken pursuant to an approved use.
      b.   The grading or filling shall minimize site alteration, minimize
adverse effects and maximize beneficial effects.
      c.   The applicant shall demonstrate that all grading which takes place
will be conducted in a manner that preserves the root zone aeration and
stability of existing trees and provides an adequate watering area equal to at
least 1/2 of each tree’s crown cover.
      d.   Only fill free of chemical pollutants and organic wastes shall be
used.
      e.   Wetlands shall not be used for solid waste disposal.
      f.   All disturbed areas shall be restored at the completion of the
project.
      g.   All restoration of disturbed soils shall include the application of
a minimum of 4 inches of a topsoil or similar material that will support plant
growth.
      h.   Final grades shall be in conformity with the approval and topography
of the surrounding land.
      i.   All restored areas of disturbed soils shall be seeded with a mixture
appropriate to the ecology and purpose of the site.
      j.   Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public waters
shall first be authorized by the Department of Natural Resources under M.S. §
103G.245, as may be amended from time to time.
      k.   Development, grading and filling shall comply with the provisions of
the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act Laws of Minnesota 1991, Chapter 103F,
and as amended, and other applicable laws.
Subd. 7   Vegetation Management
   (1)   Trees, shrubs, and existing native vegetation shall be preserved.
   (2)   No trees shall be removed nor clear cutting of vegetation permitted
within the floodplain: within the ordinary high water level setbacks; within
ravines; on the slope or face of bluffs with 18% slopes or greater; on islands;
and within bluffline setbacks except for safety reasons or for a public use and
only under a permit issued from the City of Dayton.
   (3)   Removal, cutting, or topping of any tree over 6 inches diameter
requires a permit from the City of Dayton. Alteration of trees over 6 inches
diameter shall not occur unless specifically approved by the City of Dayton.
   (4)   Permits may be issued for:
      a.   The pruning for the health of the tree, but not to create views;
      b.   For protection of utilities in protected areas; or
      c.   For the removal of invasive non-native vegetation in conjunction
with a forest management plan that includes erosion control and re-vegetation.
   (5)   The permit will be guided by the purposes and standards of this
Subsection, the site plan approval requirements, and the following provisions:
      a.   A minimum amount of vegetation is to be cut for legally permitted
expansions or new development.
      b.   Where trees are proposed to be cut, the applicant shall demonstrate
that there are no feasible or prudent alternatives to cutting trees on the
site.
      c.   The essential character, quality and density of existing growths is
preserved and as much canopy cover as possible is maintained.
      d.   The buffering of structures and other facilities is not
substantially reduced.
      e.   If trees are approved to be cut, the density of trees shall be
restored with native vegetation to that which existed before development, but
in no case shall the applicant be required to raise the density above 10 trees
per acre.
Subd. 8   Surface Water Runoff Management
   (1)   The proposed development shall minimize runoff on-site through site
design and plans, on-site infiltration, and in accordance with appropriate best
management practices in accordance with MPCA’s “Protecting Water Quality in
Urban Areas” as amended, or other professional soil conservation technical
manuals. The best management practices shall be maintained.
   (2)   After on-site minimization has been achieved, the proposed development
shall not increase the runoff rate from the site to adjoining property, public
rights-of-way and watercourses.
   (3)   The quality of water runoff and water infiltrated to the water table
or aquifer shall be undisturbed after development, and quality of runoff
improved.
   (4)   The development can meet all applicable National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) requirements.
   (5)   Storm water runoff after on-site minimization may be directed to
public water bodies provided that storm water runoff is presettled,
substantially free of silt, debris and chemical pollutants; only at rates which
will not disturb vegetation or increase turbidity, and in accordance with this
section.
Subd. 9   Utility and Transportation Facilities
   (1)   Utility facilities.  Utility crossings of the critical area corridor
shall meet the following standards:
      a.   River crossings shall be minimized and concentrated at existing
crossings where possible.
      b.   New and modified utility facilities shall complement the planned
land and water uses and shall not stimulate incompatible development.
      c.   New constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters shall provide
for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris
before discharge.
      d.   Utility facilities shall be placed underground in order to minimize
visual impact, unless economic, technological and land character factors make
underground placement infeasible. Economic considerations alone shall not be
made the major determination regarding feasibility.
      e.   If overhead placement is necessary, the crossing shall be hidden
from view as much as practicable.
      f.   Overhead crossing, if required, shall meet the following criteria:
         1.   The location of crossings shall be in or adjacent to existing
transmission service corridors whenever practicable, including bridge or
overhead utility lines.
         2.   All structures utilized shall be as compatible as practicable
with land use, scenic views, and existing transmission structures in height,
material, color and design.
         3.   Right-of-way clearance shall be kept to a minimum.
         4.   Native vegetative screening shall be utilized to the maximum
extent consistent with safety requirements.
         5.   Routing shall avoid unstable soil, blufflines, or high ridges or
woodlands, and the creation of tunnel vistas, and the alterations of the
natural environment including grading and vegetative removal, shall be
minimized.
         6.   The crossing shall be subject to the site planning requirements
set forth in this section.
      g.   Utility substations shall be subject to the following standards:
         1.   All substations shall be subjected to the site planning
requirements set forth in this section.
         2.   New substations or refurbishment of existing substations shall be
compatible in height, scale, building materials, landscaping and signing with
the surrounding natural environment or land uses. Screening by natural means is
encouraged and should be compatible with the surrounding environment.
      h.   Pipelines and underground facilities shall be subject to the
following standards:
         1.   All pipelines and underground facilities shall be subject to the
site planning requirements set forth in this section.
         2.   The facilities shall be located to avoid slopes greater than 18%,
wetlands, woodlands, and areas of unstable soils.
         3.   All underground placement of utility facilities and pipelines
shall be followed by revegetation and rehabilitation minimally to the
conditions which existed on site prior to development.
   (2)   Transportation facilities.  The construction or reconstruction of all
transportation facilities, railroads, and parking in the Mississippi River
Corridor shall be subject to the following standards and criteria:
      a.   Roads and railways shall be constructed to preserve and protect the
natural resources and minimize impacts on the natural terrain and natural
landscape.
      b.   River crossings shall be minimized and concentrated at existing
crossings where possible.
      c.   Cuts and fills are to be avoided where possible but in all cases
shall be minimized as is practical and in conformance with other requirements.
      d.   All roads and railways shall be subject to the site planning
requirements set forth in this Subsection.
      e.   New roads and railways shall not utilize the river corridor as a
convenient right-of-way for new arterials or main lines.
      f.   New and modified transportation facilities shall complement the
planned land and water uses and shall not stimulate incompatible development.
      g.   New roads and railways shall be restricted to those facilities
needed to access existing planned uses.
      h.   If standards are met, any new river crossings shall be designed to
minimize visual and environmental impacts and accommodate pedestrian and
bicycle, as well as vehicle, movement.
      i.   All new roads and railways shall provide safe pedestrian crossing
points to allow access to the river front. Rest areas, scenic overlooks, and
waysides shall be considered if in accordance with the standards and criteria.
      j.   If possible, access to the riverfront should be in public ownership
and allow reasonable public use of the land between the river and the
transportation facility.
      k.   New transportation elements shall be architecturally designed to
maintain the character of the corridor.
      l.   The grades of streets shall not exceed 8%.
      m.   Adequate parking facilities shall be provided to service the
proposed development. The construction of parking facilities, private roads and
driveways shall be consistent with the character of the river corridor,
screened from river view by natural vegetation and shall comply with all
setbacks for structures.
      n.   The following shall be avoided where practicable:
         1.   Slopes greater than 18%;
         2.   Scenic intrusion into stream, valley and open exposures of water;
         3.   Scenic intrusion into areas such as ridge crests and high points;
         4.   Wetlands;
         5.   Forests by running along fringes of forests rather than through
them. But if it is necessary to route through forests, then utilize open areas
in order to minimize destruction of commercial forest;
         6.   Soils whose high susceptibility to erosion would create
sedimentation and pollution problems during and after construction;
         7.   Areas of unstable soils which would be subject to extensive
slippage;
         8.   Areas with highwater tables, especially if construction requires
excavation; and
         9.   Open space recreation areas shall be avoided.
Subd. 10   Riverfront Uses and Dedication
   (1)   Dedication. Development shall be required to dedicate to the public
reasonable portions of land below the bluffline, place a conservation easement
over the floodplain and bluff area, or provide proposed parks or public trail
right-of-ways. In the event of practical difficulties or physical
impossibility, the developer shall be required to contribute an equivalent
amount of cash to be used only for the acquisition of land for riverfront
property, trails, parks, preservation of open space, scenic overlooks, and
protection of natural resources, storm water drainage areas or other public
services within the corridor.
      a.   New development will not be allowed to front directly on the river.
      b.   Industrial, mining, extractive and other similar uses will not be
allowed within the riverfront.
      c.   Water access such as stairways will be evaluated on a case-by-case
basis. In addition to compliance with the standards and site plan approval
requirements set forth in this section, stairways and lifts shall also be
subject to the standards in Subsection
1001.08, Subd. 12(5)(a)(l) through (6).
Subd. 11   Existing Uses
   (1)   Existing substandard use structures.  Any proposal for an expansion,
change of use, renewal of existing permit, or building permit of an existing
substandard use structure that is inconsistent with the provisions of this
section or the critical areas designation order in location or use shall not be
eligible for any permit granted by the City, unless a variance is obtained in
accordance with M.S. § 462, as may be amended from time to time, and City Code.
   (2)   Hardship.  If hardship is proved, the following criteria shall be met:
      a.   The applicant shall provide and maintain adequate buffering of the
structure from the water through the use of natural vegetation.
      b.   Expansion of existing structures shall be in a direction away from
the river and blufflines, and must comply with the inconsistent dimensional
standards as much as possible.
      c.   The public’s ability to view the river and river corridor from
existing public streets shall not be degraded by the proposed activity.
   (3)   Signs.  Signs in the critical river area shall be in conformance with 
Subsection
1001.20 of this section unless otherwise specified below:
      a.   Advertising signs are prohibited.
      b.   Direction signs for the purposes of directing river traffic at or
near boat launching areas are permitted provided that the signs are required to
maintain safe and orderly traffic flow. These signs shall not be used as
advertising space, shall be located at least 20 feet landward of the ordinary
high water level, and shall conform to all other provisions in this chapter
pertaining to directional signs.
      c.   Any other new signs require a permit pursuant to City Code and shall
be set back from the riverfront area so as not to be viewed from the river.
Subd. 12   Boat Launching Ramps and Docks
   (1)   Boat launching ramps may be located only where access streets are
adequate to handle the traffic load generated by the facility.
   (2)   Boat launching ramps shall be the minimum dimensions and site
alteration necessary, and shall comply with all site plan approval, grading and
filling, soil erosion control, vegetative management and other provisions of
this section.
   (3)   Shared or joint use accessory parking will be preferred. Loading will
be permitted only at ramps. Parking areas must be visually screened by
vegetation or topography from the river and adjoining residential property and
located at least 20 feet landward from the ordinary high water level.
   (4)   The impact of the accessory parking must not adversely affect the
environmental quality of the site or the surrounding neighborhood.
   (5)   Boat launching ramps and minor accessory buildings and haul-off
facilities must be in character and scale with the surrounding neighborhood.
   (6)   The dock minimizes encroachment waterward of ordinary high water level
in length and width, and minimizes interference with views of and from the
river.
   (7)   Docks shall not have an adverse effect upon the ecological and
hydrologic characteristics of the water, aquatic habitat, or wildlife habitat.
   (8)   Docks and boat launching ramps shall meet all regulations of state and
federal law.
   (9)   Marinas shall be prohibited.
Subd. 13   Management of Islands.
   Undeveloped islands shall be maintained in their natural state.
Subd. 14   Land Suitability
   (1)   Each lot created through subdivision, including planned unit
developments shall be suitable in its natural state for the proposed use with
minimal alteration.
   (2)   No land shall be subdivided which is found to be unsuitable for reason
of flooding, inadequate drainage, soil and rock formations with severe
limitations for development, severe erosion potential, unfavorable topography,
inadequate water supply or sewer disposal capabilities, important fish and
wildlife habitat, presence of significant historic or cultural sites, or any
other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of the
future residents of the proposed subdivision or the community.
Subd. 15   Planned Unit Developments (Cluster Developments)
   (1)   Planned Unit Developments (PUD) in a shoreland may be allowed under a
conditional use permit for new projects on undeveloped land, redevelopment of
previously built sites, or conversions of existing buildings and land.
   (2)   Planned Developments (PUD) in the corridor shall require a Planned
Unit Development (PUD zoning of the property and shall be processed in
accordance with the provision of Subsection
1001.10 of the City Zoning Code.
   (3)   Application for Planned Unit Developments (PUD) in the Mississippi
River Corridor.
      a.   Planned Unit Developments (PUD) shall only be permitted when they
meet the provisions of Subsection
1001.10 of the City Zoning Code for a Planned Unit Development (PUD) District.
      b.   Planned Unit Developments (PUD) shall be processed in accordance
with the provisions in the Administrative Subsection of this Code, Subsection
1001.28, Subd. 1, and Planned Unit Development (PUD) Subsection
1001.10 of the City Zoning Code.
      c.   Planned Unit Developments (PUD) in the corridor may be permitted
following the completion and approval of a site plan. The City shall find that
the proposed development plan is in substantial compliance with the applicable
standards of this section and the Mississippi River Corridor plan, and through
clustering the proposal provides a better means of preserving open space,
wooded areas, bluffs, scenic and ecological values, and other natural
resources.
      d.   Smaller lot sizes and higher density may be allowed provided:
         1.   All site plan review requirements and standards for corridor
lands in this Subsection must be met or exceeded.
         2.   At least 50% of the total project area within the corridor shall
be preserved as open space. The first priority for the open space shall be the
protection of bluffs, wooded areas, scenic and natural resources, and
significant cultural sites, in areas where possible.
         3.   Open space is permanently preserved and maintained through the
use of deed restrictions, covenants, scenic easements, public dedication, or
other effective methods.
         4.   Lots with dwelling units or sites, commercial uses, road rights-
of-way, or land covered by road surfaces, parking areas, or structures, are
developed areas and shall not be included in the computation of minimum open
space.
         5.   The proposed lots, structures, development, utilities, water
access, and shore recreation facilities shall be centralized on suitable areas
of the property, and meet and exceed corridor standards except for lot size and
density.
Subd. 16   Mining
   (1)   Mining operations are subject to provisions in Subsections
1001.07 and
1001.08, Subd. 12(15)(e).
   (2)   Mining operations shall not take place within 300 feet of the river.
Subd. 17   Agricultural Uses
   (1)   General cultivation fanning, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, truck
farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if bluffs,
and shore and bluff impact areas are maintained a permanent native vegetative
cover or managed under an approved conservation plan (Resource Management
Systems) consistent with the standards in this section and the field office
technical guides of the local Soil and Water Conservation Districts of the
United States Soil Conservation Service.
   (2)   Animal feedlots shall be prohibited.
Subd. 18   Performance Standards.
   Performance standards are set forth in Subsection
1001.14, Subd. 2.
Subd. 19   Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources
   (1)   Copies of all notices and submitted information of any public
hearings, site plans, subdivisions/plats or discretionary actions affecting
lands within the Mississippi River Corridor shall be sent to the Department of
Natural Resources or the Department of Natural Resources’s designated
representative at least 30 days before the hearing or final action.
   (2)   A copy of approved subdivisions/plats, and the final decisions
granting discretionary or hearing actions under Mississippi River Corridor
Subsection shall be sent to the Department of Natural Resources or the
Department of Natural Resources’s designated representative and postmarked
within 10 days of final action.
   (3)   Proposed plan and Subsection amendments affecting lands within the
Mississippi River Corridor, including rezoning and density changes, shall be
sent to the Department of Natural Resources or the Department of Natural
Resources’s designated representative for review and approval by the D.N.R. in
accordance with procedures and review timetable in state laws.  These
amendments become effective only upon the approval by Department of Natural
Resources and subsequent enactment by the City.
Subd. 20   Enforcement
   (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the administration
and enforcement of this Subsection. Any violation of the provisions of this
Subsection or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants
of variances or conditional uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable as defined by law.
   (2)   Violations of this Subsection can occur regardless of whether or not a
permit has been issued.
   (3)   Each day that a violation of the provisions of this Subsection exist,
shall constitute a separate misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 1001.07)  (Am. Ord. 2012-06, passed 4-24-2012; Am. Ord. 2014-04,
passed 3-25-2014)
1001.08   SHORELAND ZONING.
Subd. 1   Statutory Authorization.
   This Shoreland Zoning Subsection
1001.08 is adopted pursuant to the authorization contained in M.S. Chapter
103F, as may be amended from time to time, Minn. Rules, pts. 6120.2500 through
6120.3900, and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in M.S. § 462, as
may be amended from time to time.
Subd. 2   Purpose and Intent
   (1)   The uncontrolled use of shorelands affects the public health, safety
and general welfare not only by contributing to pollution of public waters, but
also by impairing the local tax base. Therefore, it is in the best interests of
the public health, safety and welfare to provide for the wise development of
shorelands of public water.
   (2)   The Legislature of Minnesota has delegated responsibility to local
governments of the state to regulate the subdivision, use and development of
the shorelands of public water and thus preserve and enhance the quality of
surface waters, conserve the economic and natural environmental values of
shorelands, and provide for the wise use of waters and related land resources.
   (3)   This responsibility is hereby recognized by the City.
Subd. 3   Jurisdiction
   (1)   The provisions of this Subsection
1001.08 shall apply to the shorelands of the public water bodies as classified
in Subdivision 10. Shoreland is land located within 1,000 feet from the
ordinary high water mark of a lake, pond, or flowage; or 300 feet from a river
or stream, or the landward extent of a floodplain designated by ordinance on a
river or stream, whichever is greater.
   (2)   The Mississippi River and adjacent river corridor lands are designated
and classified as “Wild & Scenic River” and “Critical Area” and are regulated
by provisions of the Mississippi River Corridor Overlay District Subsection and
any other applicable section provisions, whichever is more restrictive.
   (3)   The use of any shoreland of public waters; the size and shape of lots;
the use, size type and location of structures on lots; the installation and
maintenance of water supply and waste treatment systems; the grading and
filling of any shoreland area; the cutting of shoreland vegetation; and the
subdivision of land shall be in full compliance with the terms of this section
and other applicable regulations.
Subd. 4   Enforcement
   (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the administration
and enforcement of this Subsection.
   (2)   Any violation of the provisions of this Subsection or failure to
comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or conditional
uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law.
   (3)   Violations of this Subsection can occur regardless of whether or not a
permit is required for a regulated activity pursuant to Subdivision 9(1) of
this Subsection.
   (4)   Each day that a violation of the provisions of this Subsection exist,
shall constitute a separate misdemeanor.
Subd. 5   Interpretation.
   In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this Subsection
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the City Council and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by state statutes.
Subd. 6   Severability.
   If any subdivisions, clause, provision, or portion of this section is judged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of this Subsection shall not be affected thereby.
Subd. 7   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
   It is not intended by this Subsection to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
section imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Subsection shall
prevail.
Subd. 8   Definitions.
   The definitions in Subsection
1001.03, Definitions, of the Dayton Zoning Code shall define the terms used in
this section of the Zoning Code.
Subd. 9   Administration
   (1)   Permits required.
      a.   A permit is required for the construction of buildings or building
additions (and including related activities such as construction of fences,
decks, and signs), the installation and/or alteration of sewage treatment
systems, and those grading and filling activities not exempted by Subdivision
12 of this Subsection. Application for a permit shall be made to the City on
the forms provided. The application shall include the necessary information so
that the City can determine the site’s suitability for the intended use and
that a conforming sewage treatment system or sanitary sewer connection will be
provided should any building permits or conditional use permits be issued.
      b.   Any construction for which a permit is issued as described in
Subdivision 9(1)(a) above shall be reconstructed or replaced in accordance with
the provisions of this Subsection.
   (2)   Zoning compliance.
      a.   Zoning compliance shall be required for each activity requiring a
permit as specified in Subdivision 9(1) of this Subsection. This will specify
that the use of land conforms to the requirements of this Subsection. Any use,
arrangement, or construction that varies from what has been authorized by
permit shall be deemed a violation of this Subsection and shall be punishable
as provided by Subdivision 4 of this Subsection.
      b.   This provision shall be satisfied by planning approval of permits as
they are processed by the City.
   (3)   Variances.
      a.   Variances may be granted only in accordance with M.S. Chapter 462,
as may be amended from time to time, and City Code. A variance may not
circumvent the general purposes and intent of this Subsection. No variance may
be granted that would allow any use that is prohibited in the zoning district
in which the subject property is located. Conditions may be imposed in the
granting of a variance to ensure compliance and to protect adjacent properties
and the public interest. In considering a variance request, the City Council
shall also consider whether the property owner has reasonable use of the land
without the variance, whether the property is used seasonally or year-round,
whether the variance is being requested solely on the basis of economic
considerations, and the characteristics of development on adjacent properties.
      b.   The City shall hear and decide requests for variances, including
variances for sewage treatment systems in shoreland districts, in accordance
with the rules that the City has adopted for considerations of variances in
Subsection
1001.29, Subd. 1 of the City Zoning section.
      c.   When a variance is approved after the Department of Natural
Resources has formally recommended denial in the hearing record, the
notification of the approved variance required in Subdivision 9(4) shall also
include the summary of the public record/testimony and the findings of facts
and conclusions which supported the issuance of the variance.
      d.   For existing developments, the application for variance shall
clearly demonstrate whether a conforming sewage treatment system or sanitary
sewer connection is present for the intended use of the property. All variances
granted shall require reconstruction of a non-conforming sewage treatment
system or connection.
   (4)   Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources.
      a.   Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances,
amendments, Planned Developments, or conditional uses under shoreland
management controls shall be sent to the Department of Natural Resources or the
Department of Natural Resources’s designated representative and postmarked at
least 10 days before the hearings. Notices of hearings to consider proposed
preliminary plats shall include copies thereof.
      b.   A copy of approved amendments and Subdivisions/plats, and final
decisions granting variances, Planned Developments, or conditional uses under
shoreland management controls shall be sent to the Commissioner or the
Commissioner’s designated representative and postmarked within 10 days of final
action.
Subd. 10   Shoreland Classification and Land Use Districts
   (1)   Shoreland management classifications.
      a.   The public waters of the City have been classified in this
Subsection consistent with criteria found in Minn. Rules, Part 6120.3300, and
the Public Waters Inventory Map for Hennepin County, Minnesota.
      b.   The shoreland area for the water bodies, creeks and rivers listed
below shall be defined as shown on the official Zoning Map of the City.
      c.   Lakes.
 
Natural                         Land Section                Shoreland Overlay
Environment  D.N.R. ID# Acreage (T27N- R22W)   Type Wetland District
Lakes (NE)
Goose Lake   27-122     83      35             4            Recreational
                                                            Recreational,
Laura Lake   27-123     135     7              5            Residential,
                                                            Agricultural
Unnamed      27-124     44      8, 9, 16, 17   4            Agricultural
Hayden Lake  27-128     400     23, 26         5            Recreational
                                                            Recreational,
DuBay Lake   27-129     17      28, 29         4            Residential,
                                                            Agricultural
Powers Lake  27-130     160     26, 27, 34, 35 4            Recreational,
                                                            Residential
                                                            Recreational,
Grass Lake   27-135     214     18, 19         4            Agricultural,
                                                            Residential
Recreation                      Land Section                Shoreland Overlay
Development  D.N.R. ID# Acreage (T120N- R22W)  Type Wetland District
Lakes (RD)
                                                            Recreational,
Diamond Lake 27-125     454     17 through 19  5            Residential,
                                                            Agricultural
                                                            Industrial,
French Lake  27-127     365     19, 29, 30     5            Agricultural,
                                                            Residential,
                                                            Recreational
 
      d.   Rivers and streams.
 
River or Stream* Class            Land Section (T120  Shoreland Overlay
                                  R22W)               District
                                  Sec. 6, T120N,
Crow River       Agricultural     R22W, Sec.31,       Residential,
                                  T121N, R22W,        Agricultural, Commercial
                                  Sec.36, T121N, R23W
Diamond Lake     Tributary Stream 15, 16, 17, 19, 20, Agricultural,
                                  21, 22, 26, 27      Residential, Recreational
                                                      Agricultural,
Rush Creek       Tributary Stream 31, 32, 33, 34      Residential, Industrial,
                                                      Commercial
Elm Creek        Tributary Stream 26, 34, 35          Recreational
Unnamed          Tributary Stream 17                  Recreational,
                                                      Agricultural
*The Mississippi River and adjacent river corridor lands are designated and
classified as “Wild & Scenic River” and “Critical Area” and are regulated by
provisions of the Mississippi River Corridor Overlay District Section and any
other applicable ordinance provisions, whichever is more restrictive.
** Portions of the Crow River Shoreland that are north of the centerline of
Hennepin County Road 12 shall not be subject to this Shoreland Zoning Section,
but shall be regulated by the provisions of the Mississippi River Corridor
Overlay District Section and any other applicable ordinance provisions,
whichever is more restrictive.
 
   (2)   Land use zone districts.
      a.   Purpose.
         1.   The development of shorelands of public waters shall be
controlled by means of land use zoning districts which are designated to be
compatible with the classes of public waters to which they apply. Land use
zoning districts are established to provide for:
            (a)   The management of areas unsuitable for development due to wet
soils, steep slopes, flooding, inadequate drainage, severe erosion potential,
presence of significant historical sites, or any other feature likely to be
harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the City;
            (b)   The preservation of areas suitable for residential
development from encroachment by commercial and industrial uses;
            (c)   The centralization of service facilities for residential
areas and enhancement of economic growth for those areas suitable for limited
commercial development;
            (d)   The management of areas for commercial or industrial uses
which, by their nature, require location in shoreland areas; and
            (e)   The preservation and enhancement of the quality of water-
based recreational use of public waters including provisions for public
accesses.
      b.   Land uses for lakes, rivers and streams.
 
SHORELAND USE TABLE
Shoreland Overlay Use
Districts              Natural     Recreation  Agricultural
P= Permitted           Environment Development Rivers       Tributary Stream
C = Conditional Use    Lakes       Lakes
N = Not Permitted   
Recreational, Agricultural and Residential District Uses
Forest management      P           P           P            P
Sensitive resource     P           P           P            P
management
Agricultural: crop and P           P           P            P
pasture
Agricultural: feedlots N           N           N            N
Single-family          P           P           P            P
residential
Public parks and       P           P           P            P
recreation
Semi-public and public C           C           C            C
Mining                 C           C           C            C
Multiple residential   C           C           C            C
(sewered only)
Surface water oriented N           N           N            N
commercial
Planned Developments   C           C           C            C
Commercial District Uses
Any use permitted in   As regulated in the Residential District and
Residential or         Agricultural District
Agricultural Districts
Commercial             N           C           C            C
Commercial Planned     C           C           N            C
Development ¹
 
 
SHORELAND USE TABLE
Shoreland Overlay Use
Districts              Natural     Recreation  Agricultural
P= Permitted           Environment Development Rivers       Tributary Stream
C = Conditional Use    Lakes       Lakes
N = Not Permitted   
Residential Planned    C           C           C            C
Development
Industrial District Uses
Any use permitted in   As regulated in the Residential District and
Residential or         Agricultural District
Agricultural District
Industrial             N           C           N            C
Industrial Planned
Development 1
Residential Planned
Development
¹ Only permitted in sewered areas.
 
      c.   Land use in the Shoreland Overlay Districts.
         1.   For any use that is regulated by more than 1 zoning district,
including the base zoning district, Shoreland Overlay District or other Overlay
Districts, the most restrictive regulation requirement shall apply.
         2.   Land use districts in the shoreland area shall be in conformance
with the criteria specified in Minn. Rules, Part 6120.3200, Subpart 3.
         3.   District boundaries for the Shoreland Overlay Districts shall be
as shown on the official Zoning Map of the City, or alternatively as described
in Subsection
1001.08 Subd. 10.
         4.   Conditional use permits shall be processed by the City as
provided by Subsection l001.23, subds. 2 through 4 of the City Zoning Code.
Subd. 11   Dimensional Requirements
   (1)   The following minimum requirements shall apply to all shore lands of
the public waters listed in Subdivision 10. The minimum lot area in (square
feet) and minimum lot width requirements (in lineal feet) for residential lots
created after the date of enactment of this Subsection for the lake, river and
stream classifications are as set forth in this subdivision. Where the
requirements of the underlying zoning district, as shown on the official Zoning
Map, are more restrictive than those set forth herein, then more restrictive
standards shall apply.
      a.   Unsewered areas for riparian and non-riparian lots.
 
                  Natural     Recreational Agricultural       Tributary
Unsewered Areas   Environment Development  Rivers             Stream
                  Waters      Waters
Min. Lot Area     80,000      40,000       40,000             80,000
(square feet)
Min. Lot Width
and Bldg. Line    200         150          150                100
(ft.)
Min. Structure
Setback From      150         100          100                100
Ordinary High
Water Mark (ft.)
Min. Structure
Setback From      Determined by the provisions of the City Zoning Code.
Roads and Highway
Max. Structure    Determined by the provisions of the City Zoning Code
Height            except that no height can exceed 35 feet
Limitations
Maximum Lot Area
* Covered by      25          25           In the RO district All other 25
Impervious                                                    districts
Surface (%)
30                25
Min. Sewage
System Setback
From Ordinary     150         100          75                 100
High Water Mark
(ft.)
Min. Structure
Setback from top  30          30           30                 30
of bluff (feet)
*See Provisions of Subdivision 12(14) b.
 
      b.   Sewered areas for riparian and non-riparian lots.  (See footnote¹
below table).
 
              Natural            Recreational      Agricultural       Urban and
              Environment Waters Development       Rivers             Tributary
Sewered Areas                    Waters                               Stream
              Riparian  Non-     Riparian Non-     All lots           All lots
                        riparian          riparian
      Single  40,000    20,000   20,000   15,000
      Duplex  70,000    35,000   35,000   26,000
Min.          100,000   52,000   50,000   38,000                      As per
Lot           or        or       or       or       As per base zoning base
Area  Multi-  32,500/   16,250/  16,250/  12,250/  district standards zoning
(sq.  family  unit      unit     unit     unit                        district
ft.)          whichever which    which    which                       standards
              is        ever is  ever is  ever is
              greater   greater  greater  greater
Min.  Single  125       125      75       75       150                75
Lot   Duplex  225       220      135      135      225                115
Width         add 100   add 95   add 60   add 55                      add 40
and   Multi-  feet for  feet for feet for feet for add 75 feet for    feet for
Bldg. family  each unit each     each     each     each unit over 2   each unit
Line          over 2    unit     unit     unit                        over 2
(ft.)                   over 2   over 2   over 2
Min.
Structure
Setback from  150                75                50                 50
Ordinary High
Water Mark
(ft.)
Min.
Structure
Setback from  Determined by the provisions of the City Zoning Code.
Roads and
Highway (ft.)
Max.
Structure     Determined by the provisions of the City Zoning Code, except that
Height        no height can exceed 35 feet.
Limitations
Maximum Lot                                        In the   All other
Area Covered  25                 25                RO       districts 25
by Impervious                                      District
Surface (%)                                        30       25
Min.
Structure
Setback from  30                 30                30                 30
top of bluff
(ft.)
 
¹ Because of the existing built condition of the RO District, flexibility in
the above standards may be granted through City. Review of these requests shall
be made on a case by case basis and be based on proposed measures to control
and protect storm water quality. The shore impact area and bluff impact area
standards shall not be modified.
      c.   For any lot regulated by the base zoning district and the Shoreland
Overlay District, the most restrictive regulation requirement for setback
height, lot coverage, density and any other applicable requirement shall apply.
      d.   For commercial and industrial lots, where only part of the lot is
located within a shoreland area, the maximum impervious area of the lot within
the Shoreland Overlay shall not exceed 25%. The impervious surface area of the
lot outside of the shoreland overlay must meet the base zoning district
standards.
Subd. 12   General Provisions
   The following general provisions shall be required in the Shoreland Overlay
District:
   (1)   Lots for controlled accesses.  Lots used for controlled accesses to
public waters or as recreation areas by owners of non-riparian lots within
subdivisions shall meet or exceed the following standards:
      a.   Lots shall meet the minimum width and area requirements for
residential lots, and be suitable for the intended uses of controlled access
lots;
      b.   If docking, mooring, or over-water storage of more than 6 watercraft
is to be allowed at a controlled access lot, then the width of the lot (keeping
the same lot depth) shall be increased by 25% in lot frontage for each
watercraft beyond 6;
      c.   Lots shall be jointly or commonly owned by all purchasers of lots in
the subdivision or by all purchasers of non-riparian lots in the subdivision
who are provided riparian access rights on the access lot in a manner
acceptable to the City and the Department of Natural Resources; and
      d.   Covenants or other equally effective legal instruments shall be
developed that specifically state which lot owners have authority to use the
access lot and what activities are allowed. The activities may include
watercraft launching, loading, storage, beaching, mooring, or docking. They
shall also include other outdoor recreational activities that do not
significantly conflict with general public use of public water or the enjoyment
of normal property rights of adjacent property owners examples of the non-
significant conflict activities include swimming, sunbathing, or picnicking.
The covenants shall limit the total number of vehicles allowed to be parked and
the total number of watercraft allowed to be continuously moored, docked, or
stored over water, and shall require centralization of all common facilities
and activities in the most suitable locations on the lot to minimize
topographic and vegetation alterations. The shall also require all parking
areas, storage buildings and other facilities to be screened by vegetation or
topography as much as practical from view from the public water, assuming
summer, leaf-on conditions.
   (2)   Placement and design of structures and decks.  Placement of structure
on lots.
      a.   When more than 1 setback applies to a site, structures and
facilities shall be located to meet all setbacks.
         b.   Where structures exist on the adjoining lots on both sides of a
proposed building site, structure setbacks required for a new proposed building
or an addition to an existing building may be altered without a variance to
conform to the average setbacks on the adjoining lots from the ordinary high
water level, provided the proposed building site is not located in a shore
impact zone or bluff impact zone.
         c.   Decks must meet structure setback standards. Decks that do not
meet setback requirements from public waters may be allowed without a variance
to be added to structures existing on the date the shoreland structure setbacks
were established by ordinance, if all of the following criteria and standards
are met:
            1.   A thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals no
reasonable location for a deck meeting or exceeding the existing ordinary high
water level setback of the structure;
            2.   The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level
does not exceed 15% of the existing shoreline setback of the structure from the
ordinary high water level or does not encroach closer than 30 feet, whichever
is more restrictive; and
            3.   The deck is constructed primarily of wood and is not roofed or
screened.
   (3)   Floodplain regulations.
      a.   Structures shall be located in accordance with the City Floodplain
Regulations applicable to the site.
      b.   Water-oriented accessory structures, where allowed, may have the
lowest floor placed lower than the elevation determined by the procedures in
this Subsection if the structure is constructed of flood-resistant materials to
the flood elevation, electrical and mechanical equipment is placed above the
flood elevation and, if long duration flooding is anticipated, the structure is
built to withstand ice action and wind-driven waves and debris.
   (4)   Water-oriented accessory structures.  On recreation development lakes,
each residence may have 1 water-oriented accessory structure not meeting the
normal structure setback in Subdivision 11 of this Subsection if this water-
oriented accessory structure complies with the following provisions:
         a.   The accessory use shall not be a boat house, fish cleaning house,
or pump house which are prohibited uses in all Shoreland Zoning Districts;
         b.   The structure or facility shall not exceed 10 feet in height,
exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater than 150 square
feet. Detached decks shall not exceed 3 feet above grade at any point;
         c.   The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high
water level shall be at least 10 feet, except for a boat lift;
         d.   The structure or facility shall be treated to reduce visibility
as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography,
increased setbacks or color, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions; and
         e.   The structure of facility shall not be designed or used for human
habitation and shall not contain water supply or sewage treatment facilities.
   (5)   Stairways, lifts, landings and docks.
      a.   Stairways and lifts are the preferred alternative to major
topographic alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep
slopes to shore areas.
      b.   Stairways and lifts shall meet the following design requirements:
         1.   Stairways and lifts shall not exceed 4 feet in width. Wider
stairways may be used for public open-space recreational properties;
         2.   Landings for stairways, landings at the bottom of stairways and
lifts on residential lots shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. Landings
larger than 32 square feet may be used for public open-space recreational
properties;
         3.   Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, or landings;
         4.   Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above
the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground, provided they are
designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion;
         5.   Stairways, lifts, and landings shall be located in the most
visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the
public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical;
         6.   Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for physically
handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas,
provided that the dimensional and performance standards of items (1) to (5)
above are complied with in addition to the requirements of Minn. Regulations,
Chapter 1340; and
         7.   Docks that exceed 5 feet in width require a shoreland building
permit.
   (6)   Significant historic sites.  No structure shall be placed on a
significant historic site in a manner that affects the historical value of the
site unless adequate information about the site as determined by the Minnesota
Historical Society has been removed and documented in a public repository.
   (7)   Steep slopes.
      a.   The City shall evaluate possible soil erosion impacts and
development visibility from public waters before issuing a permit for
construction of sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways, structures, or
other improvements on steep slopes.
      b.   When determined necessary, conditions shall be attached to issued
permits to prevent erosion and to preserve existing vegetation screening of
structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed from the surface of public
waters, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
   (8)   Height of structures.  All structures in all Shoreland Districts shall
not exceed 35 feet in height.
   (9)   Shoreland alterations.  Alterations of vegetation and topography will
be regulated to prevent soil erosion into public waters, fix nutrients,
preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping,
and protect fish and wildlife habitat.
   (10)   Vegetation alterations.
      a.   Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of structures,
utilities, and sewage treatment systems and the construction of roads and
parking areas regulated by Subdivision 12(17)(b) of this Subsection are exempt
from the vegetation alteration standards that follow.
      b.   Removal or alteration of vegetation, except for agricultural and
forest management uses as regulated in Subdivision 12(15) of this Subsection,
respectively, is allowed subject to the following standards:
         1.   Clear-cutting and intensive vegetation clearing within the shore
impact zones, bluff impact zones and on steep slopes are not permitted.
Intensive vegetation clearing for forestland conversion to another use outside
of these areas is allowable as a conditional use if a soil erosion and control
and sedimentation plan is developed and approved by the Soil and Water
Conservation District in which the property is located.
         2.   In shore impact zones, bluff impact zones and on steep slopes,
limited clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning, and trimming of
trees is allowed to provide a view to the water from the principal dwelling
site and to accommodate the placement of stairways, landings, picnic areas,
access paths, trails, beach and watercraft areas, and permitted water-oriented
accessory structures of facilities, provided that:
            (a)   The screening or structures, vehicles, or other facilities as
viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, is not
substantially reduced;
            (b)   Along rivers, existing shading of water surfaces is
preserved; and
            (c)   In the shore impact zone and bluff impact zone, vegetation
should remain mostly undisturbed, except to provide for a water viewing
corridor not to exceed 20% of the lot width or 30 feet, whichever is less.
      c.   The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of trees,
limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or posed safety hazards.
   (11)   Topographic alterations/grading and filling.
      a.   Grading and filling and excavations necessary for the construction
of structures, utilities, sewage treatment systems, and driveways under validly
issued construction permits for these facilities do not require the issuance of
a separate grading and filling permit. However, the grading and filling
standards in this Subsection shall be incorporated into the issuance of permits
for construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways.
      b.   Public roads and parking areas are regulated by Subdivision 12(13)
below.
      c.   Notwithstanding items a. and b. above, a grading and filling permit
will be required for:
         1.   The movement of more than 10 cubic yards of material on steep
slopes or within shore or bluff impact zones; and
         2.   The movement of more than 50 cubic yards of material outside of
steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones.
      d.   The following considerations and conditions shall be adhered to
during the issuance of construction permits, grading and filling permits,
conditional use permits, variances and subdivision approvals:
         1.   Alterations shall be designed and conducted in a manner that
ensures that only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the
shortest time possible;
         2.   Mulches or similar materials shall be used, where necessary, for
temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation cover shall be
established as soon as weather conditions allow;
         3.   Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before
they reach any surface water feature shall be used;
         4.   Altered areas shall be stabilized to acceptable erosion control
standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the local Soil
and Water Conservation Districts and the United States Soil Conservation
Service;
         5.   Fill or excavated material shall not be placed in a manner that
creates an unstable slope;
         6.   Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes shall
be reviewed by the City Engineer for continued slope stability and shall not
create finished slopes of 30% or greater;
         7.   Fill or excavated material shall not be placed in bluff impact
zones;
         8.   Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public
waters shall first be authorized by the Department of Natural Resources under
M.S. § 103G.245, as may be amended from time to time;
         9.   Alteration of topography shall be allowed only if they are
accessory to construction of public utilities, permitted or conditional uses
and do not adversely affect adjacent or near by properties;
         10.   Placement of natural rock riprap, and placement of filter
blanket is permitted if the finished slope does not exceed 3 feet horizontal to
1 foot vertical (may be increased by Department of Natural Resources permit),
the landward extent of the riprap is within 6 feet of the ordinary high water
level, and the height of the riprap above the ordinary high water level does
not exceed 3 feet; and
         11.   Excavation and fills shall also be subject to all other
provisions of the City Code related thereto.
      e.   Connection to public waters.  Excavation where the intended purpose
is a new connection to a public water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons, and
harbors, requires a conditional use permit.
   (12)   Wetland protection regulations.
      a.   Grading and filling in any type 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8 wetland shall
be evaluated by the City to determine how extensively the proposed activity
would effect the following functional qualities of the wetland:
         1.   Sediment and pollutant trapping and retention;
         2.   Storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood damage;
         3.   Fish and wildlife habitat;
         4.   Recreational use;
         5.   Shoreline or bank stabilization; and
         6.   Noteworthiness, including special qualities such as historic
significance, critical habitat for endangered plants and animals, or others.
      b.   An evaluation shall also be made to determine whether the wetland
alteration being proposed requires permits, reviews, or approvals by other
local, state, or federal agencies such as a Watershed District, the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources, or the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
The person(s) proposed the wetland alteration shall be responsible for this
evaluation and compliance with these agency regulations and requirements.
      c.   Development, grading and filling shall comply with the provisions of
the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act Laws of Minnesota 1991, Chapter 103F,
and as amended.
   (13)   Placement and design of roads, driveways and parking areas.
      a.   Public and private roads and parking areas shall be designed to take
advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening
from view from pubic waters. Documentation shall be provided to the City
Engineer that all roads and parking areas are designed and constructed to
minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent with the field office
technical guides of the local Soil and Water Conservation District, or other
applicable technical materials.
      b.   Roads, driveways and parking areas shall meet structure setbacks and
shall not be placed within bluff and the shore impact zones, when other
reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives exist,
they shall be placed within these areas and shall be designed to minimized
adverse impacts.
      c.   Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and
access-related parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones provided
the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of Subdivision 12(13)
of this Subsection are met. For private facilities, the grading and filling
provisions of Subdivision 12(11) of this Subsection shall be met.
   (14)   Stormwater management.
      a.   The following general and specific standards shall apply:
         1.   General standards.
            (a)   When possible, existing natural drainageways, wetlands, and
vegetated soil surfaces shall be used to convey, store, filter, and retain
stormwater runoff before discharge to public waters.
            (b)   Development shall be planned and conducted in a manner that
will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion
potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas shall be
stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods used to
retain sediment on the site.
            (c)   When development density, topographic features, and soil and
vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff
using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities
such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, waterways, and
ponds shall be required. Preference shall be given to designs using surface
drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and man-made
materials and facilities. Settling basins to intercept urban runoff shall be
sized to a minimum of a 10-year storm design.
         2.   Specific standards.
            (a)   Impervious surface coverage of lots shall not exceed 25% of
the lot area, except in the RO District where impervious surface shall not
exceed 30%. This may be increased provided the City has approved and
implemented a storm water management plan affecting the subject site and a
conditional use permit permitting an increase has been granted.
            (b)   When constructed facilities are used for stormwater
management, documentation shall be provided by a qualified individual that they
are designed and installed consistent with the field office technical guide of
the local Soil and Water Conservation Districts.
            (c)   New constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters shall
provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface
debris before discharge.
   (15)   Special provisions for public/semipublic, agriculture, forestry and
extractive uses.
      a.   Surface water-oriented uses and public, or semipublic uses, where
permitted by this Subsection, that have need for access to and use of public
waters may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters.
      b.   Those uses with water-oriented needs shall meet the following
standards:
         1.   In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks, and
other zoning standards in this Subsection, the uses shall be designed to
incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas and
structures;
         2.   No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs may be
placed in or upon public waters. Signs conveying information or safety messages
may be placed in or on public waters by the City.
         3.   Outside lighting may be located within the shore impact zone or
over pubic waters if it is used primarily to illuminate potential safety
hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent direct illumination
out across public waters. This does not preclude the use of navigational
lights;
         4.   Commercial uses such as boat rides, on-board vendors or similar
uses are strictly prohibited; and
         5.   Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons shall
centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of navigation
and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the need.
      b.   Uses without water-oriented needs shall be located on lots or
parcels without public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with
public waters frontage, shall either be set back double the normal ordinary
high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from the water
by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
      c.   Agriculture use standards.
         1.   In all lake and river shoreland areas, general cultivation
farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, sod farming, and wild
crop harvesting are permitted used if steep slopes and shore and bluff impact
zones are maintained in a permanent vegetation or managed under an approved
conservation plan (Resource Management Systems) consistent with field office
technical guides of the local Soil and Water Conservation Districts of the
United States Soil Conservation Service, as provided by a qualified individual
or agency.
         2.   The shore impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural
land uses is equal to a line parallel to and 50 feet from the ordinary high
water level.
         3.   Livestock are prohibited from the shore impact zone and are also
prohibited from any lakes, rivers, tributaries or water bodies listed in
Subdivision 10.
         4.   Animal feedlots shall be prohibited in the Shoreland District.
      d.   Forest management standards.  The harvesting of timber and
associated reforestation shall be conducted consistent with the provision of
the Minnesota Nonpoint Source Pollution Assessment-Forestry and the provisions
of Water Quality in Forest Management “Best Management Practices in Minnesota.”
      e.   Mining standards.
         1.   Site development and restoration plan. An extractive use site
development and restoration plan shall be developed, approved, and followed
over the course of operation of the site. The plan shall address dust, noise,
possible pollutant discharges, hours and duration of operation, and anticipated
vegetation and topographic alterations. It shall also identify actions to be
taken during operation to mitigate adverse environmental impacts, particularly
erosion, and shall clearly explain how the site will be rehabilitated after
extractive activities end.
         2.   Setbacks for processing machinery.  Processing machinery shall be
located consistent with setback standards for structures from ordinary high
water levels of public waters and from bluffs.
      f.   Mining of metallic minerals and peat.  Mining of metallic minerals
and peat, as defined in M.S. §§ 93.44 to 93.51, as may be amended from time to
time, shall be a conditional use provided the provisions of M.S. §§ 93.44 to
93.51, as may be amended from time to time, are satisfied.
   (16)   Conditional uses.
      a.   Conditional uses allowable within shoreland areas shall be subject
to the review and approval procedures, and criteria and conditions for review
of conditional uses established by the City in Subsection
1001.23 of the City Zoning Code.
      b.   The following additional evaluation criteria and conditions shall
apply within shoreland areas:
         1.   Evaluation criteria. A thorough evaluation of the waterbody and
topographic, vegetation, and soils conditions on the site shall be made to
ensure:
            (a)   The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of
public waters, both during and after construction;
            (b)   The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed
from public waters is limited;
            (c)   The site is adequate for water supply and on-site sewage
treatment and public utilities shall be utilized where they are available; and
            (d)   The types, uses, and numbers of watercraft that the project
will generate are compatible in relation to the suitability of public waters to
safely accommodate these watercraft.
      b.   Conditions attached to conditional use permits.
         1.   The Planning Commission and City Council, upon consideration of
the criteria listed above and the purposes of this Subsection, shall attach
these conditions to the issuance of the conditional use permits as it deems
necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Subsection.
         2.   These conditions may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
            (a)   Increased setbacks from the ordinary high water level;
            (b)   Limitations on the natural vegetation to be removed or the
requirement that additional vegetation be planted; and
            (c)   Special provisions for the location, design, and use of
structures, sewage treatment systems, watercraft launching and docking areas,
and vehicle parking areas.
      c.   All conditional use permits and attached conditions require approval
of the City Council as required in Subsection
1001.23 of the City Zoning Code.
   (17)   Water supply and sewage treatment.
      a.   Water supply.  Any public or private supply of water for domestic
purposes shall meet or exceed standards for water quality of the Minnesota
Department of Health and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
      b.   Sewage treatment.
         1.   All private sewage treatment systems shall meet or exceed the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s standards for individual sewage treatment
systems contained in the document titled, “Individual Sewage Treatment System
Standards, Chapter 7080,” a copy of which is hereby adopted by the City by
reference and declared to be a part of this Code.
         2.   Connections shall be made to public sanitary sewer and water
systems where available.
         3.   On-site sewage treatment systems shall be set back from the
ordinary high water level in accordance with the setbacks contained in
Subdivision 11 of this Subsection.
         4.   Evaluation criteria.
            (a)   All proposed sites for individual treatment systems shall be
evaluated in accordance with the criteria in the following sub-items:
               i.   Depth to the highest known or calculated ground water table
or bedrock;
               ii.   Soil conditions, properties and permeability;
               iii.   Slope; and
               iv.   The existence of lowlands, local surface depressions, and
rock outcrops.
            (b)   If the determination of a site’s suitability cannot be made
with publicly available, existing information, it shall then be the
responsibility of the applicant to provide sufficient soil borings and
percolation test from on-site field investigations.
         5.   Non-conforming sewage treatment systems shall be regulated and
upgraded in accordance with this Subdivision and the following:
            (a)   A sewage treatment system not meeting the requirements of
Subdivision 12(17)(b)(1) shall be upgraded, at a minimum, at any time a permit
or variance of any type is required for improvement on, or use of, the
property. For the purposes of this provision, a sewage treatment system shall
not be considered non-conforming if the only deficiency is the sewage treatment
systems improper setback from the ordinary high water level.
            (b)   The City will require upgrading or replacement of any non-
conforming system identified by this program within 5 years. Sewage systems
installed according to applicable local shoreland standards adopted under M.S.
§§ 103F.211 and 103F.221, as may be amended from time to time, in effect at the
time of installation may be considered as conforming unless they are determined
to be failing. Systems using cesspools, leaching pits, seepage pits, or other
deep disposal methods, or systems with less soil treatment area separation
above ground water than required by the Minnesota Pollution Control agency’s
Chapter 7080 for design of on-site sewage treatment systems, shall be
considered non-conforming.
            (c)   Additional regulations governing on-site sewage treatment
systems are contained in the City’s On-Site Treatment Systems Section.
   (18)   Subdivision provisions.
      a.   Land suitability.
         1.   Each lot created through subdivision, including planned unit
developments shall be suitable in its natural state for the proposed use with
minimal alteration.
         2.   Suitability analysis by the City shall consider the following:
            (a)   Susceptibility to flooding;
            (b)   Existence of wetlands;
            (c)   Soil and rock formations with severe limitations for
development;
            (d)   Sever erosion potential;
            (e)   Steep topography;
            (f)   Inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities;
            (g)   Near-shore aquatic conditions, unsuitable for water-based
recreation;
            (h)   Important fish and wildlife habitat, presence of significant
historic sites; and/or
            (i)   another feature of the natural land likely to be harmful to
the health safety or welfare of future residents of the proposed subdivision or
of the community.
      b.   Consistency with other controls.
         1.   Subdivisions shall conform to all official controls of the City.
         2.   A subdivision will not be approved where a later variance from 1
or more standards in official controls would be needed to use the lots for
their intended purpose.
         3.   In areas not served by publicly owned sewer and water systems, a
subdivision will not be approved unless domestic water supply is available and
a sewage treatment system consistent with City Code can be provided for every
lot.
            (a)   In areas where sanitary sewer is not available each lot shall
include at least a minimum contiguous lawn area, that is free of limiting
factors sufficient for the construction if 2 standard soil treatment systems
where private sewage systems are permitted.
            (b)   Lots that would require use of holding tanks shall not be
approved.
         4.   Each lot shall meet the minimum lot size and dimensional
requirements of Subdivision 11.
      c.   Public utilities. All uses shall be connected to public utilities
including municipal sanitary sewer and water when available.
Subd. 13   Planned Developments (Cluster Developments) in a Shoreland
   (1)   Types of Planned Developments permitted in a shoreland.
      a.   Planned Developments in a shoreland may be allowed as a rezoning for
new projects on undeveloped land, redevelopment of previously built sites, or
conversions of existing buildings and land.
      b.   Planned Developments shall be generally referred to as Planned Unit
Developments or PUDs throughout this Code.
   (2)   Planned Development zoning.
      a.   Planned Developments in a shoreland zone shall require a rezoning of
the property, and processed in accordance with the provision of Subsection
1001.10 of the City Zoning Code.
   (3)   Application for Planned Development in a shoreland.
      a.   Planned Developments shall only be permitted when they meet the
provisions of Subsection
1001.10 of the City Zoning Code for a Planned Development District.
      b.   Planned Developments shall be processed in accordance with the
provisions in Subdivision 9 of this Subsection and Subsection
1001.10 of the City Zoning Code.
   (4)   Public utilities. Public utilities including municipal sanitary sewer
and water shall be available and be required for any Planned Development (PUD)
in the City.
   (5)   Site suitable area evaluation.  Proposed new or expansions to existing
Planned Developments in a shoreland shall be evaluated using the following
procedures and standards to determine the suitable area for the dwelling unit/
dwelling site density evaluation in Planned Development areas.
      a.   Shoreland tier dimensions.  The project parcel shall be divided into
tiers by locating 1 or more lines approximately parallel to a line that
identifies the ordinary high water level at the following intervals, proceeding
landward:
 
Shoreland Tier Dimensions (width of each tier)
Public Waters Classes                  Sewered (feet)
Recreational Development Lakes         267
Natural Environment Lakes              320
Agricultural River or Tributary Stream 300
 
      b.   Suitable area calculation.  The suitable area within each tier is
calculated by excluding from the tier area all wetlands, bluffs, or land below
the ordinary high water level of public waters. The suitable area and the
proposed project are then subjected to either the residential or commercial
planned development density evaluation steps to arrive at an allowable number
of dwelling units or sites.
   (6)   Density evaluation for PUDs in a shoreland.
      a.   The procedures for determining the base density of a PUD and density
increase multipliers are as follows. Allowable densities may be transferred
from any tier to any other tier further from the waterbody, but shall not be
transferred to any other tier closer. Overall project or subdivision density
shall not exceed the limitations of the Planned Development, Subsection
1001.10.
         1.   Residential PUD base density evaluation. The suitable area within
each tier is divided by the minimum single-family residential lot size standard
for lakes or for rivers, to determine the maximum permitted density. Proposed
location and number of dwelling units or sites for Planned Developments are
then compared with the tier, density, and suitability analysis herein and the
design criteria in Subsection
1001.08, Subd. 13(7).
         2.   Residential density increase multipliers.
            (a)   Increases to the dwelling unit or dwelling site base
densities previously determined are allowable if the dimensional standards in
Subsection
1001.08, Subd. 11 are met or exceeded and the design criteria in item (7) below
are satisfied. The allowable density increases in item 2(b) below will only be
allowed if at least 50% of the project area within the shoreland overlay zone
is preserved as open space and structure setbacks from the ordinary high water
level are increased to at least 50% greater than the minimum setback, or the
impact on the waterbody is reduced an equivalent amount through vegetative
management, topography, or additional means acceptable to the City and the
setback is at least 25% greater than the minimum setback.
            (b)   Allowable dwelling unit or dwelling site density increases
for Residential or Mixed Use Planned Developments in a shoreland.
 
Density Evaluation Tiers Maximum Density Increase within each tier (percent)
First                    50
Second                   100
Third                    200
Fourth                   200
Fifth                    200
 
         3.   Commercial, Industrial and Mixed Use GPUD or PUD base density
evaluation.  The base density or floor area ratios for commercial, industrial
and mixed use Planned Developments in shorelands shall be based on the density
limitation of the underlying zoning district and shall be limited by the
maximum impervious surface area allowed within the shoreland area and the open
space requirement.
         4.   Commercial, Industrial and Mixed Use GPUD or PUD density increase
multipliers in a shoreland.
            (a)   Increases to the base floor area or density of a Commercial,
Industrial or Mixed Use Planned Development within a shoreland area shall not
exceed the limitations of Subsection
1001.10 provisions and are allowable if the dimensional standards in
Subdivision 11 of this Subsection are met or exceeded and the design criteria
in item (7) below are satisfied.
            (b)   The allowable density increases in Subdivision 13 (6)(a)(2)
(b) above will only be allowed if at least 50% of the project area within the
Shoreland Overlay Zone is preserved as open space and structure setbacks from
the ordinary high water level are increased to at least 50% greater than the
minimum setback, or the impact on the waterbody is reduced an equivalent amount
through vegetative management, topography, or additional means acceptable to
the City and the setback is at least 25% greater than the minimum setback.
   (7)   Maintenance and design criteria.
      a.   Before final approval of a Planned Development, adequate provisions
shall be developed for preservation and maintenance in perpetuity of open
spaces and for the continued existence and functioning of the development.
      b.   Open space preservation.  Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent
easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other equally effective and
permanent means shall be provided to ensure long-term preservation and
maintenance of open space. The instruments shall include all of the following
protections:
         1.   Commercial uses in open spaces, except water oriented accessory
structures, are prohibited (for residential PD’s in a shoreland);
         2.   Vegetation and topographic alterations shall be prohibited except
by routine maintenance;
         3.   Construction of additional buildings or storage of vehicles and
other materials shall be prohibited; and
         4.   Uncontrolled beaching of watercraft shall be prohibited.
      c.   Development organization and functioning.  Unless an equally
effective alternative community framework is established, when applicable, all
Residential Planned Developments shall use an owners association with the
following features:
         1.   Membership shall be mandatory for each dwelling unit or site
purchaser and any successive purchasers;
         2.   Each member shall pay a pro-rata share of the association’s
expenses, and unpaid assessments can become liens on units or sites;
         3.   Assessments shall be adjustable to accommodate changing
conditions; and
         4.   The association shall be responsible for insurance, taxes, and
maintenance of all commonly owned property and facilities.
   (8)   Open space requirements.  Planned Developments in a shoreland shall
contain open space meeting all of the following criteria:
      a.   At least 50% of the total project area within the Shoreland Overlay
Area shall be preserved as open space;
      b.   Dwelling units or sites, commercial and industrial uses, road
rights-of-way, or land covered by road surfaces, parking areas, or structures,
except water-oriented accessory structures or facilities, are developed areas
and shall not be included in the computation of minimum open space;
      c.   Open space shall include, but is not limited to areas with physical
characteristics unsuitable for development in their natural state, and areas
containing significant historic sites or unplatted cemeteries;
      d.   Open space may include outdoor recreational facilities for use by
owners of dwelling units or sites, by guests staying in commercial dwelling
units or sites, and by the general public;
      e.   Open space shall not have commercial facilities or uses, but may
contain water-oriented accessory structures or facilities;
      f.   The appearance of open space areas, including topography,
vegetation, and allowable uses, shall be preserved by use of restrictive deed
covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other
equally effective and permanent means; and
      g.   The shore impact zone, based on normal structure setbacks, shall be
preserved as open space. For Residential PUD’s, at least 50% of the shore
impact zone area of existing developments or at least 70% of the shore impact
zone area of new developments shall be preserved in its natural or existing
state.
   (9)   Erosion control and stormwater management in shorelands.  Erosion
control and stormwater management plans shall be developed and the PUD shall:
      a.   Be designed, and the construction managed, to minimize the
likelihood of serious erosion occurring either during or after construction.
         1.   Erosion minimization shall be accomplished by limiting the amount
and length of time of bare ground exposure.
         2.   Temporary ground covers, sediment entrapment facilities,
vegetated buffer strips, or other appropriate techniques shall be used to
minimize erosion impacts on surface water features.
         3.   Erosion control plans approved by the Soil and Water Conservation
District may be required if project size and site physical characteristics
warrant; and
      b.   Be designed and constructed to effectively manage reasonably
expected quantities and qualities of stormwater runoff. Impervious surface
coverage within any tier shall not exceed 25% of the tier area.
   (10)   Centralization and design of facilities.  Centralization and design
of facilities and structures shall be done according to the following
standards:
      a.   Planned Developments shall be connected to publicly owned water
supply and sewer systems, if available;
      b.   Dwelling units or sites shall be clustered into 1 or more groups and
located on suitable areas of the development.
         1.   They shall be designed and located to meet or exceed the
following dimensional standards for the relevant shoreland classification:
setback from the ordinary high water level, elevation above the surface water
features, and maximum height.
         2.   Setbacks from the ordinary high water level shall be increased in
accordance with Subdivision 13 (6) of this Subsection for developments with
density increases;
      c.   Shore recreation facilities, including but not limited to swimming
areas, docks, and watercraft mooring areas and launching ramps, shall be
centralized and located in suitable areas.
         1.   Evaluation of suitability shall include consideration of land
slope, water depth, vegetation, soils, depth to groundwater and bedrock, or
other relevant factors.
         2.   The number of spaces provided for continuous beaching, mooring,
or docking of watercraft shall not exceed 1 for each allowable dwelling unit or
site in the first tier.
         3.   Launching ramp facilities, including a small dock for loading and
unloading equipment, may be provided for use by occupants of dwelling units or
sites located in other tiers.
      d.   Structures, parking areas, and other facilities shall be treated to
reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by
vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color, or other means acceptable to
the City, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions. Vegetative and topographic
screening shall be preserved, if existing, or may be required to be provided;
      e.   Accessory structures and facilities, except water oriented accessory
structures, shall meet the required principal structure setback and shall be
centralized; and
      f.   Water-oriented accessory structures and facilities may be allowed if
they meet or exceed design standards contained in Subdivision 12(2) of this
Subsection and are centralized.
   (11)   Conversions of existing land uses and facilities to a PUD.
      a.   The City shall not permit existing land uses and facilities to be
converted to Residential Planned Developments except where incorporated into a
new Planned Development wherein existing uses comprise less than 50% of the
development.
      b.   Existing dwelling unit or dwelling site densities that exceed
standards in Subdivision 13(5) of this Subsection may be allowed to continue
but shall not be allowed to be increased.
Subd. 14   Non-Conformities
   (1)   All legally established non-conformities as of the date of this
Subsection may continue, but shall be administered according to applicable
Minnesota State Statutes and other regulations of the City for future
alterations and additions, repair or replacement after damage, discontinuance
of use, and intensification of use; except that the following standards will
also apply in shoreland areas:
      a.   Construction on non-conforming lots of record.
         1.   Lots of record in the office of the county recorder on the date
of enactment of local shoreland controls that do not meet the requirements of
Subdivision 11 of this Subsection of this Subsection may be allowed as building
sites without variances from lot size requirements provided:
            (a)   The use is permitted in the zoning district;
            (b)   The lot has been in separate ownership from abutting lands at
all times since it became substandard;
            (c)   Was created compliant with official controls in effect at the
time; and
            (d)   Sewage treatment and setback requirements of this Subsection
are met.
         2.   A variance from setback requirements must be obtained before any
use, sewage treatment system, or building permit is issued for a lot.
            (a)   In evaluating the variance, the Board of Adjustment shall
consider sewage treatment and water supply capabilities or constraints of the
lot and shall deny the variance if adequate facilities cannot be provided.
         3.   If, in a group of 2 or more contiguous lots under the same
ownership, any individual lot does not meet the requirements of Subdivision 11
of this Subsection above, the lot must not be considered as a separate parcel
of land for the purposes of sale or development. The lot must be combined with
the 1 or more contiguous lots so they equal 1 or more parcels of land, each
meeting the requirements of Subdivision 11 of this Subsection above as much as
possible.
      b.   Additions/expansions to non-conforming structures.
         1.   All additions or expansions to the outside dimensions of an
existing non- conforming structure must meet the setback, height, and other
requirements of Subdivision 11 of this Subsection above. Any deviation from
these requirements must be authorized by a variance pursuant to Subdivision 9
(3) of this Subsection.
         2.   Deck additions may be allowed without a variance to a structure
not meeting the required setback from the ordinary high water level if all of
the following criteria and standards are met:
            (a)   The structure existed on the date the structure setbacks were
established;
            (b)   A thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals
no reasonable location for a deck meeting or exceeding the existing ordinary
high water level setback of the structure;
            (c)   The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level
does not exceed 15% of the existing setback of the structure from the ordinary
high water level or does not encroach closer than 30 feet, whichever is more
restrictive; and
            (d)   The deck is constructed primarily of wood, and is not roofed
or screened.
      c.   Non-conforming sewage treatment systems shall conform to the
provisions of Subdivision 12(17)(b).
      d.   Public utility connections.  No new commercial and /or residential
development shall be permitted in any Shoreland District where public utilities
are available unless the new development is connected to the public utilities.
(Prior Code, § 1001.08)  (Am. Ord. 2004-03, passed 8-24-2004; Am. Ord. 2012-06,
passed 4-24-2012; Am. Ord. 2014-04, passed 3-25-2014)
1001.09   FLOODPLAINS.
Subd. 1   Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact and Purpose
      (1)   Statutory Authorization. The legislature of the State of Minnesota
has, in M.S. Ch. 103F and Ch. 462 delegated the responsibility to local
government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
Therefore, the City of Dayton, Minnesota, does ordain as follows.
      (2)   Purpose.
         a.   This section regulates development in the flood hazard areas of
City of Dayton. These flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation,
which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base.
It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare by minimizing these losses and disruptions.
         b.   National Flood Insurance Program Compliance. This section is
adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program codified as 44 C.F.R. Parts 59 -78, as amended, so as to
maintain the community’s eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.
         c.   This section is also intended to preserve the natural
characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to
moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil
erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational
opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development.
Subd. 2   General Provisions
      (1)   How to use this section. This section adopts the floodplain maps
applicable to the City of Dayton and includes three floodplain districts:
Floodway, Flood Fringe, and General Floodplain.
         a.   Where Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts are delineated on the
floodplain maps, the standards in Subds. 4 or 5 will apply, depending on the
location of a property.
         b.   Locations where Floodway and Flood Fringe districts are not
delineated on the floodplain maps are considered to fall within the General
Floodplain District. Within the General Floodplain District, the Floodway
District standards in Subd. 4 apply unless the floodway boundary is determined,
according to the process outlined in Subd. 6. Once the floodway boundary is
determined, the Flood Fringe District standards in Subd. 5 may apply outside
the floodway.
      (2)   Lands to which section applies. This section applies to all lands
within the jurisdiction of the City of Dayton shown on the Official Zoning Map
and/or the attachments to the map as being located within the boundaries of
the: Floodway, Flood Fringe, or General Floodplain Districts.
         a.   The Floodway, Flood Fringe and General Floodplain Districts are
overlay districts that are superimposed on all existing zoning districts. The
standards imposed in the overlay districts are in addition to any other
requirements in this section. In case of a conflict, the more restrictive
standards will apply.
      (3)   Incorporation of maps by reference. The following maps together
with all attached material are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of the official zoning map and this section. The attached material
includes the Flood Insurance Study for Hennepin County, Minnesota, and
Incorporated Areas, dated November 4, 2016 and the flood insurance rate map
panels enumerated below, dated November 4, 2016, all prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. These materials are on file in the (list location
where maps will be filed - i.e., City Clerk’s Office).
         Effective flood insurance rate map panels: 27053C0032F, 27053C0051F,
27053C0058F, 27053C0064F, 27053C0034F, 27053C0052F, 27053C0061F, 27053C0066F,
27053C0044F, 27053C0053F, 27053C0062F, 27053C0068F, 27053C0045F, 27053C0054F,
and 27053C0063F.
      (4)   Regulatory flood protection elevation. The regulatory flood
protection elevation (RFPE) is an elevation no lower than one foot above the
elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway.
      (5)   Interpretation. The boundaries of the zoning districts are
determined by scaling distances on the flood insurance rate map.
         a.   Where a conflict exists between the floodplain limits illustrated
on the official zoning map and actual field conditions, the flood elevations
shall be the governing factor. The Zoning Administrator must interpret the
boundary location based on the ground elevations that existed on the site on
the date of the first national flood insurance program map showing the area
within the regulatory floodplain, and other available technical data.
         b.   Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries will
be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Planning
Commission and to submit technical evidence.
      (6)   Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases
used in this section must be interpreted according to common usage and so as to
give this section its most reasonable application.
         Accessory Use or Structure
         A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily
incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
         Base Flood Elevation
         The elevation of the “regional flood.” The term Base Flood Elevation
is used in the flood insurance survey.
         Basement
         Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or
base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the depth
of excavation below ground level.
         Conditional Use
         A specific type of structure or land use listed in the official
control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth review procedure and
with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the official zoning
controls or building codes and upon a finding that:
            1.   Certain conditions as detailed in the zoning section exist.
            2.   The structure and/or land use conform to the comprehensive
land use plan if one exists and are compatible with the existing neighborhood.
         Critical Facilities
         Facilities necessary to a community’s public health and safety, those
that store or produce highly volatile, toxic or water-reactive materials, and
those that house occupants that may be insufficiently mobile to avoid loss of
life or injury. Examples of critical facilities include hospitals, correctional
facilities, schools, daycare facilities, nursing homes, fire and police
stations, wastewater treatment facilities, public electric utilities, water
plants, fuel storage facilities, and waste handling and storage facilities.
         Development
         Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
         Equal Degree of Encroachment
         A method of determining the location of floodway boundaries so that
floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of conveying a
proportionate share of flood flows.
         Farm Fence
         A fence as defined by M.S. § 344.02, Subd. l(a)-(d). An open type
fence of posts and wire is not considered to be a structure under this section.
Fences that have the potential to obstruct flood flows, such as chain link
fences and rigid walls, are regulated as structures under this section.
         Flood
         A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage
of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
         Flood Frequency
         The frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood stage or
discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
         Flood Fringe
         The portion of the Special Flood Hazard Area (1% annual chance flood)
located outside of the floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous with the term
Floodway Fringe used in the Flood Insurance Study for Hennepin County,
Minnesota.
         Floodplain
         The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse
which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
         Flood Prone Area
         Any land susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
Flood).
         Floodproofing
         A combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to
properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or
elimination of flood damages.
         Floodway
         The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to
carry or store the regional flood discharge.
         Historic Structure
         (See definition for Substantial Improvement, Subd. b.)
         Lowest Floor
         The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles,
building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not
considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of 44 C.F.R., Part 60.3.
         Manufactured Home
         A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on
a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term Manufactured Home
does not include the term Recreational Vehicle.
         New Construction
         Structures, including additions and improvements, and placement of
manufactured homes, for which the start of construction commenced on or after
the effective date of this section.
         Obstruction
         Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting
into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain which may impede,
retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
         One Hundred Year Floodplain
         Lands inundated by the Regional Flood (see definition).
         Principal Use or Structure
         All uses or structures that are not accessory uses or structures.
         Reach
         A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban
area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings
would most typically constitute a reach.
         Recreational Vehicle
         A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400 square feet or
less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to be
self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and is designed
primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. For the purposes of this
section, the term Recreational Vehicle is synonymous with the term Travel
Trailer/Travel Vehicle.
         Regional Flood
         A flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred
generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to
occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 1% chance or 100-year
recurrence interval. Regional Flood is synonymous with the term Base Flood used
in a flood insurance study.
         Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE)
         An elevation not less than 1 foot above the elevation of the regional
flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the
floodplain that result from designation of a floodway.
         Repetitive Loss
         Flood related damages sustained by a structure on 2 separate occasions
during a 10 year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such
flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
         Special Flood Hazard Area
         A term used for flood insurance purposes synonymous with One Hundred
Year Floodplain.
         Start of Construction
         Includes substantial improvement, and means the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or
other improvement that occurred before the permit’s expiration date. The actual
start is either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on
a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
         Structure
         Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings,
factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, recreational
vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in Subd. 9(2)b. of this
section and other similar items.
         Substantial Damage
         Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed
50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
         Substantial Improvement
         Within any consecutive 365-day period, any reconstruction,
rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), repair after damage,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the Start of
Construction of the improvement. This term includes structures that have
incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include either:
            1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
            2.   Any alteration of a Historic Structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
Historic Structure. For the purpose of this section, Historic Structure is as
defined in 44 C.F.R., Part 59.1.
      (8)   Annexations. The flood insurance rate map panels adopted by
reference into Subdivision 2(3) above may include floodplain areas that lie
outside of the corporate boundaries of City of Dayton at the time of adoption
of this section. If any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the
City of Dayton after the date of adoption of this section, the newly annexed
floodplain lands will be subject to the provisions of this section immediately
upon the date of annexation.
      (9)   Detachments. The flood insurance rate map panels adopted by
reference into Subd. 2(3) above will include floodplain areas that lie inside
the corporate boundaries of municipalities at the time of adoption of this
section. If any of these floodplain land areas are detached from a municipality
and come under the jurisdiction of the City of Dayton after the date of
adoption of this section, the newly detached floodplain lands will be subject
to the provisions of this section immediately upon the date of detachment.
Subd. 3   Establishment of Zoning Districts
      (1)   Districts.
         a.   Floodway district. The Floodway District includes those areas
within Zones AE that have a floodway delineated as shown on the flood insurance
rate map adopted in Subd. 2(3). For lakes, wetlands and other basins within
Zones AE that do not have a floodway delineated, the Floodway District also
includes those areas that are at or below the ordinary high water level as
defined in M.S. § 103G.005, Subd. 14.
         b.   Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District includes areas
within Zones AE that have a floodway delineated on the flood insurance rate map
adopted in Subd. 2(3), but are located outside of the floodway. For lakes,
wetlands and other basins within Zones AE that do not have a floodway
delineated, the Flood Fringe District also includes those areas below the 1%
annual chance (100-year) flood elevation but above the ordinary high water
level as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, Subd. 14.
         c.   General Floodplain District. The General Floodplain District
includes those areas within Zone A that do not have a delineated floodway as
shown on the flood insurance rate map adopted in Subd. 2(3).
      (2)   Applicability. Within the floodplain districts established in this
section, the use, size, type and location of development must comply with the
terms of this section and other applicable regulations. In no cases shall
floodplain development adversely affect the efficiency or unduly restrict the
capacity of the channels or floodways of any tributaries to the main stream,
drainage ditches, or any other drainage facilities or systems. All uses not
listed as permitted uses or conditional uses in Subds. 4, 5 and 6 are
prohibited. In addition, critical facilities, as defined in Subd. 2(6), are
prohibited in all floodplain districts.
Subd. 4   Floodway District (FW)
      (1)   Permitted uses. The following uses, subject to the standards set
forth in Subd. 4(2), are permitted uses if otherwise allowed in the underlying
zoning district or any applicable overlay district:
         a.   General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
         b.   Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport
landing strips.
         c.   Open space uses, including but not limited to private and public
golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds,
boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves,
game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, hunting and fishing areas, and
single or multiple purpose recreational trails.
         d.   Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
         e.   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and
pipelines, provided that the Department of Natural Resources’ Area Hydrologist
is notified at least 10 days prior to issuance of any permit.
      (2)   Standards for floodway permitted uses.
         a.   The use must have a low flood damage potential. The use shall be
permissible in the underlying zoning district if one exists.
         b.   The use must not obstruct flood flows or cause any increase in
flood elevations and must not involve structures, obstructions, or storage of
materials or equipment.
         c.   Any facility that will be used by employees or the general public
must be designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for
evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the depth
(in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a
product of 4 upon occurrence of the regional (1% chance) flood.
      (3)   Conditional Uses. The following uses may be allowed as conditional
uses following the standards and procedures set forth in Subd. 10(4) of this
section and further subject to the standards set forth in Subd. 4(4), if
otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district or any applicable overlay
district.
         a.   Structures accessory to the uses listed in Subd. 4(1)a. - c.
above and the uses listed in Subd. 4(3)b. and c. below.
         b.   Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials.
         c.   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water control
structures.
         d.   Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.
         e.   Placement of fill or construction of fences that obstruct flood
flows. Farm Fences, as defined in Subd. 2(6), are permitted uses.
         f.   Travel-ready recreational vehicles meeting the exception
standards in Subd. 9(2).
         g.   Levees or dikes intended to protect agricultural crops for a
frequency flood event equal to or less than the 10-year frequency flood event.
      (4)   Standards for Floodway Conditional Uses.
         a.   All Uses. A conditional use must not cause any increase in the
stage of the 1% chance or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages
in the reach or reaches affected.
         b.   Fill; Storage of Materials and Equipment.
            1.   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or
plant life is prohibited.
            2.   Fill, dredge spoil, and other similar materials deposited or
stored in the floodplain must be protected from erosion by vegetative cover,
mulching, riprap or other acceptable method. Permanent sand and gravel
operations and similar uses must be covered by a long-term site development
plan.
            3.   Temporary placement of fill, other materials, or equipment
which would cause an increase to the stage of the 1% chance or regional flood
may only be allowed if the City of Dayton has approved a plan that assures
removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time
available.
         c.   Accessory Structures. Accessory structures, as identified in
Subdivision 4(3)a., may be permitted, provided that:
            1.   Structures are not intended for human habitation;
            2.   Structures will have a low flood damage potential;
            3.   Structures will be constructed an placed so as to offer a
minimal obstruction to the flow of flood waters;
            4.   Service utilities, such as electrical and heating equipment,
within these structures must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation or properly floodproofed;
            5.   Structures must be elevated on fill or structurally dry
floodproofed in accordance with the FP1 or FP2 floodproofing classifications in
the State Building Code. All floodproofed structures must be adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement and designed to
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
            6.   As an alternative, an accessory structure may be internally/
wet floodproofed to the FP3 or FP4 floodproofing classifications in the State
Building Code, provided the accessory structure constitutes a minimal
investment and does not exceed 576 square feet in size. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer
or meet or exceed the following criteria:
               (a)   To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure,
there must be a minimum of 2 “automatic” openings in the outside walls of the
structure, with a total net area of not less than 1 square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; and
               (b)   There must be openings on at least 2 sides of the
structure and the bottom of all openings must be no higher than 1 foot above
the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open a
garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy this requirement for automatic
openings.
         d.   Structural works for flood control that will change the course,
current or cross section of protected wetlands or public waters are subject to
the provisions of M.S. § 103G.245.
         e.   A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway must not
cause an increase to the 1% chance or regional flood. The technical analysis
must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream.
         f.   Floodway developments must not adversely affect the hydraulic
capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse
or drainage system.
Subd. 5   Flood Fringe District (FF)
      (1)   Permitted Uses. Permitted uses are those uses of land or structures
allowed in the underlying zoning district(s) that comply with the standards in
Subdivisions 5(2). If no pre-existing, underlying zoning districts exist, then
any residential or nonresidential structure or use of a structure or land is a
permitted use provided it does not constitute a public nuisance.
      (2)   Standards for Flood Fringe Permitted Uses.
         a.   All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated
on fill so that the lowest floor, as defined, is at or above the regulatory
flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for structures must be
no lower than 1 foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation and the
fill must extend at the same elevation at least 15 feet beyond the outside
limits of the structure.
         b.   Accessory Structures. As an alternative to the fill requirements
of Subd. 5(2)a., structures accessory to the uses identified in Subd. 5(1) may
be permitted to be internally/wet floodproofed to the FP3 or FP4 floodproofing
classifications in the State Building Code, provided that:
            1.   The accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment, does
not exceed 576 square feet in size, and is only used for parking and storage.
            2.   All portions of floodproofed accessory structures below the
regulatory flood protection elevation must be:
               (a)   Adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement and designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls;
               (b)   Be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
and
               (c)   Must have all service utilities be water-tight or elevated
to above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
            3.   Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following criteria:
               (a)   To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure,
there must be a minimum of 2 “automatic” openings in the outside walls of the
structure, with a total net area of not less than 1 square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; and
               (b)   There must be openings on at least 2 sides of the
structure and the bottom of all openings must be no higher than 1 foot above
the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open a
garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy this requirement for automatic
openings.
         c.   The cumulative placement of fill or similar material on a parcel
must not exceed 1,000 cubic yards, unless the fill is specifically intended to
elevate a structure in accordance with Subd. 5(2)a., or if allowed as a
conditional use under Subd. 5(3)c. below.
         d.   The storage of any materials or equipment must be elevated on
fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
         e.   All service utilities, including ductwork, must be elevated or
water-tight to prevent infiltration of floodwaters.
         f.   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or
plant life is prohibited.
         g.   All fill must be properly compacted and the slopes must be
properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable
method.
         h.   All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or
above an elevation not more than 2 feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation, or must have a flood warning /emergency evacuation plan acceptable
to the City of Dayton.
         i.   Accessory uses such as yards, railroad tracks, and parking lots
may be at an elevation lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation.
However, any facilities used by employees or the general public must be
designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation
if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the depth (in feet)
multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a product of four
upon occurrence of the regional (1% chance) flood.
         j.   Interference with normal manufacturing/industrial plant
operations must be minimized, especially along streams having protracted flood
durations. In considering permit applications, due consideration must be given
to the needs of industries with operations that require a floodplain location.
         k.   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles must meet the
standards of Subd. 9.
      (3)   Conditional uses. The following uses and activities may be allowed
as conditional uses, if allowed in the underlying zoning district(s) or any
applicable overlay district, following the procedures in Subd. 10(4).
         a.   Any structure that is not elevated on fill or floodproofed in
accordance with Subd. 5(2)a. and b.
         b.   Storage of any material or equipment below the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
         c.   The cumulative placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill
when the fill is not being used to elevate a structure in accordance with Subd.
5(2)a..
      (4)   Standards for Flood Fringe conditional uses.
         a.   The standards listed in Subds. 5(2)d. through j. apply to all
conditional uses.
         b.   Basements, as defined by Subd. 2(6), are subject to the
following:
            1.   Residential basement construction is not allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
            2.   Non-residential basements may be allowed below the regulatory
flood protection elevation provided the basement is structurally dry
floodproofed in accordance with Subd. 5(4)c.
         c.   All areas of nonresidential structures, including basements, to
be placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation must be floodproofed
in accordance with the structurally dry floodproofing classifications in the
State Building Code. Structurally dry floodproofing must meet the FP1 or FP2
floodproofing classification in the State Building Code, which requires making
the structure watertight with the walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and with structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
         d.   The placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other
similar material on a parcel (other than for the purpose of elevating a
structure to the regulatory flood protection elevation) must comply with an
approved erosion/sedimentation control plan.
            1.   The plan must clearly specify methods to be used to stabilize
the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the regional (1% chance)
flood event.
            2.   The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered
professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the City of
Dayton.
            3.   The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of
the material from the floodplain if adequate flood warning time exists.
         e.   Storage of materials and equipment below the regulatory flood
protection elevation must comply with an approved emergency plan providing for
removal of such materials within the time available after a flood warning.
Subd. 6   General Floodplain District (GF)
      (1)   Permitted uses.
         a.   The uses listed in Subd. 4(1), Floodway District permitted uses,
are permitted uses.
         b.   All other uses are subject to the floodway/flood fringe
evaluation criteria specified in Subd. 6(2) below. Subd. 4 applies if the
proposed use is determined to be in the Floodway District. Subd. 5 applies if
the proposed use is determined to be in the Flood Fringe District.
      (2)   Procedures for Floodway and Flood Fringe determinations.
         a.   Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval
within the General Floodplain District, the Zoning Administrator must obtain,
review and reasonably utilize any regional flood elevation and floodway data
available from a Federal, state, or other source.
         b.   If regional flood elevation and floodway data are not readily
available, the applicant must furnish additional information, as needed, to
determine the regulatory flood protection elevation and whether the proposed
use would fall within the Floodway or Flood Fringe District. Information must
be consistent with accepted hydrological and hydraulic engineering standards
and the standards in division c. below.
         c.   The determination of floodway and flood fringe must include the
following components, as applicable:
            1.   Estimate the peak discharge of the regional (1% chance) flood.
            2.   Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood
based upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas.
            3.   Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional
flood without increasing flood stages more than 0.5 foot. A lesser stage
increase than 0.5 foot is required if, as a result of the stage increase,
increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of encroachment on both
sides of the stream within the reach must be assumed in computing floodway
boundaries.
         d.   The Zoning Administrator will review the submitted information
and assess the technical evaluation and the recommended Floodway and/or Flood
Fringe District boundary. The assessment must include the cumulative effects of
previous floodway encroachments. The Zoning Administrator may seek technical
assistance from a designated engineer or other expert person or agency,
including the Department of Natural Resources. Based on this assessment, the
Zoning Administrator may approve or deny the application.
         e.   Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries have been
determined, the Zoning Administrator must process the permit application
consistent with the applicable provisions of Subds. 4 and 5.
Subd. 7   Land Development Standards
      (1)   In general. Recognizing that flood prone areas may exist outside of
the designated floodplain districts, the requirements of this section apply to
all land within the City of Dayton.
      (2)   Subdivisions. No land may be subdivided which is unsuitable for
reasons of flooding or inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment
facilities. Manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds are considered subdivisions under this section.
         a.   All lots within the floodplain districts must be able to contain
a building site outside of the Floodway District at or above the regulatory
flood protection elevation.
         b.   All subdivisions must have road access both to the subdivision
and to the individual building sites no lower than 2 feet below the regulatory
flood protection elevation, unless a flood warning emergency plan for the safe
evacuation of all vehicles and people during the regional (1% chance) flood has
been approved by the City of Dayton. The plan must be prepared by a registered
engineer or other qualified individual, and must demonstrate that adequate time
and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation.
         c.   For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the Floodway and Flood
Fringe District boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the
required elevation of all access roads must be clearly labeled on all required
subdivision drawings and platting documents.
         d.   In the General Floodplain District, applicants must provide the
information required in Subd. 6(2) to determine the regional flood elevation,
the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries and the regulatory flood
protection elevation for the subdivision site.
         e.   If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development is in
a flood prone area, any such proposal must be reviewed to assure that:
            1.   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage within the flood prone area;
            2.   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage; and
            3.   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure of flood
hazard.
      (3)   Building sites. If a proposed building site is in a flood prone
area, all new construction and substantial improvements (including the
placement of manufactured homes) must be:
         a.   Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         b.   Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage;
         c.   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
and
         d.   Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and
air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/
or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
Subd. 8   Public Utilities, Railroads, Roads, and Bridges
      (1)   Public utilities. All public utilities and facilities such as gas,
electrical, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the floodplain
must be floodproofed in accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to
the regulatory flood protection elevation.
      (2)   Public transportation facilities. Railroad tracks, roads, and
bridges to be located within the floodplain must comply with Subds. 4 and 5.
These transportation facilities must be elevated to the regulatory flood
protection elevation where failure or interruption of these facilities would
result in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are
essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or
railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption
of transportation services would not endanger the public health or safety.
      (3)   On-site water supply and sewage treatment systems. Where public
utilities are not provided:
         a.   On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and are subject to the
provisions in Minn. Rules Ch. 4725.4350, as amended; and
         b.   New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems
and discharges from the systems into flood waters, they must not be subject to
impairment or contamination during times of flooding, and are subject to the
provisions in Minn.  Rules Ch. 7080.2270, as amended.
Subd. 9   Manufactured Homes, Manufactured Home Parks, and Recreational
Vehicles
      (1)   Manufactured homes. New manufactured home parks and expansions to
existing manufactured home parks are prohibited in any Floodplain District. For
existing manufactured home parks or lots of record, the following requirements
apply:
         a.   Placement or replacement of manufactured home units is prohibited
in the Floodway District.
         b.   If allowed in the Flood Fringe District, placement or replacement
of manufactured home units is subject to the requirements of Subd. 5 and the
following standards.
            1.   New and replacement manufactured homes must be elevated in
compliance with Subd. 5 and must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top
or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable
state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
            2.   New or replacement manufactured homes in existing manufactured
home parks must meet the vehicular access requirements for subdivisions in
Subd. 7(2)b.
      (2)   Recreational vehicles. New recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds and expansions to existing recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds are prohibited in any floodplain district. Placement of
recreational vehicles in existing recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds in
the floodplain must meet the exemption criteria below or be treated as new
structures meeting the requirements of this section.
         a.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this
section if they are placed in any of the following areas and meet the criteria
listed in Subd. 9(2)b.:
            1.   Individual lots or parcels of record;
            2.   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds;
and
            3.   Existing condominium-type associations.
         b.   Criteria for exempt recreational vehicles.
            1.   The vehicle must have a current license required for highway
use.
            2.   The vehicle must be highway ready, meaning on wheels or the
internal jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks.
            3.   No permanent structural type additions may be attached to the
vehicle.
            4.   The vehicle and associated use must be permissible in any pre-
existing, underlying zoning district.
            5.   Accessory structures are not permitted within the Floodway
District. Any accessory structure in the Flood Fringe District must be
constructed of flood-resistant materials and be securely anchored, meeting the
requirements applicable to manufactured homes in Subd. 9(2)b.
            6.   An accessory structure must constitute a minimal investment.
         c.   Recreational vehicles that are exempt in Subd. 9(2)b. lose this
exemption when development occurs on the site that exceeds a minimal investment
for an accessory structure such as a garage or storage building. The
recreational vehicle and all accessory structures will then be treated as new
structures subject to the elevation and floodproofing requirements of Subd. 5.
No development or improvement on the parcel or attachment to the recreational
vehicle is allowed that would hinder the removal of the vehicle should flooding
occur.
Subd. 10   Administration
      (1)   Zoning Administrator. A Zoning Administrator or other official
designated by the City of Dayton must administer and enforce this section.
      (2)   Permit requirements.
         a.   Permit required. A permit must be obtained from the Zoning
Administrator prior to conducting the following activities:
            1.   The erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation, or
alteration of any building, structure, or portion thereof. Normal maintenance
and repair also requires a permit if such work, separately or in conjunction
with other planned work, constitutes a substantial improvement as defined in
this section;
            2.   The use or change of use of a building, structure, or land;
            3.   The construction of a dam, fence, or on-site septic system,
although a permit is not required for a farm fence as defined in this section;
            4.   The change or extension of a nonconforming use;
            5.   The repair of a structure that has been damaged by flood,
fire, tornado, or any other source;
            6.   The placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage
of materials or equipment within the floodplain;
            7.   Relocation or alteration of a watercourse (including new or
replacement culverts and bridges), unless a public waters work permit has been
applied for; and
            8.   Any other type of “development” as defined in this section.
         b.   Application for permit. Permit applications must be submitted to
the Zoning Administrator on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator. The
permit application must include the following as applicable:
            1.   A site plan showing all pertinent dimensions, existing or
proposed buildings, structures, and significant natural features having an
influence on the permit;
            2.   Location of fill or storage of materials in relation to the
stream channel;
            3.   Copies of any required municipal, county, state or Federal
permits or approvals; and
            4.   Other relevant information requested by the Zoning
Administrator as necessary to properly evaluate the permit application.
         c.   Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered, or
nonconforming use. No building, land or structure may be occupied or used in
any manner until a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by the
Zoning Administrator stating that the use of the building or land conforms to
the requirements of this section.
         d.   Certification. The applicant is required to submit certification
by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land
surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in
compliance with the provisions of this section. Floodproofing measures must be
certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect.
         e.   Record of first floor elevation. The Zoning Administrator must
maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all new structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the
floodplain. The Zoning Administrator must also maintain a record of the
elevation to which structures and alterations or additions to structures are
floodproofed.
         f.   Notifications for watercourse alterations. Before authorizing any
alteration or relocation of a river: or stream, the Zoning Administrator must
notify adjacent communities. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work
in public waters pursuant to M.S. § 103G.245, this will suffice as adequate
notice. A copy of the notification must also be submitted to the Chicago
Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
         g.   Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or decrease
base flood elevations. As soon as is practicable, but not later than 6 months
after the date such supporting information becomes available, the Zoning
Administrator must notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by
submitting a copy of the relevant technical or scientific data.
      (3)   Variances.
         a.   Variance applications. An application for a variance to the
provisions of this section will be processed and reviewed in accordance with
applicable state statutes and § 1001.29 of the zoning ordinance/code.
         b.   Adherence to state floodplain management standards. A variance
must not allow a use that is not allowed in that district, permit a lower
degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for
the particular area, or permit standards lower than those required by state
law.
         c.   Additional variance criteria. The following additional variance
criteria of the Federal Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied:
            1.   Variances must not be issued by a community within any
designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base
flood discharge would result.
            2.   Variances may only be issued by a community upon:
               (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
               (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
               (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
            3.   Variances may only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
         d.   Flood insurance notice. The Zoning Administrator must notify the
applicant for a variance that:
            1.   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
            2.   Such construction below the base or regional flood level
increases risks to life and property. Such notification must be maintained with
a record of all variance actions.
         e.   General considerations. The community may consider the following
factors in granting variances and imposing conditions on variances and
conditional uses in floodplains:
            1.   The potential danger to life and property due to increased
flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments;
            2.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others;
            3.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems, if any, and
the ability of these systems to minimize the potential for disease,
contamination and unsanitary conditions;
            4.   The susceptibility of any proposed use and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
            5.   The importance of the services to be provided by the proposed
use to the community;
            6.   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location;
            7.   The availability of viable alternative locations for the
proposed use that are not subject to flooding;
            8.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future;
            9.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive land
use plan and flood plain management program for the area;
            10.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles; and
            11.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
         f.   Submittal of hearing notices to the department of natural
resources (DNR). The Zoning Administrator must submit hearing notices for
proposed variances to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at least 10
days’ notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S.
Mail to the respective DNR Area Hydrologist.
         g.   Submittal of final decisions to the DNR. A copy of all decisions
granting variances must be forwarded to the DNR within 10 days of such action.
The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR
Area Hydrologist.
         h.   Record-keeping. The Zoning Administrator must maintain a record
of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and must
report such variances in an annual or biennial report to the Administrator of
the National Flood Insurance Program, when requested by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
      (4)   Conditional uses.
         a.   An application for a conditional use permit under the provisions
of this section will be processed and reviewed in accordance with § 1001.23 of
the zoning ordinance.
         b.   Factors used in decision-making. In passing upon conditional use
applications, the City of Dayton must consider all relevant factors specified
in other sections of this section, and those factors identified in Subd. 10
(3)e.
         c.   Conditions attached to conditional use permits. The City of
Dayton may a such conditions to the granting of conditional use permits as it
deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this section. Such conditions may
include, but are not limited to, the following:
            1.   Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities;
            2.   Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation;
            3.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions;
            4.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures; and
            5.   Floodproofing measures, in accordance with the State Building
Code and this section. The applicant must submit a plan or document certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing
measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and
associated flood factors for the particular area.
         d.   Submittal of hearing notices to the Department of Natural
Resources (DNR). The Zoning Administrator must submit hearing notices for
proposed conditional uses to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at
least 10 days’ notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail
or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR Area Hydrologist.
         e.   Submittal of final decisions to the DNR. A copy of all decisions
granting conditional uses must be forwarded to the DNR within 10 days of such
action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. mail to the
respective DNR Area Hydrologist.
Subd. 11   Nonconformities
      (1)   Continuance of nonconformities. A use, structure, or occupancy of
land which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this section but which
is not in conformity with the provisions of this section may be continued
subject to the following conditions. Historic Structures, as defined in Subd. 2
(6), are subject to the provisions of Subds. 11(1)a. - f.
         a.   A nonconforming use, structure, or occupancy must not be
expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases its flood
damage potential or degree of obstruction to flood flows except as provided in
Subd. 11(1)b. below. Expansion or enlargement of uses, structures or
occupancies within the Floodway District is prohibited.
         b.   Any addition or structural alteration to a nonconforming
structure or nonconforming use that would result in increasing its flood damage
potential must be protected to the regulatory flood protection elevation in
accordance with any of the elevation on fill or floodproofing techniques (i.e.,
FP1 thru FP4 floodproofing classifications) allowable in the State Building
Code, except as further restricted in Subd. 11(1)c. and g. below.
         c.   If the cost of all previous and proposed alterations and
additions exceeds 50% of the market value of any nonconforming structure, that
shall be considered substantial improvement, and the entire structure must meet
the standards of Subds. 4 or 5 for new structures, depending upon whether the
structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively. The cost
of all structural alterations and additions must include all costs such as
construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all manpower or labor.
         d.   If any nonconforming use, or any use of a nonconforming
structure, is discontinued for more than 1 year, any future use of the premises
must conform to this section. The Assessor must notify the Zoning Administrator
in writing of instances of nonconformities that have been discontinued for a
period of more than 1 year.
         e.   If any nonconformity is substantially damaged, as defined in
Subd. 2(6), it may not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this section. The applicable provisions for establishing new uses
or new structures in Subds. 4 or 5 will apply depending upon whether the use or
structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe, respectively.
         f.   If any nonconforming use or structure experiences a repetitive
loss, as defined in Subd. 2(6), it must not be reconstructed except in
conformity with the provisions of this section.
         g.   Any substantial improvement, as defined in Subd. 2(6), to a
nonconforming structure requires that the existing structure and any additions
must meet the requirements of Subds. 4 or 5 for new structures, depending upon
whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District.
Subd. 12   Penalties and Enforcement
      (1)   Violation constitutes a misdemeanor. Violation of the provisions of
this section or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants
of variances or conditional uses) constitute a misdemeanor and will be
punishable as defined by law.
      (2)   Other lawful action. Nothing in this section restricts the City of
Dayton from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation. If the responsible party does not appropriately respond
to the Zoning Administrator within the specified period of time, each
additional day that lapses will constitute an additional violation of this
section and will be prosecuted accordingly.
      (3)   Enforcement. Violations of the provisions of this section will be
investigated and resolved in accordance with the provisions of § 1001.28 of the
zoning ordinance/code. In responding to a suspected ordinance violation, the
Zoning Administrator and the City of Dayton may utilize the full array of
enforcement actions available to it including but not limited to prosecution
and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures
or a request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood
insurance availability to the guilty party. The City of Dayton must act in good
faith to enforce these official controls and to correct ordinance violations to
the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National
Flood Insurance Program.
Subd. 13   Amendments
      (1)   Floodplain designation - restrictions on removal. The floodplain
designation on the official zoning map must riot be removed from floodplain
areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or that the area
has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood protection
elevation and is. contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special
exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of the Department
of Natural Resources (DNR) if the Commissioner determines that, through other
measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use.
      (2)   Amendments require DNR approval. All amendments to this section
must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of the Department of
Natural Resources (DNR) prior to adoption. The Commissioner must approve the
amendment prior to community approval.
      (3)   Map revisions require section amendments. The Floodplain District
regulations must be amended to incorporate any revisions by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency to the floodplain maps adopted in Subd. 2(3).
(Ord. 04-02, passed 8-24-2004; Am. Ord. 2016-20, passed 9-26-2016)
1001.10   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
Subd. 1   General Provisions.
   A tract of land, which is developed as a unit under single or unified
ownership or control and which generally includes 2 or more principal buildings
or uses but which may consist of 1 building containing a combination of
principal and supportive uses. PUD may be requested in any zoning district
under the provisions set forth is this section. Uses not otherwise allowed in
the zoning district are prohibited within a planned development unless specific
provisions are made and listed in the development plan or modified in the
conditions of approval.
Subd. 2   Purpose.
   The purposes of this Subsection are:
   (1)   To encourage a more creative and efficient development of land and its
improvements through the preservation of natural features and amenities than is
possible under the more restrictive application of zoning requirements. This
section may allow modifications such as non-standard lot sizes, private streets
and driveways, reduced rights-of-way and street widths, housing types, zero lot
lines and building setbacks. These changes shall meet the standards and
purposes of the Comprehensive Plan while preserving the health, safety, and
welfare of the citizens of the City.
   (2)   To allow for the potential mixture of uses in an integrated and well
planned area when such mixing of land uses could not otherwise be accomplished
under this Code.
   (3)   To ensure concentration of open space into more usable areas, and a
preservation of the natural resources of the site.
   (4)   Protects natural features in private, common and public open space.
   (5)   To facilitate the economical provision of streets and public
utilities.
   (6)   To facilitate mixed use developments, and/or affordable housing,
recreational uses and institutional uses.
Subd. 3   Allowed Uses.
   Uses within the PUD may include only those uses generally considered
associated with the general land use category shown for the area on the
official Comprehensive Land Use Plan unless otherwise approved in the
development plan. Specific allowed uses and performance standards for each PUD
shall be delineated in an ordinance and development plan. The PUD development
plan shall identify all the proposed land uses and those uses shall become
permitted uses with the acceptance of the development plan. Any change in list
of uses presented in the development plan will be considered an amendment to
the PUD and will follow the procedures specified in this Subsection.
Subd. 4   General Standards for Approval
   (1)   A rezoning will be required of all Planned Unit Developments. The
rezoning will be applied as an overlay to the underlying zoning district and
reflected as such on the official Zoning Map. The City may approve the Planned
Unit Development only if it finds that the development satisfies all of the
following standards:
      a.   The Planned Unit Development is consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan of the City.
      b.   The Planned Unit Development is an effective and unified treatment
of the development possibilities on the project site and the development plan
provides for the preservation or creation of unique amenities such as natural
streams, stream banks, wooded cover, rough terrain, manmade landforms or
landscaping and similar areas.
      c.   The Planned Unit Development can be planned and developed to
harmonize with any existing or proposed development in the areas surrounding
the project site. The development plan will not have a detrimental effect upon
the neighborhood or area in which it is proposed to be located.
      d.   The Planned Unit Development provides transitions in land use in
keeping with the character of adjacent land use, and provides variety in the
organization of site elements and building design.
      e.   The tract under consideration is under single ownership or control.
      f.   The tract is at least 10 acres in size unless the applicant can show
that a PUD of less acreage meets the standards and purposes of the
Comprehensive Plan and preserves the health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of the City and that all of the following conditions exist:
         1.   The proposal better adapts itself to the physical and aesthetic
setting of the site and with the surrounding land uses than could be developed
using strict standards and land uses allowed within the underlying zoning
district.
         2.   The proposal would benefit the area surrounding the project to
greater degree than development allowed within the underlying zoning district
(s).
         3.   The proposal would provide mixed land use and/or site design
flexibilities while enhancing site or building aesthetics to achieve an
overall, workable higher quality of development than would otherwise occur in
the underlying zoning district.
         4.   The proposal would ensure the concentration of open space into
more workable or usable areas and would preserve the natural resources of the
site than would otherwise occur in the underlying zoning district.
      g.   Public benefits shall be included in each development and considered
as part of the review of the overall Planned Unit Development and as an
opportunity to support any deviations from the primary zoning ordinance
provisions and performance standards. Public benefits, that may be considered,
include the following:
         1.   Public or private open space (above what is excluded in net
calculation).
         2.   Increased park land dedication beyond the required park
dedication amount when land is required by the ordinance.
         3.   Expansion of existing open space or open space corridors and/or
linking open space corridors beyond borders of the site.
         4.   Preservation of existing natural resources and woodlands (as
mapped as the greenway corridor on the land use plan) beyond minimum net
calculation or required by ordinance.
         5.   Site amenities: private parks, enhanced pedestrian scale and
decorative street lighting, tot lots, trails (above what is required by
ordinance), recreational facilities, community center, pools or other on site
amenities which serve the entire development.
         6.   Development based storm water treatment system that provides
treatment benefits beyond the site and the City’s LID ordinance.
         7.   Multiple development wide enhanced entry features including the
following elements: monument signage with decorative lighting, water feature
and enhanced entry landscaping surrounding the monument.
         8.   Innovative street designs including but not limited to
curvilinear streets.
         9.   Architectural detail beyond minimum requirements.
         10.   Unique environmentally friendly development characteristics or
building techniques.
      h.   The Planned Unit Development will not create an excessive burden on
parks, schools, streets, or other facilities and utilities that serve or are
proposed to serve the Planned Unit Development.
Subd. 5   Coordination with Subdivision Regulations.
   Subdivision review under the subdivision regulations shall be carried out
simultaneously with the review of the PUD. The plans required under this
chapter shall be submitted in a form which will satisfy the requirements of the
subdivision ordinance for the preliminary and final plat.
Subd. 6   Procedure for Processing a Planned Unit Development (PUD)
   (1)   All Planned Unit Development applications shall follow the procedural
requirements set forth in this Subsection. Prior to issuance of any permits for
development within a PUD the following must occur:
      a.   A concept sketch plan review may be completed pursuant to this
Subsection if so desired by the applicant. This review provides helpful insight
and preliminary review comments by the Planning Commission and City Council.
      b.   A general development plan application and preliminary plat shall be
submitted according to the procedures outlined in the following items subject
to review and approval by the City Council.
      c.   A final development plan application and final plat shall be
submitted according to the procedures outlined in the following items subject
to review and approval by the City Council.
   (2)   Concept sketch plan review. The purpose of the concept stage is to
inform the City of the applicant’s intentions and to inform the applicant as to
the general acceptability of the proposal before extensive costs are expended
by the applicant.
      a.   A concept sketch plan review is optional, however it is highly
encouraged as it aids in the review process.
      b.   The approval is non-binding, on the part of both the applicant and
the City. Any approval or denial shall in no way bind the City to subsequent
action on more detailed plans.
      c.   Concept sketch plan review application information:
         1.   An application for concept sketch plan review on City application
form and all applicable fees, signatures and information.
         2.   A general plan and statement of the concept explaining the land
use proposed, density, public and private parks and open space, natural
resources or other public benefits and tentative staging or schedule.
      d.   Concept sketch plan review:
         1.   Planning staff shall submit a written review along with the
applicant’s plans to the Planning Commission for their consideration.
         2.   The Planning Commission shall hold an information public meeting
of all interested parties.
         3.   The Planning Commission shall make its recommendations on the
City Council.
         4.   The City Council will take action on the concept sketch plan
review. Approval of the concept sketch plan review shall be limited to the
general acceptability of the land uses proposed and their interrelationship.
The action shall in no way bind the City Council to subsequent action on more
detailed plans.
   (3)   General development plan. In addition to criteria and standards set
forth in Subdivision
1001.28 of this chapter for granting of a rezoning, the following additional
findings shall be made before the approval of a general development plan.
      a.   An applicant shall make an application for a Planned Unit
Development following the procedural steps as set forth in Subdivision
1001.28 of this chapter.
      b.   The proposed PUD is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan.
      c.   The uses proposed will not have an undue and adverse impact on the
reasonable enjoyment of neighboring property and will not be detrimental to
potential surrounding uses.
      d.   Each phase of the proposed development, as it is proposed to be
completed, is of sufficient size, composition, and arrangement that its
construction, marketing, and operation are feasible as a complete unit, and
that provision and construction of dwelling units and common open space are
balanced and coordinated.
      e.   The PUD will not create an excessive burden on parks, schools,
streets, and other public facilities and utilities, which serve or are proposed
to serve the area.
      f.   The proposed total development is designed in such a manner as to
form a desirable and unified environment within its own boundaries.
   (4)   The following exhibits and written narratives shall be submitted to
the City by the proposed developer as a part of the application for a general
development plan PUD:
      a.   An explanation of the character of the planned development and the
manner in which it has been planned to take advantage of the planned
development regulations including public benefits it is providing.
      b.   A list of the present ownership of all the land included within the
planned development and a list of property owners within 500 feet of the outer
boundaries of the property.
      c.   A general indication of the expected schedule of development
including progressive phasing and time schedule.
      d.   A map giving the legal description of the property including
approximate total acreage and also indicating existing property lines and
dimensions, ownership of all parcels, platting, easements, street right-of-
ways, utilities, and buildings for the property and for the area 500 feet
beyond.
      e.   Natural features, maps or maps of the property and area 500 feet
beyond showing contour lines at no more than 2-foot intervals, drainage
patterns, wetlands, vegetation, soil, and subsoil conditions.
      f.   A map indicating proposed land uses and corresponding areas
including housing units, total densities and types, area devoted to non-
residential uses, area devoted and number of off street parking and loading
spaces and related access, and common and private parks and open space uses.
      g.   Circulation including vehicular and pedestrian movement throughout
the site, relationship to the City thoroughfare plan and the adjoining land.
      h.   Full description as to how all necessary governmental services will
be provided to the development including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water
systems, streets and other public utilities.
      i.   An engineering report presenting results of percolation tests and
soil analysis of the site.
      j.   Any additional information requested by the City staff, the Planning
and Zoning Commission and City Council that may be required for clarification
of the proposed project.
      k.   Fifteen copies of all required information shall be submitted.
      l.   The applicant shall also submit a preliminary plat and all the
necessary documentation as required under Section
1002 of all or that portion of the project to be platted. For purposes of
administrative simplification, the public hearings required for the PUD and
preliminary plat may be combined into 1 hearing or may be held concurrently.
      m.   Care and maintenance of public space and service facilities. When
the proposed PUD includes provisions for public or common open space or service
facilities, a statement describing the provision that is to be made for the
care and maintenance of such open space or service facilities.
      n.   Restrictive covenants. Any restrictive covenants that are to be
recorded with respect to property included in the proposed PUD.
   (5)   Final development plan. After approval of the general development plan
and preliminary plat the applicant may apply for final development plan
approval for all or a portion of the PUD. The applicant shall submit the
following material for review by the Planning Commission and City Council.
      a.   The final development plan with recommended modifications, if any,
and if necessary, the modified preliminary plat, shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator containing the information required in the general development
plan plus any changes recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the
City Council as a result of the public hearing.
      b.   The applicant shall also submit a final plat, according to the
requirements in Section
1002 for all or that portion to be platted. Such plats may be submitted in
smaller increments as may be economical to finance or construct at one time.
      c.   The final general development plan shall be submitted with the first
final plat which shall conform to the approved general development plan and
approved preliminary plat. This plan shall include any recommended changes by
the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council to the original general
development plan and original preliminary plat.
      d.   The City Council shall review the final development plan and final
plat. Upon approval the following items shall occur:
         1.   The final development plan, and all supporting documents will be
filed with the PUD agreement and together they will form the conditions of
approval.
         2.   If the final plat is not recorded with Hennepin County and the
development contract is not fully executed with all required bonds posted
within 18 months of the date of the final plat and development contract were
approved by the City Council, then the PUD shall become null and void.
            (a)   At any time within 30 days before such deadline, the
applicant may file with the Zoning Administrator a written request that the
deadline be extended 1 year beyond the date the extension is granted.
            (b)   The Zoning Administrator shall place the applicant’s request
on the agenda of a regularly scheduled Council meeting to be held within 30
days of such filing.
            (c)   The Council at its discretion may grant the extension, for
not more than 1 year, for, when good cause shown, such extension is necessary.
            (d)   Only 1 such extension may be made.
            (e)   In any case where final development plan approval expires,
the Council may forthwith adopt a resolution repealing the general development
plan approval and the final development plan approval for that portion of the
PUD.
      e.   Building permits. Building permits shall not be issued for any
structures and land alterations shall not be made until the following
conditions are met:
         1.   Public open space has been deeded to the City and officially
recorded.
         2.   A development contract has been approved and executed by all
required parties with all required bonds posted.
         3.   The homeowners association bylaws, covenants and deed
restrictions have been approved by the City Attorney and officially recorded.
         4.   The final plat has been approved by the City and recorded with
appropriate governmental agencies as required by law.
   (6)   Conveyance and maintenance of common open space.
      a.   All land shown on the final development plan as common open space
must be conveyed to homeowners association or similar organization provided in
an indenture establishing an association or similar organization for the
maintenance of the planned development. The common open space must be conveyed
to the homeowners association or similar organization subject to covenants to
be approved by the City Attorney which restrict the common open space to the
uses specified on the final development plan, and which provide for the
maintenance of the common open space in a manner which assures its continuing
use for its intended purpose.
      b.   If a homeowners association is created, the applicant shall submit
any required homeowner association documents at the time of the first final
plat of development to the City Attorney and City staff which explain:
         1.   Ownership and membership requirements.
         2.   Articles of incorporation and bylaws.
         3.   Time at which the developer turns the association over to the
homeowners.
         4.   Approximate monthly or yearly association fees for homeowners.
         5.   Specific listing of items owned in common including such items as
roads, recreation facilities, parking, common open space grounds, and
utilities.
   (7)   Standards for common or open space. No open area may be approved as
common open space under the provisions of this Subsection unless it meets the
following standards:
      a.   The location, shape, size, and character of the common open space
must be suitable for the planned development.
      b.   Common open space must be used for amenity or recreational purposes.
The uses authorized for the common open space must be appropriate to the scale
and character of the planned development, considering its size, density,
expected population, topography, and the number and type of dwellings to be
provided.
      c.   Common open space must be suitably improved for its intended use but
common space containing natural features worthy of preservation may be left
unimproved. The buildings, structures and improvements which are permitted in
the common open space must be appropriate to the uses which are authorized for
the common open space and must conserve and enhance the amenities of the common
open space having regard to its topography and unimproved condition.
      d.   Outlots to be dedicated for park, ponding or other purposes shall be
deeded to the City before the final plat is released for recording.
   (8)   Review and amendments.
      a.   From time to time the Zoning Administrator may review PUDs within
the City and may make a report to the City Council on the status of
noncompliance for a particular PUD. If the City Planner finds that the
development has not commenced within 1 year after the original approval of the
conditional use for the PUD, the City Planner may recommend that the City
Council extend the time or revoke the PUD approval as set forth in Subsection
1001.28 of this chapter. Prior to cancellation or revocation of this permit,
the City Council shall hold a public hearing at which time all interested
parties will be given an opportunity to be heard.
      b.   For additional phases of the PUD, if within 5 years the project has
not progressed, the City Planner may recommend that the City Council determine
what action will be taken with the remainder of the project. Prior to
determining the outcome of the PUD, the City Council shall hold a public
hearing at which time all interested parties will be given an opportunity to be
heard.
      c.   Minor changes in the location, placement, and heights of the
buildings or structures may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator if
required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the
final plan was approved.
      d.   Approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council
shall be required for other changes such as rearrangement of lots, blocks and
building tracts. These changes shall be consistent with the purpose and intent
of the approved final development plan.
      e.   Any amendment to the PUD shall require the same procedures as for
the application for a PUD as set forth in this chapter.
   (9)   Inspections during development.
      a.   Following approval of a PUD, or a stage thereof, the Zoning
Administrator shall, at least annually until the completion of development,
review all permits issued and construction undertaken and compare actual
development with the approved development schedule.
      b.   If the Zoning Administrator finds that development fails in any
respect to comply with the PUD plans as finally approved, he/she shall
immediately notify the Council. Within 30 days of such notice, the Council
shall either by ordinance revoke the PUD permit, and the land shall thereafter
be governed by the regulations applicable in the district in which it is
located, or shall take such steps as it shall deem necessary to compel
compliance with the final development plan as approved, or shall require the
landowner or applicant to seek an amendment of the development stage plan.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 9-28-2010)
1001.11   MOBILE HOME PARK DEVELOPMENT.
Subd. 1   Purpose.
   As an alternative to conventional 1 family dwelling districts, the mobile
home park development procedures and regulations are set forth in order to
encourage innovative mobile home park development; to reflect changes in the
technology of land development; to encourage a more creative approach in the
utilization of land in order to accomplish a more efficient, aesthetic, and
desirable development which may be characterized by special features of the
geography, topography, size or shape of a particular property, and to provide a
compatible environment in harmony with that of the surrounding area.
Subd. 2.   Application, Review, Administrative Procedures and General
Regulations
   (1)   Applications for a conditional use permit to establish a mobile home
park shall follow the regulations set forth in Subsection
1001.23.
   (2)   A mobile home park development, when included as a part of a Planned
Unit Development or proposed as the only building unit type within a
residential development shall consist of at least 100 mobile home lots or pads
and must meet all requirement contained in “Minimum Design Standards for Mobile
Home Parks”, June 1973, Code No. 4940.5.
   (3)   The density of the development shall be consistent with that contained
in the Comprehensive Plan and the zoning district for which the property is
zoned.
Subd. 3.   Responsibilities of Park Management
   (1)   The person to whom the State Health Department issues a license for a
mobile home park shall operate the park in compliance with this Subsection and
regulations issued hereunder and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain
the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and
sanitary condition.
   (2)   The park management shall notify park occupants of all applicable
provisions of this Subsection and inform them of their duties and
responsibilities under this Code and regulations issued hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 1001.11)
1001.12   ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS.
Subd. 1   Authority, Purpose and Intent
   (1)   Authority. The United States Supreme Court has ruled that sexually-
explicit speech, including nude dancing, is entitled to some level of
protection under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. As a
result, municipalities may not ban adult establishments. However, the Supreme
Court has ruled that cities may adopt content-neutral zoning and licensing
provisions to regulate and control the adverse secondary effects of adult
establishments on the community.
   (2)   Findings of the City Council. The Minnesota Attorney General’s Office
and the cities of St. Paul, Alexandria, and Rochester, Minnesota, as well as
Indianapolis, Indiana; Phoenix, Arizona; Los Angeles, California; Seattle,
Washington; St. Croix County, Wisconsin; and Adams County, Colorado; have
conducted studies of the impact of adult establishments on their respective
communities. These studies have concluded that adult establishments have an
adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhoods. Those impacts include
increased crime rates, lower property values, increased transiency,
neighborhood blight and potential health risks. The City Council of the City of
Dayton is relying on the studies, many of which were conducted in larger
cities, recognizing that the same or similar adverse impacts could occur in a
smaller city such as the City of Dayton. The findings are based upon the
experiences of other cities where such businesses have located. Based on these
studies, the City Council makes the following findings regarding the need to
regulate adult establishments:
      a.   Adult establishments have adverse secondary impacts of the types set
forth above.
      b.   The adverse impacts caused by adult establishments tend to diminish
if adult establishments are governed by location and licensing requirements.
      c.   The City may adopt regulations to promote the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare.
      d.   The public health, safety, morals and general welfare will be
promoted by regulations governing adult establishments.
      e.   Adult establishments can contribute to increased criminal activity
and police calls in the area in which they are located, taxing law enforcement
services.
      f.   Adult establishments can be used as fronts for prostitution and
other criminal activity. The experience of other cities indicates that the
proper management and operation of such businesses can, however, minimize this
risk.
      g.   Adult establishments can cause or contribute to public health
problems by the presence of live adult entertainment in conjunction with food
and/or drink on the same premises.
      h.   Many members of the public perceive areas within which adult
establishments are located as less safe than other areas that do not have such
uses.
      i.   The adverse impact that adult establishments have on the surrounding
area diminishes as the distance from the adult establishments increases.
      j.   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of
the adult establishment. A licensing procedure will place an incentive on the
operators to see that the adult establishment is run in a manner consistent
with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as
the citizens of the City. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances
that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually-oriented business,
fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring
therein.
      k.   The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been
convicted of a sexually-related crime leads to the rational assumption that the
applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this Subsection.
      l.   The barring of individuals with sexually-related criminal
convictions from the management of adult establishments for a period of years
serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which may lead to the
transmission of sexually-transmitted diseases.
      m.   The general health, safety, and welfare of the community is promoted
by prohibiting nudity in adult establishments. This prohibition is based on
concerns of potential adverse effects such as prostitution, the transmission of
sexually-transmitted diseases, exposure to minors, obscenity and unsanitary
conditions in public places.
      n.   Small cities experience many of the same adverse impacts of adult
establishments present in larger communities.
   (3)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this Subsection to regulate adult
establishments to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of
the citizens of the City and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations
to:
      a.   Prevent criminal activity within the City;
      b.   To allow for efficient and effective law enforcement services in the
City;
      c.   Prevent deterioration of neighborhoods and its consequent adverse
effect on real estate values of properties within the neighborhood;
      d.   To locate adult establishments away from residential areas, schools,
parks and places of worship;
      e.   To provide a content-neutral, objective, licensing scheme that
allows the City to monitor adult establishments for violations of building and
health codes; and
      f.   Prevent ownership of adult establishments by persons with prior,
relevant criminal convictions.
   (4)   Reasonable opportunity. The provisions of this Subsection do not
prohibit adult establishments from having a reasonable opportunity to locate in
the City. This Subsection is not for the purpose of, nor is it intended to,
impose a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including adult-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent
nor effect of this Subsection to restrict or deny access by adults to adult-
oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or to deny access by
distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to their intended
market.
Subd. 2   Definitions.
   For purposes of this Subsection the terms defined in this section have the
meanings given them.
Adult Establishment
      a.   Any business that devotes a substantial or significant portion of
its inventory, stock in trade, or publicly-displayed merchandise, or devotes a
substantial or significant portion of its floor area (not including storerooms,
stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any portion of the business not open to
the public) to the sale at its business site of items, merchandise, devices or
other materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material
depicting, exposing, simulating, describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or
      b.   Any business that engages in any adult use as defined in this
Subsection.
Adult Use
   Any of the activities and businesses described below:
      a.   Adult Body Painting Studio. An establishment or business that
provides the service of applying paint, ink, or other substance, whether
transparent or non-transparent, to the body of a patron when the person is
nude.
      b.   Adult Bookstore. An establishment or business used for the barter,
rental, or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides,
records, audio tape, videotape, movies, or motion picture film if a substantial
or significant portion of its inventory, stock in trade, or publicly-displayed
merchandise consists of, or if a substantial or significant portion of its
floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any
portion of the business not open to the public) is devoted to, or if
substantial or significant portion of its gross revenues is derived from sales
at its business site of items, merchandise, devices or materials that are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, exposing,
simulating, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      c.   Adult Cabaret. A business or establishment that provides dancing or
other live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on: (1)
the depiction of nudity, specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; or (2) the presentation, display, or depiction of matter that seeks to
evoke, arouse, or excite sexual or erotic feelings or desire.
      d.   Adult Car Wash. A wash facility for any type of motor vehicle that
allows employees, agents, independent contractors, or other persons to appear
in a state of partial or total nudity in terms of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.
      e.   Adult Companionship Establishment. A business or establishment that
provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or
discussion distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
      f.   Adult Conversation/Rap Parlor. A business or establishment that
provides the services of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or
discussion distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
      g.   Adult Health/Sport Club. A health/sport club that is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      h.   Adult Hotel or Motel. A hotel or motel that presents material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing,
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      i.   Adult Use Mini-Motion Picture Theater. A building or portion of a
building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material
if such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas. The phrase “used for” in this definition means a regular and
substantial course of conduct and not a 1-time presentation of such material.
      j.   Adult Use Miscellaneous. Any establishment, business, or service
whose products or services are substantially or significantly distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      k.   Adult Massage Parlor/Health Club. A massage parlor or health club
that provides massage services distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      l.   Adult Modeling Studio. A business or establishment that provides
live models who, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification, engage in specified sexual activities or display specified
anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn,
sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted.
      m.   Adult Motion Picture Arcade. Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited where coin or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture
machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are used to show images
to 5 or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      n.   Adult Motion Picture Theater. A motion picture theater that as a
prevailing practice presents material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for
observation by patrons.
      o.   Adult Novelty Business. An establishment or business that devotes a
substantial or significant portion of its inventory, stock in trade, or
publicly-displayed merchandise or devotes a substantial or significant portion
of its floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements,
or any portion of the business not open to the public) to, or derives a
substantial or significant portion of its gross revenues from sales at its
business site of items, merchandise, or devices that are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis of material depicting or describing specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or items, merchandise or
devices that simulate specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, or are designed for sexual stimulation.
      p.   Adult Sauna. A sauna that provides a steam bath or heat bathing room
used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, if the service
provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      q.   Adult Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility. A building or portion of a
building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the
purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, if the service provided
by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Nude or Specified Anatomical Areas
      a.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
regions, buttocks, anuses, or female breasts below a point immediately above
the top of the areola; and
      b.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
Premises
   The real property and all building and structures located on the real
property.
Specified Sexual Activities
      a.   An act of sexual intercourse, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including genital-genital, anal-genital, or oral-genital
intercourse, whether between human beings or between a human being and an
animal;
      b.   Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning flagellation or torture by or upon a
person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a revealing costume or the
condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restricted on the
part of one so clothed;
      c.   Masturbation or lewd exhibitions of the genitals including any
explicit, close-up representation of a human genital organ clothed or
unclothed; and
      d.   Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the clothed or
unclothed pubic areas or buttocks of a human male or female, or breasts of a
female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between
humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
Substantial or Significant Portion
   Twenty-five percent or more.
Subd. 3   Application of this Subsection
   (1)   Other laws. No adult establishment shall engage in any activity or
conduct or permit any other person to engage in any activity or conduct in the
establishment that is prohibited by any ordinance of the City of Dayton, the
laws of the State of Minnesota, or the United States of America. Nothing in
this Subsection shall be construed as authorizing or permitting conduct that is
prohibited or regulated by other statutes or ordinances, including but not
limited to statutes or ordinances prohibiting the exhibition, sale, or
distribution of obscene material generally, or the exhibition, sale, or
distribution of specified materials to minors.
   (2)   Existing adult establishments. Except as otherwise provided in this
Subsection, existing adult establishments must comply with all requirements of
this Subsection immediately upon its effective date.
Subd. 4   Hours of Operation.
   No adult establishment shall be open to the public from the hours of 2:00
a.m. until 10:00 a.m. weekdays and Saturdays, or at any time on Sundays or
national holidays.
Subd. 5   Operation. Adult establishments are subject to the following business
regulations.
   (1)   Off-site viewing. An adult establishment must prevent off-site viewing
of its merchandise or any materials depicting, describing or relating to
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” by any visual or
auditory media, including display, decoration, sign, show window, sound
transmission or other means.
   (2)   Prohibition on liquor.
      a.   Adult establishments shall not sell or dispense intoxicating liquor
or 3.2% malt liquor nor shall the adult establishment be located in a building
or on a premises that contains a business that sells or dispenses intoxicating
liquor or 3.2% malt liquor.
      b.   The sale and consumption of alcohol is prohibited on the premises of
an adult establishment, including, but not limited to, any parking areas or
lots that are owned or leased by the adult establishment or its owner, or used
by patrons when they are at the adult establishment.
   (3)   Entrances. All entrances to an adult establishment, with the exception
of emergency fire exits, that are not useable by patrons to enter the business,
shall be visible from a public right-of-way.
   (4)   Layout. The layout of any display areas shall be designed so that the
management of the adult establishment and any law enforcement personnel inside
the store can observe all patrons while they have access to any merchandise
offered for sale or viewing including but not limited to books, magazines,
photographs, video tapes, or any other material, or any live dancers or
entertainers.
   (5)   Illumination. Illumination of the premises exterior shall be adequate
to observe the location and activities of all persons on the exterior premises.
   (6)   Signs. Signs for adult establishments shall not contain
representational depiction of an adult nature or graphic descriptions of the
adult theme of the operation. An adult establishment must prominently display
at the entrance of the business, or no more than 2 feet from the door-opening
device of the establishment, a sign that states “This business sells or
displays material containing adult themes. Persons under 18 years of age shall
not enter.” The sign must contain letters between 3/8 inch and 2 inches in
height.
   (7)   Access by minors. No minor shall be permitted on the premises of an
adult establishment. Adult goods or materials may not be offered, sold,
transferred, conveyed, given or bartered to a minor, or displayed in a fashion
that allows them to be viewed by a minor, whether or not the minor is on the
licensed premises.
   (8)   Additional conditions for adult cabarets. The following additional
conditions apply to adult cabarets:
      a.   No dancer, live entertainer or performer shall be under 18 years
old.
      b.   All dancing or live entertainment shall occur on a platform intended
for that purpose and which is raised at least 2 feet from the level of the
floor.
      c.   No dancer or performer shall perform any dance or live entertainment
closer than 3 feet to any patron.
      d.   No dancer or performer shall fondle, caress, or touch any patron and
no patron shall fondle, caress, or touch any dancer or performer.
      e.   No patron shall pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or performer.
      f.   No dancer or performer shall solicit or receive any pay or gratuity
from any patron.
   (9)   No nudity. No person may be nude on the premises of any adult
establishment.
Subd. 6   License Required
   (1)   License required. It is unlawful for any person or entity to own,
lease, rent, manage or operate an adult establishment without a valid license
issued by the City pursuant to this Subsection.
   (2)   Existing businesses. Within 30 working days of the effective date of
this Subsection, any existing adult establishment must apply for a license from
the City. Failure to apply for a license is a violation of this Subsection and
is subject to penalty under Subdivision 17. An existing adult establishment may
continue to operate pending review of the license application by the City.
Subd. 7   License Application
   (1)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
City. The completed application must contain the following information:
      a.   All applicants. For all applicants:
         1.   Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation,
partnership, or other form of organization.
         2.   The legal description of the premises to be licensed, along with
a sketch or diagram showing the floor plan of the premises. The floor plan of
the premises shall detail all internal operations and activities, including a
statement of the total floor space occupied by the business. The floor plan
need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or
drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus 6 inches.
         3.   The name and street address of the business. If the business is
to be conducted under a designated name, or style other than the name of the
applicant, a certified copy of the certificate required by M.S. § 333.01, as
may be amended from time to time, shall be submitted.
         4.   Whether the applicant has had a previous adult establishment
license suspended or revoked.
      b.   Applicants who are natural persons. If the applicant is a natural
person:
         1.   The name, place, and date of birth, street, city and mailing
address, and phone number of the applicant.
         2.   Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name
other than the applicant’s name, and if so, the name or names used and
information concerning dates and places where used.
         3.   The street and city addresses at which the applicant has lived
during the preceding 2 years.
         4.   The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in
which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding 2 years and name(s)
and address(es) of the applicant’s employee(s) and partner(s), if any, for the
preceding 2 years.
         5.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a gross
misdemeanor or felony relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses, or adult
establishments.
      c.   Applicants that are partnerships. If the applicant is a partnership:
         1.   The name(s) and address(es) of the partnership, the name(s) and
address(es) of all partners and all of the information concerning each partner
that is required of applicants in Subdivision 7(1)b. of this section.
         2.   Whether the partnership is general or limited.
         3.   A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with
the application. If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a
trade name pursuant to M.S. § 333.01, as may be amended from time to time, a
certified copy of the certificate shall be attached to the application.
      d.   Corporate or other applicants. If the applicant is a corporation or
other organization:
         1.   The name of the corporation or business form, and if
incorporated, the date and state of incorporation.
         2.   A true copy of the Certificate of Incorporation, Articles of
Incorporation or Association Agreement and Bylaws shall be attached to the
application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a Certificate of
Authority as required by M.S. § 303.06, as may be amended from time to time,
shall be attached. If the entity is a limited liability company, then true and
accurate copies of the Articles of Organization and any Membership Agreements
shall be attached to the application.
         3.   The name of the manager(s), proprietor(s), or other agent(s) in
charge of the business and all of the information concerning each manager,
proprietor or agent that is required of the applicants in Subdivision 7(1)b. of
this section.
         4.   Accurate and complete business records showing the names,
addresses, and dates of birth of all officers, directors and controlling
stockholders for the business.
         5.   The name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the
registered office for service of process.
   (2)   Changes in the information provided on the application or provided
during the investigation must be brought to the attention of the City by the
applicant or licensee. If such a change takes place during the investigation,
it must be reported to the City Clerk-Treasurer in writing. A failure by an
applicant or licensee to report such a change may result in a denial or
revocation of a license.
Subd. 8   Disqualifications and Requalification
   (1)   The City will issue a license to an applicant within 30 days of the
application unless 1 or more of the following conditions exist:
      a.   The applicant is under 18;
      b.   The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on
the license application;
      c.   The applicant gives false, fraudulent, or untruthful information on
the license application;
      d.   The applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor, gross misdemeanor
or felony relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses, or adult
establishments;
      e.   The adult establishment is not in full compliance with the Dayton
City Code and all provisions of state and federal law;
      f.   The applicant has not paid the required license fee;
      g.   The applicant has been denied a license by the City or any other
Minnesota municipal corporation to operate an adult establishment, or such
license has been suspended or revoked, within the preceding 12 months;
      h.   The applicant is not the proprietor of the establishment for which
the license is issued; or
      i.   The adult establishment premises holds an intoxicating liquor, beer
or wine license.
   (2)   An applicant may qualify for a license:
      a.   After 1 year has elapsed in the case of a previous license
revocation;
      b.   After 2 years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date
of release from confinement in the case of a misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor
offense;
      c.   After 5 years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or
the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is later, in
the case of a felony offense; or
      d.   After 5 years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or
the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is
later, if the conviction is of 2 or more misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor
offenses or combination of misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any 24-month period.
Subd. 9   Expiration and Renewal
   (1)   Expiration. An adult establishment license expires at the end of the
calendar year.
   (2)   Renewal. A licensee may renew a license by completing an application
as provided in Subdivision 7. The applicant will be allowed to continue
business until the City has determined that the applicant meets the criteria
for renewal of the license. If the City denies the renewal, the applicant shall
not be issued a license for 1 year from the date of denial.
Subd. 10   Suspension
   (1)   Causes of suspension. The City may suspend a license for a period not
to exceed 30 days if it determines that the licensee or an employee of a
licensee has:
      a.   Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this
Subsection;
      b.   Allowed or engaged in the sale or use of alcoholic beverages while
on the adult establishment premises other than at an adult hotel or motel;
      c.   Refused to allow an inspection of the adult establishment as
authorized by this Subsection; or
      d.   Knowingly permitted unlawful gambling by any person on the adult
establishment premises.
   (2)   Notice. A suspension by the City shall be preceded by written notice
to the licensee and a public hearing. The notice shall give at least 10 days’
notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state the nature of the
charges against the licensee. The notice may be served upon the licensee
personally, or by leaving the same at the licensed business premises with the
person in charge thereof, or by mailing the notice by U.S. Mail to the last
known address of the owner or agent authorized to receive legal notices for the
business, as listed on its license application.
Subd. 11   Revocation
   (1)   Suspended licenses. The City may revoke a license if a cause of
suspension in Subdivision 11(2) occurs and the license has been suspended at
least once before within the preceding 12 months.
   (2)   Causes of revocation. The City may revoke a license if it determines
that:
      a.   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted to the City during the application process;
      b.   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or
sale of controlled substances on the premises;
      c.   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises;
      d.   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the adult establishment
during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
      e.   A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in Subdivision 8
(1)d., for which the time period required in Subdivision 8(2) has not elapsed;
or
      f.   Except in the case of an adult hotel or motel, a licensee or an
employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation or masturbation to occur in or on the licensed premises.
   (3)   Appeals. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the revocation of the license.
   (4)   Granting a license after revocation. When the City revokes a license,
the revocation shall continue for 1 year and the licensee shall not be issued
an adult establishment license for 1 year from the date revocation became
effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the City finds that the basis for the
revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license
if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became
effective. If the license is revoked due to a criminal conviction under
Subdivision 8(1)d., an applicant may not be granted another license until the
appropriate number of years required under Subdivision 8(2), has elapsed.
Subd. 12   Procedures for Appeal.
   Non-renewals, suspensions and revocations of an adult establishment license
are governed by the following:
   (1)   Notice and hearing. In the event that the City proposes not to renew,
suspend or revoke a license, the City will notify the licensee in writing of
the basis for the action. The Council will hold a hearing for the purpose of
determining whether to not renew, suspend, or revoke the license. The hearing
must be within 30 days of the date of the notice. The City Council must
determine whether to not renew, suspend or revoke a license within 30 days
after the close of the hearing or within 60 days of the date of the notice,
whichever is sooner. The Council must notify the licensee of its decision
within that period.
   (2)   Suspension or revocation. If the Council determines to suspend or
revoke a license, the suspension or revocation is not effective until 15 days
after notification of the decision to the licensee. If, within that 15 days,
the licensee files and serves an action in state or federal court challenging
the Council’s action, the suspension or revocation is stayed until the
conclusion of such action.
   (3)   Non-renewal. If the City Council determines not to renew a license,
the licensee may continue its business for 15 days after receiving notice of
such non-renewal. If the licensee files and serves an action in state or
federal court within the 15 days for the purpose of determining whether the
City acted properly, the licensee may continue in business until the conclusion
of the action.
   (4)   Prompt judicial review. After denial of an application or a renewal of
an application, or suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or
licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such action in any court of
competent jurisdiction. The court shall promptly review such action.
Subd. 13   Posting.
   The license, if granted, must state on its face the name of the person or
entity to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the adult
establishment. The license must be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance to the adult establishment.
Subd. 14   Fees.
   The annual license fee for adult establishments is $5,000. If 8 months of
any licensing year have elapsed when an application is made, the fee shall be
reduced to 1/2 the regular amount. The fee is non-refundable.
Subd. 15   Inspection
   (1)   Access. An applicant or licensee shall permit health officials,
representatives of the police department, fire department, and building
inspector, to inspect the premises of an adult establishment for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for
business. The licensee is at all times responsible for the conduct, activity
and operation of the business.
   (2)   Refusal to permit inspections. Refusal to permit a lawful inspection
of the premises by health officials, representatives of the police department,
fire department, or building inspector at any time it is occupied or open for
business is a violation of this Subsection. Refusal to permit inspections may
result in non-renewal, suspension or revocation of the license.
   (3)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an
adult hotel or motel that are currently being rented by a customer for use as a
permanent or temporary habitation. Temporary habitation is defined as a period
of time of at least 12 hours.
Subd. 16   Transfer of License. A licensee shall not transfer this license to
another, nor shall a licensee operate an adult establishment under the
authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the
application.
Subd. 17   Penalty.
   Any person violating any provision of this Subsection shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties for a
misdemeanor as prescribed by state law. Each day the violation continues shall
be considered a separate misdemeanor offense punishable by a separate
misdemeanor penalty. The City may also enforce any provision of this Subsection
by mandamus, injunction or any other appropriate civil remedy in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
Subd. 18   Severability.
   Every section, provision, or part of this Subsection is declared severable
from every other section, provision, or part thereof to the extent that if any
section, provision, or part of this Subsection be held invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction it shall not invalidate any other section, provision, or
part thereof.
(Ord. 2010-02, passed 2-9-2010)
1001.13   HOME OCCUPATIONS.
Subd. 1   Purpose. 
   The purpose of this Subsection is to maintain the character and integrity of
residential areas, to prevent competition with commercial districts, to
encourage telecommuting, and to provide a means through the establishment of
specific standards and procedures by which home occupations can be conducted in
residential neighborhoods without jeopardizing the health, safety and general
welfare of the surrounding neighborhood. In addition, this Subsection is
intended to provide a mechanism enabling the distinction between permitted home
occupations and special or customarily “more sensitive” home occupations, so
that permitted home occupations may be allowed through an administrative
process rather than a legislative hearing process.
Subd. 2   Home Business Categories
   Home businesses shall fall into 2 categories.
   (1)   Administrative Home Occupations are those Home Occupations that have
no effect on the surrounding neighborhood. This accessory use may be allowed
with an administrative permit in all agricultural and residential neighborhoods
when the occupation conforms to the standards of Subdivisions 3 and 4(1) below.
   (2)   Home Extended Businesses are those Home Occupations that typically
involve more significant element of commercial-type activity that may  have a
minimal effect on the surrounding neighbors. This accessory use may be allowed
if the use meets all the criteria of Subdivisions 3 and 4(2) below, and
requires the issuance of an interim use permit. The Council may require
compliance with any reasonable conditions, restrictions or limitations
necessary to protect the residential or agricultural character of the area.
Subd. 3   General Provisions
   All Home Occupations shall meet the following standards:
   (1)   All Home Occupations shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the
residential use of the premises, should not change the residential character
thereof, and shall result in no incompatibility or disturbance to the
surrounding residential uses.
   (2)   The applicant shall reside in the home associated with the Home
Occupation.
   (3)   No Home Occupation shall require internal or external alterations or
involve construction features not customarily found in dwellings except where
required to comply with local and state fire and police recommendations.
   (4)   No Home Occupation shall involve the use of equipment other than that
customarily found in a residential dwelling.
   (5)   No Home Occupation shall be visible from the outside of the dwelling.
There shall be no exterior display or exterior signs or interior display or
interior signs which are visible from the outside of the dwelling with the
exception of one directional or identification/business sign not to exceed 2
square feet in area.
   (6)   All Home Occupations shall comply with the provisions of the City
Nuisance Ordinance and City Noise Ordinance.
   (7)   All parking associated with the Home Occupation shall occur on-site on
the driveway.
   (8)   The Home Occupation shall not cause septic waste flow to exceed the
design capacity of the septic system.
   (9)   No Home Occupation shall generate traffic (by customers, employee,
deliveries, etc.) to and from (“trip”) the dwelling that is not characteristic
of the neighborhood and shall not exceed 8 trips per day by any combination of
employee, contract employee, customer or client visits, and/or deliveries per
standard 8 hour day and no more than one customer or client visit on the
premises at any given time. For the purposes of this section, one customer/
client visit shall be considered to include any number of persons arriving in a
single vehicle.
   (10)   No Home Occupations shall produce light, glare, noise, odor or
vibration that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or
nearby property.
   (11)   No equipment shall be used in the operation of a Home Occupation
which will create electrical interference to surrounding properties.
   (12)   All Home Occupations shall meet all applicable fire and building
codes.
   (13)   No Home Occupation shall be conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. unless the Home Occupation does not  require any on-street or
off-street parking facilities or require in person customer interaction on site
(e.g. telecommuting).
   (14)   No vehicles or machinery related to the home occupation shall be
idling or running on site, outdoors, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
Subd. 4   Performance Standards
   (1)   Administrative Home Occupation Performance Standards.
      a.   The occupation shall not use more than 25% of the floor area of the
home (excluding the garage area). State licensed day care facilities serving 12
or fewer persons are exempt from this Subsection.
      b.   No part of any detached garage or accessory building can be used for
the occupation.
      c.   No outdoor storage of supplies, materials, debris, equipment or
maintenance items; all home occupation related items shall be kept in an
enclosed structure.
      d.   The home occupation is conducted entirely by the occupants of the
home and up to 2 nonresident employee, or contract employee, working on, or
reporting to, the home.
      e.   No direct sale of goods to the consumer are allowed to occur at the
home occupation site.
      f.   Up to 1 vehicle associated with the business with a gross vehicle
weight rating under 12,000 lbs. may be parked on the home property. No vehicles
over a gross vehicle weight rating of 12,000 lbs. associated with the
occupation shall be parked at or near the home. The Home Occupation shall not
create a parking demand in excess of that which can be accommodated in an
existing driveway where no vehicle is parked closer than 15 feet from the curb
line or edge of paved surface.
      g.   If the proposed home occupation cannot comply with all of the above
rules, an interim use permit for a Home Extended Business is required.
   (2)   Home Extended Business performance standards (interim use permit
required). Home Extended Business occupations shall only be allowed in
Agricultural Zoned Districts, or any Residential Zoned Properties over 1 acre.
      a.   The occupation use of the home shall not exceed 30% of the floor
area of the principal dwelling (excluding the garage area). State licensed day
care facilities are exempt from this Subsection.
      b.   No outdoor storage of supplies, materials, debris, equipment,
machinery or maintenance items; all home occupation related items shall be kept
in an enclosed structure on properties less than 2.5 acres. On properties which
are at least 2.5 acres, outdoor storage may be allowed provided the outdoor
storage area is significantly screened from view from the street and adjacent
properties and does not exceed 20% of the lot. Screening shall consist of a
combination of existing or proposed landscaping and fencing.
      c.   The Home Extended Business shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet
from any dwelling, other than that of the subject property.
      d.   The garage or 1 accessory building may be used for the business,
provided there is still a garage space to park a vehicle. Accessory buildings
shall meet the accessory building design requirements in Section
1001.35, Accessory Buildings and Structures.
      e.   The Home Extended Business shall be conducted entirely by the
occupants of the home and up to 2 nonresident employees, or contract employees,
working at, or reporting to, the home.
      f.   No more than 1 vehicle, which shall be under a gross vehicle weight
of 12,000 lbs., associated with the business can be parked overnight outside or
near the home. One vehicle which exceeds 12,000 lbs. may be stored on site
provided the vehicle does not exceed a gross vehicle weight rating of 18,000
lbs. and the vehicle is stored entirely within a building or is significantly
screened from view from the road or surrounding properties. The Home Extended
Business shall not create a parking demand in excess of that which can be
accommodated in an existing driveway where no vehicle is parked closer than 15
feet from the curb line or edge of paved surface.
      g.   Direct sale of goods that are not produced on the site is
prohibited.
      h.   Dust control measures may be required.
      i.   Any other reasonable conditions required by the City Council.
      j.   The City Council may allow Home Occupations to operate in excess of
the provisions in this section provided the City has reasonable assurance, due
to the nature of the Home Occupation or through mitigation measures (e.g.
increase landscaping, or screening than required), that the Home Occupation
will not adversely impact neighboring properties or become a nuisance.
Subd. 5   Procedures and Permits
   (1)   Administrative home occupation permit.
      a.   An application form and fee for a home occupation permit must be
completed and filed with the City.
      b.   Administrative Home Occupations complying with all the provisions as
provided in this section may be approved by the City Administrator or the
Administrator’s designee.
      c.   The City on an annual basis may review Administrative Home
Occupation permits. If the Administrative Home Occupation is in compliance of
City Code the City Administrator may renew the permit. If the Administrator
finds that the use is not in compliance the permit holder will be notified and
shall have 60 days to bring the use into compliance.
      d.   The permit shall remain in full force and effect until such time as
there has been a change in ownership or until such time as the provisions of
this Subsection have been breached. At such time as the City has reason to
believe that either event has taken place, a public hearing shall be held
before the Planning Commission. The City Council shall make a final decision on
whether or not the permit holder is entitled to the permit.
   (2)   Home Extended Business interim use permit.
      a.   An application form, fee and supporting materials for an interim use
permit must be filed with the City. See Subsection
1001.23 for the interim use permit application and review process.
      b.   Home Extended Businesses must comply with all the provisions of this
section and all conditions associated with issuance of an interim use permit.
      c.   The City shall notify the County Tax Assessor when any Home Extended
Business permit is granted and provide a copy of such permit to the Assessor.
      d.   The City Council shall approve the Home Extended Business IUP with a
5 year time limit. If the City Zoning Administrator, his/her designee, finds
that the use is not in compliance, the permit holder will be notified and shall
have 60 days to bring the use into compliance. Should the Home Extended
Business’ noncompliance continue past 60 days the Home Extended Business IUP
shall be revoked.
      e.   Whenever an application for an interim use permit has been
considered and denied by the City Council, a similar application for a permit
affecting substantially the same property and use shall not be considered again
by the Planning Commission or City Council for at least 6 months from the date
of its denial.
   (3)   Transferability. Home Extended Business interim use permits and
Administrative Home Occupation permits shall not run with the land and shall
not be transferable. If the Home Extended Business or Administrative Home
Occupation is discontinued for a period of one year, or non-compliance beyond
60 days, the Home Occupation permit, or Home Extended Business interim use
permit shall be revoked.
   (4)   Renewal of permits. An applicant shall not have a vested right for a
permit renewal by reason of having obtained a previous permit. The previous
granting or renewal of a permit shall not constitute a precedent or basis for
the renewal of a permit.
   (5)   Inspection. The City hereby reserves the rights upon issuing any
permit to inspect the premises in which the home business is being conducted to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this Subsection or any conditions
additionally imposed.
Subd. 6   Non-conforming and Existing Home Business Uses
   (1)   Home Occupations lawfully existing on the effective date hereof may
continue as nonconforming uses. They shall, however, be required to obtain
permits, as may be required by this section, for their continued operation. Any
existing Home Occupation that is discontinued for a period of more than 1 year,
or is in violation of the provisions under which it was initially established,
shall be brought into conformity with the provisions of this section.
   (2)   When identified and notified by the City, existing Home Occupations
that do not have a permit from the City, shall within 30 days make application
for an Administrative Home Occupation permit or Home Extended Business interim
use permit as may be required by this section.
(Prior Code, § 1001.12, Subd. 7) (Ord. 2006-14, passed 12-14-06; Am. Ord. 2018-
11, passed 5-8-2018)
1001.14   GENERAL REGULATIONS, ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS, EXCEPTIONS AND
MODIFICATIONS.
Subd. 1   Intent.
   It is the intent of this Subsection to provide that all residential and
nonresidential uses and related activities shall be established and maintained
with proper appearance from streets and adjoining properties and to provide
that each use shall be a good neighbor to adjoining properties by the control
of the standards set forth below.
Subd. 2   Standards
   (1)   Glare.  Glare, whether direct or reflected, such as from floodlights
or high temperature processes, and as differentiated from general illumination,
shall not be visible at any property line so as to obstruct traffic.
   (2)   Exterior Lighting.  Any lights used for exterior illumination, shall
not be visible at any property line so as to obstruct traffic.
   (3)   Vibration.
      a.   Vibration shall not be discernible at any property line to the human
sense of feeling for 3 minutes or more duration in any 1 hour.
      b.   Vibration of any kind shall not produce at any time an acceleration
of more than 0.1 gravities or shall result in any combination of amplitudes and
frequencies beyond the safe range of Table VII United States Bureau of Mines
Bulletin No. 422, “Seismic Effects of Quarry Blasting,” on any structure.
      c.   The methods and equations of Bulletin No. 422 shall be used to
compute all values for the enforcement of this provision. The bulletin is
incorporated herein by reference.
   (4)   Noise, odors, smoke, dust, fumes, water and waste.
      a.   The design, construction and performance of all nonresidential uses
shall be in conformance with City, county, and State of Minnesota standards and
regulations.
      b.   The storage of trash shall be within principal buildings or
otherwise shall be within an accessory enclosure complete with roof and walls
of the same exterior finish as the main structure and screened from all
Residential Districts with an adequate buffer.
   (5)   Accessory buildings.  The exterior finish and design of all accessory
buildings shall match the exterior design and materials of the principal
building or dwelling.
Subd. 3   Height Regulations
   (1)   Where the average slope of a lot is greater than 1 foot rise or all in
7 feet of horizontal distance from the established elevation or the property
line, 1 story in addition to the number permitted in the district in which the
lot is situated shall be permitted on the downhill side of any building.
   (2)   Height limitations set forth elsewhere in this Subsection may be
increased by 100% when applied to the following:
      a.   Monuments;
      b.   Flagpoles;
      c.   Cooling towers; and
      d.   Elevator penthouses.
   (3)   Height limitations set forth elsewhere in the Subsection may be
increased by conditional use permit when applied to the following:
      a.   Church spires, belfries, or domes which do not contain usable space;
      b.   Water towers; and
      c.   Chimneys or smokestacks, radio and television broadcasting towers.
   (4)   Height limitations set forth in the Commercial and Industrial
Districts may be increased to a greater height provided the following
conditions are met:
      a.   No increase in height limitation shall be allowed, except by
conditional use permit.
      b.   The building or portion thereof with increased height shall not be
adjacent to nor closer than 300 feet to any lot in any Residential District.
      c.   Where an increase in the height limitation is allowed under this
Subdivision, the building or portion thereof shall be set back from all side
and rear lots lines an additional distance of 1 foot that the building exceeds
the height limitation of the district in which it is located.
      d.   The building or portion thereof with increased height shall be set
back from front yard lines an additional distance of 1 feet for every 1 foot
that it exceeds 45 feet.
      e.   A site plan of the proposed building shall be submitted along with
the application for conditional use permit. The site plan shall show the
location and extent of the proposed building, parking, loading, access drives,
landscaping and any other improvements. Upon consideration by the Planning
Commission and subsequent approval by the City Council the site plan shall be
attached to and become a part of the conditional use permit. Any substantial
change to the site plan shall require a resubmission to the Planning Commission
and subsequent approval by the City Council.
      f.   The provisions of Subsection
1001.14, Subd. 3(4)(b), (c) and (d) above, may be waived by the City Council in
whole or in part, upon a finding that such a waiver would not have deleterious
effect upon surrounding properties.
Subd. 4   Yard Regulations
   Measurements shall be taken from the nearest point of the wall of a building
to the lot line in question, subject to the following qualifications:
   (1)   Cornices, canopies, or eaves may extend into the required front yard a
distance not exceeding 4 feet, 6 inches.
   (2)   Fire escapes may extend into the required front yard a distance not
exceeding 4 feet, 6 inches.
   (3)   A landing place or uncovered porch may extend into the required front
yard a distance not exceeding 6 feet, if the landing place or porch has its
floor no higher than the entrance floor of the building an open railing may be
placed around the place.
   (4)   The above enumerated architectural features may also extend into any
side or rear yard to the same extent, except that no porch, terrace, or outside
stairway shall project into the required side yard distance.
   (5)   A wall, fence or hedge may occupy part of the required front, side or
rear yard.
   (6)   On double frontage lots, the required front yard shall be provided on
both streets.
   (7)   In determining the depth of rear yard for any building where the rear
yard opens into an alley, ½ of the width of the alley, but not exceeding 10
feet, may be considered as a portion of the rear yard subject to the following
qualifications:
      a.   The depth of any rear yard shall not be reduced to less than 10 feet
by the application of this exception.
      b.   If the door of any building or improvement, except a fence, opens
toward an alley, it shall not be erected or established closer to the center
line of an alley than a distance of 15 feet.
Subd. 5   Area Regulations.
   No lot shall be so reduced that the area of the lot or dimensions of the
open space shall be smaller than herein prescribed.
Subd. 6   Accessory Uses
   The following accessory uses, in addition to those hereinbefore specified
shall be permitted in any Residential District, if the accessory uses do not
alter the character of the premises in respect to their use for the purposes
permitted in the district.
   (1)   The renting of rooms or the providing of table board in a dwelling as
an incidental use to that of its occupancy as a dwelling of the character
permitted in the respective district, but not to the extent of constituting a
hotel as defined in this Subsection, unless permitted in the district.
   (2)   The operation of necessary facilities and equipment in connection with
schools, colleges, universities, hospitals and other institutions permitted in
the district.
   (3)   News and refreshment stands and restaurants in connection with
passenger stations.
   (4)   Recreation, refreshment and service buildings in public parks and
playgrounds.
   (5)   Swimming pools, as regulated by Code Chapter 905, Subd. 3, Accessory
Buildings.
Subd. 7   One Family Dwellings: Standards, Minimum Dwelling Size, Materials and
Requirements
   To encourage the availability of moderate-income housing yet provide for
attractive exterior appearances, avoid overcrowding, maintain property values,
provide harmonious use, and to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare, standards for single family site-built homes and manufactured homes on
lots not within a mobile home park are hereby established:
   (1)   Each single family dwelling shall contain at least 960 square feet of
livable floor space, not including the floor area of carports, garages, utility
rooms, storage rooms.
   (2)   The minimum width of a single family dwelling shall be 24 feet at its
narrowest point.
   (3)   The minimum length of a single family dwelling shall be 24 feet at its
shortest point.
   (4)   The roof of a single family dwelling, except an earth-sheltered
dwelling, shall have a roof pitch of not less than 1 foot of rise for each 3
feet of horizontal run. The minimum distance from the eaves to the ridge shall
be 10 feet.
   (5)   The roof shall be covered with shingles, shakes, or tiles of uniform
color and appearance.
   (6)   The exterior walls of a single family dwelling shall be covered with a
material that is generally acceptable in residential areas; provided, however,
that reflection from siding coated with clean, white, gloss, exterior enamel
does not impact neighboring properties.
   (7)   Every single family dwelling shall be firmly attached or anchored to a
permanent foundation below frost line in accordance with the requirements of
the State Building Code in effect at the time the building permit is granted.
Subd. 8   Manufactured Homes
   (1)   For the purpose of applying the provisions of this Subsection, no
distinction shall be made between manufactured, as defined herein, and
dwellings substantially constructed on site.
   (2)   However, a manufactured home placed on a lot not within a mobile home
park shall comply with all of the requirements of M.S. Chapter 327, as may be
amended from time to time, in addition to the requirements of this Subsection;
manufactured homes placed on a unit within a mobile home park shall comply with
all of the requirements of M.S. Chapter 327, as may be amended from time to
time.
Subd. 9   Driveways, Residential
   (1)   Driveway permit.
      a.   No person  shall construct an access driveway within the City
without first obtaining a permit to construct the driveway from the City
Planner or Zoning Administrator.
      b.   A driveway permit may be obtained from the City Planner or Zoning
Administrator upon the following terms and conditions:
         1.   The person desiring to obtain a permit shall make application to
the Public Works Department Clerk on a form available from the City. Each
application shall include a site plan showing, but not limited to access onto
the City street. No more than 1 access to the City street shall be permitted
per parcel.
         2.   The applicant states on the application that the driveway shall
be constructed according to the terms of this Subsection.
         3.   The applicant has paid the permit fee to be set from time to time
by the City Council.
         4.   A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any parcel
until the access driveway has been completed and is approved by the City, or in
the alternative, an escrow deposit, guaranteeing the timely and workmanlike
completion of the access driveway, in an amount established by the City, has
been provided to the City.
   (2)   Performance standards.
      a.   All dwellings, whether of an agricultural or residential nature,
shall provide an access driveway. For the purposes of this Subsection,
agricultural nature shall mean any property located within an Agricultural
Zoned District and which is primarily used for commercial, or for-profit,
agricultural activity. Residential nature shall mean any property not of an
agricultural nature.
      b.   The driveway shall include an all weather driving surface
constructed pursuant to the following minimum specifications:
         1.   Driveway length (measured from centerline):
 
Zoning Class Less than 150 feet    More than 150 feet
Agricultural 12' wide gravel       16' wide gravel
Residential  12' wide hard surface 12' wide hard surface with 2' wide gravel
                                   shoulder on each side
 
         2.   General requirements for surfaces.
            (a)   Gravel surfaces shall be a minimum of 6 inches thick with a
Class 5 aggregate base of 100% crushed limestone (recycled concrete/bituminous
shall not be permitted).
            (b)   Hard surfaces shall be a minimum of 4 inches thick concrete
with 2 inches bituminous pavement and a 6 inches thick Class 5 aggregate base
(recycled concrete/bituminous is allowed for base).
            (c)   Driveway requirements shall apply to within 20 feet of the
dwelling structure.
            (d)   Driveways longer than 150 feet shall include a 12 feet by 12
feet hammerhead turn around built according to specifications that can be
obtained from the City, which shall be approved by the City Fire Chief.
            (e)   Driveways through low areas susceptible to flooding shall be
constructed a minimum of 2 feet above ground elevation and must include a
minimum 12 inches diameter culvert.
            (f)   Driveways shall be setback from property lines a minimum
distance of 10 feet on agricultural property and 5 feet on residential
property.
            (g)   Vertical clearance shall be a minimum of 14 feet along all
portions of every driveway.
            (h)   Driveways shall have a minimum radius at street level of 10
feet in agricultural and 5 feet in residential areas.
            (i)   Driveway surfaces adjacent to streets shall be no higher than
the existing street surface.
   (3)   Driveway aprons. A bituminous or concrete driveway apron shall be
installed extending from the edge of the curb to the property line and shall
measure:
      a.   On a straight or curvilinear street be not less than 12 feet nor
more than 28 feet in width, and shall not be located within the drainage and
utility easement, or closer than five feet from the property line; and
      b.   On a cul-de-sac street be not less than 12 feet nor more than 24
feet in width.
Subd. 10   Compliance
   (1)   In order to insure compliance with the performance standards set forth
above, the City Council may require the owner or operator of any use to have
made the investigations and/or tests as may be required to show adherence to
the performance standards.
   (2)   The investigation and/or tests as are required to be made shall be
carried out by an independent testing organization as may be approved by the
City.
   (3)   The costs incurred in the investigation or testing shall be ordered by
the owner or operator and shared equally by the owner or operator and the City
unless the investigation and tests disclose noncompliance with the performance
standards; in which situation the investigation or testing shall be paid by the
owner or operator.
Subd. 11   Swimming Pools
   (1)   General provisions. Private swimming pools are regulated by this
chapter and are defined as follows: Any enclosure, designed or intended or used
for the containment of water, whether constructed below ground level or above
ground level, having a surface area exceeding 100 square feet and a depth
exceeding 18 inches which is designed, intended or used for swimming, wading,
or other recreational use by the owner or tenant of the property upon which the
pool is constructed, or by their family or invited guests without payment of a
fee.
   (2)   Permit required. No swimming pool shall be constructed or established,
and no such pool construction shall be commenced in the City without first
obtaining a permit from the Building Inspector.
   (3)   Application for permit. Application for a swimming pool permit shall
be made to the Building Inspector upon forms provided by the Building
Inspector. A fee set by resolution of the Council shall be submitted with the
application to cover the costs of inspection. The application for the permit
shall include, without limitation, the following information:
      a.   Complete plans and specifications for the construction of the pool;
      b.   A site plan showing the location of all structures on the lot,
including the house, garage, fences, trees, overhead or underground wiring,
utility easements, and other significant improvements or natural features;
      c.   The proposed location of pumps, filters, electrical power source (if
applicable), flushing and drainage outlets, and other optional features;
      d.   Location and specifications of protective fencing.
   (4)   Construction set-back requirements. Private swimming pools shall be
constructed so as to avoid hazard or damage to the occupants of the subject
property or the occupants of adjacent property and shall meet the following
minimum requirements:
      a.   Setback. No pool shall be located within 18 feet (measured
horizontally) from any underground or overhead utility line of any kind.
      b.   Easements. No pool shall be located within any public or private
utility easement, ingress or egress easement, drainage way, marsh, or other
location in which it will represent a threat to the natural environment.
      c.   Accessory structures. Swimming pools are accessory structures in all
residential districts under the City's zoning ordinance and must meet
appropriate setback regulations.
      d.   Electrical. All electrical installations shall comply with current
building, electrical and other applicable state and local codes.
   (5)   Safety fence required.
      a.   Fence required. A safety fence at least 4 feet in height shall
completely enclose the pool. All openings or points of entry into the pool area
shall be equipped with gates or doors. All gates and doors shall have a latch
which shall be so constructed and so placed as to be inaccessible to small
children. All gates and doors shall be latched and locked to prevent access to
the pool when the pool is not in use. Any opening between the bottom of the
fence and the ground level shall not exceed 3 inches.
      b.   Walls and fence construction. The wall of any pool constructed above
ground level, regardless of the height thereof, shall not quality as a safety
fence.
         Safety fences shall be constructed so as to inhibit the climbing
thereof by any person. Any safety fence constructed primarily of wood shall be
composed of vertical members with spaces no greater than 3 inches between the
boards. If constructed primarily of other materials, a safety fence shall
contain no space through which a sphere 3 inches in diameter may pass.
   (6)   Miscellaneous requirements.
      a.   Nuisance. The conduct of persons and the operation of pools shall be
the responsibility of the owner and the tenant thereof, and such conduct of
persons and operation of the pool shall be done in such a manner so as to avoid
any nuisance or breach of the peace, and it shall be unlawful to allow loud
noises to go beyond the boundaries of the property upon which the pool is
located to adjacent property.
      b.   Drainage. All back flushing water or pool drainage water shall be
directed onto the property of the owner, or onto approved drainage ways.
Drainage unto public streets or other public drainage shall require a permit
from the Building Inspector.
      c.   Lighting. Any outdoor lighting of the pool shall not be permitted to
spill or shine upon adjacent properties.
      d.   Filling. The filling of pools from fire hydrants or other public
facilities is prohibited without prior approval of the Director of Public
Works.
   (7)   Application. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to pools
constructed after the date of passage of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1001.12, subds. 1 and 4)  (Am. Ord. 2010-06, passed 3-23-2010;
Am. Ord. 2010-23, passed 12-14-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-09, passed 10-9-2012; Am.
Ord. 2014-10, passed 7-8-2014; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 4-10-2018)
1001.19   PARKING REGULATIONS.
Subd. 1   General Provisions.
   The following provisions apply in all districts.
   (1)   Maintaining existing spaces. Upon effective date of this chapter,
existing off-street parking spaces and loading spaces shall not be reduced in
number unless the number exceeds requirements set forth herein for a similar
use.
   (2)   Damaged or destroyed buildings. Buildings, structures, or uses in
existence upon the effective date of this chapter that are subsequently damaged
or destroyed by fire or other cause may be re-established in compliance with
Subsection
1001.22, except that in doing so any off-street parking or loading which
existed must be retained. If the building, structure, or use is altered by
changing the use, floor area, seating capacity, or other facilities which would
affect the requirement for parking or loading spaces, the number of spaces may
be reduced if excess spaces are available or the number of spaces shall be
enlarged if additional spaces are required.
   (3)   Prohibited uses in required parking areas. Required off-street parking
space in any district shall not be used for open storage of goods. Temporary/
seasonal sales areas are allowed in off-street parking areas of 20 spaces, but
not more than 5% of the total parking spaces.
   (4)   Accessible parking. All parking shall comply with the adopted codes
and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), as deemed necessary. Accessible
parking cannot be used for temporary/seasonal sales.
      a.   Required spaces. With the exception of single and 2-family
dwellings, in all off-street parking facilities where parking is provided for
employees, visitors, or residents, parking spaces for disabled persons shall be
provided. The number of accessible parking spaces shall be included in the
total number of required parking spaces and shall be in accordance with the
applicable requirements of the current Minnesota Accessibility Code adopted by
the City, as amended from time to time, and all additional governing codes and
applicable laws.
      b.   Dimensions and design. Such spaces shall comply with the design
standards presented in Subsection
1001.19, Subd. 9 and shall provide an accessibility aisle between each space
provided. Such spaces shall be identified by a sign and pavement markings
indicating parking for the disabled only. Such spaces shall be the spaces
closest to the entrance of the building or structure, and shall be connected by
a paved surface designed to provide safe and easy access.
Subd. 2   Design, Construction, and Maintenance
   (1)   Design. All parking lots, spaces, driving aisles, and circulation
patterns shall be designed in conformance with the minimal dimensional
requirements and layout configurations in Subsection
1001.19, Subd. 9.
   (2)   Location of parking spaces. All required off-street parking spaces in
all districts shall be on the same lot as the principal building, unless
allowed through the issuance of a conditional use permit (CUP).
   (3)   Queuing of vehicles. Parking and circulation shall be designed to
avoid the queuing of vehicles within the public right-of-way. Gates or other
access limiting devices shall not be installed until the City finds that the
devices will have no adverse impact on the public right-of-way.
   (4)   Circulation design. Parking areas shall be so designed that
circulation between parking bays or aisles occurs within the designated parking
lot. Parking area design that requires backing into the public street is
prohibited.
   (5)   Access to parking spaces. All off-street parking spaces shall have
access from private driveways or parking lot aisles and shall not depend on a
public street for access to parking spaces or for circulation within the
parking lot. Backing onto a public street from a parking space, other than for
parallel parking spaces and 45 degree parking spaces in V-M, Village Mixed Use
District, is prohibited. This requirement applies to parking for all uses
except single and 2-family dwellings and townhouses where parking is accessed
by individual driveways. The width of the driveways and aisles shall conform to
the minimal dimensional requirements as regulated in Subsection
1001.19, Subd. 9 and shall be so located as to cause the least interference
with traffic movement.
   (6)   Fire access lanes. Fire access lanes shall he provided as required by
the Building and Fire Code.
   (7)   Lighting.
      a.   Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be
not being directed upon the public right-of-way and nearby or adjacent
properties.
      b.   The illumination must be indirect or diffused. Consideration should
be given to provide lighting for pedestrians and vehicles. On-site lighting
shall be provided as is necessary for security, safety and traffic circulation.
   (8)   Curbing. All open off-street parking areas designed to have head-in
parking along the property line shall provide a curb not less than 5 feet from
the property line. The curbing requirement applies to parking in all uses
except private single and 2-family dwellings and townhomes unless requested by
the City Engineer for drainage purposes.
   (9)   Landscaping. Landscaping design requirements and maintenance shall
comply with Subsection
1001.24.
   (10)   Surface and drainage. Off-street parking areas and driveways in
Commercial or Industrial Districts shall be improved with a durable and
dustless surface such as concrete or bituminous. The City may consider the use
of permeable pavers, pervious asphalt, or other surface technology to improve
stormwater management as part of an overall system. All surfacing for driveways
in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-E, V-M, and H-M Districts furnishing access to a dwelling
unit or garage and all parking areas shall be surfaced with concrete or
bituminous material so as to be dust free. Off-street parking areas and
driveways in A-1, A-2 and S-A Districts may be surfaced with a crushed rock
material or other approved material. All surfacing must be completed prior to
occupancy of the structure unless other arrangements have been made with the
City. Parking lots and adjoining areas shall be graded and drained to dispose
of all surface water accumulation within the parking area. Plans for surfacing
and drainage shall be subject to approval of the City Engineer.
   (11)   Marking of spaces. To assure full parking capacity as designed,
except in single-family, 2-family, and townhouse development, spaces shall be
marked with painted lines 4 inches wide in accordance with the approved site
plan. Accessible parking spaces shall be marked with a symbol that is in
accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
   (12)   Signs. No signs shall be located in any parking area except as
necessary for orderly operation of traffic movement.
   (13)   Screening. Screening of parking lots and driveways into parking lots
shall be required as specified in Subsection
1001.24.
   (14)   Maintenance of off-street parking spaces. It shall be the joint
responsibility of the operator and owner of the principal use, uses, and/or
building to maintain, in a neat and adequate manner, the parking spaces, drive
aisles, landscaping, screening, and fences.
   (15)   Approval of parking plans. Except for single-family and 2-family
dwellings, before any construction occurs on any new, enlarged, reduced,
reconfigured, or altered parking lot, plans for the parking lots shall require
review and approval by the City through the site plan approval process. When
the parking lot is in conjunction with an application for a new structure,
expansion of an existing structure, or expansion of a use of land, parking lot
plans shall be a part of the site plan review and approval process as specified
in Subsection
1002.04. The parking lot plans shall be shown on a site plan drawn to scale and
shall include: a layout of spaces, accessible spaces, drive aisles and access
drives with dimensions; construction materials: grading and drainage;
screening; landscaping; signage; lighting; and a tabulation of the number of
spaces required relative to square footages of specific uses on the site and
the number of spaces provided.
Subd. 3   Parking Provisions in Residential Districts.
   The following provisions shall apply to parking in all Residential Districts
unless otherwise stated.
   (1)   Location of parking spaces and driveway aisles.
      a.   Same lot as principal building. Required off-street parking space in
all Residential Districts shall be on the same lot as the principal building,
and multiple-family dwellings shall have their required parking within 200 feet
of the main entrance to the principal building being served.
      b.   Parking setbacks.
         1.   Front yard. Off-street parking shall not be located in required
front yards unless located on a designated driveway leading directly into a
garage or 1 surfaced space located on the side of a driveway adjacent to the
dwelling meeting the required driveway setback. The extra space shall be
surfaced as required in Subsection
1001.14.
         2.   Clear view triangle/corner lots. On corner lots off-street
parking shall not be located in the clear view triangle. The clear view
triangle is formed by the curb lines or edge of street extended and the line
connecting 55 feet from the intersection of the street edges or curb lines
extended.
         3.   Side or rear yards. Off-street parking and driveways shall not be
located within 5 feet of any side or rear lot line and cannot impede drainage.
Off-street parking and driveways, if placed in an easement, must be approved in
writing by the holder of the easement.
   (2)   Use of parking facilities. Not more than one oversized vehicle may be
parked or stored outside, unless being used in conjunction with a temporary
service including, but not limited to, a construction or remodeling project
benefitting the premises or general loading or unloading. All vehicles in
excess of a gross vehicle weight rating of 12,000 lbs. and/or 9 feet tall are
prohibited from being parked or stored outside in residential districts unless
being used in conjunction with a temporary service included, but not limited
to, a construction or remodeling project benefitting the premises or general
loading or unloading. This restriction shall not apply to recreational vehicles
or for lots of 5 acres or more. Agricultural activities operating within an
Agricultural District are exempt from the gross vehicle weight rating
restrictions.
   (3)   Screening of parking facilities.
      a.   All parking and driveways to parking areas for multiple-family
dwellings shall be screened, as required in Subsection
1001.24, from all adjacent property.
      b.   All parking and driveways to parking areas for non-residential uses
in Residential Districts shall be screened, as required in Subsection
1001.24 from all adjacent property.
Subd. 4   Parking Provisions in Business Districts.
   The following provisions shall apply in all Business Districts.
   (1)   Same lot as principal building. Required off-street parking spaces in
all Business Districts shall be on the same lot as the principal building.
   (2)   a.   Parking setbacks are stated in the zoning districts language
found in Subsection
1001.06.
      b.   Side interior setback may be reduced to 0 feet if master planned and
shared parking practices will be implemented.
   (3)   Clear view triangle/corner lots. On corner lots off-street parking
shall not be located in the clear view triangle. The clear view triangle is
formed by the curb lines or edge of street extended and the line connecting 55
feet from the intersection of the street edges or curb lines extended.
   (4)   Exemptions. Commercial uses zoned V-M (Village Mixed Use) are exempt
front the off-street parking requirements of this chapter. Uses with
requirements for substantial parking, e.g., theaters and restaurants, are
encouraged to provide off-street parking for their patrons.
Subd. 5   Parking Provisions in Industrial Districts.
   The following provisions shall apply in all Industrial Districts.
   (1)   Same lot as principal building. Required off-street parking space in
all Industrial Districts shall be on the same lot as the principal building.
   (2)   Parking setbacks are stated in the zoning districts language found in
Subsection
1001.06.
   (3)   Clear view triangle/corner lots. On corner lots off-street parking
shall not be located in the clear view triangle. The clear view triangle is
formed by the curb lines or edge of street extended and the line connecting 55
feet from the intersection of the street edges or curb lines extended.
   (4)   Screening of parking facilities. All parking and driveways to parking
areas for multiple-family dwellings shall be screened, as required in
Subsection
1001.24, from all adjacent property.
Subd. 6   Parking Design Requirements in all Business, Commercial, and
Industrial Districts
   (1)   Parking area design. To break up the appearance of large impervious
areas, all parking lots in Business, Commercial, Industrial and Multiple Family
Residential Zoning Districts and non-residential uses in Residential Districts
shall be subject to the following design standards.
      a.   Parking lot islands shall be required at the beginning and end of
each parking row to break up longer rows.
      b.   Continuous landscaped medians shall be provided every 3 (or fewer)
banks of parking. Medians shall have a landscaped area at least 9 feet in
width. Type and quantity of landscaping shall comply with Subsection
1001.24.
      c.   Parking spaces shall not be located between the front facade line of
buildings and a street edge.
      d.   Parking areas greater than 50,000 square feet shall be divided both
visually and functionally into smaller parking courts.
      e.   Parking spaces and rows shall be organized to provide consolidated
soft landscaped areas and opportunity for on-site stormwater management.
      f.   Parking rows shall be limited to a maximum length of 22 spaces.
Longer rows shall include landscaped breaks, such as islands, with shade trees.
      g.   The total area calculated for landscaping within the parking lot is
calculated as part of the overall landscape requirements of the site. In the
event that a parking lot may not have adequate space for landscaping islands,
the landscaped areas internal of the parking area and adjacent to the building
may be counted towards the required landscaped percentages within a parking
lot.
      h.   Thirty-five percent of all parking spots in a parking lot must abut
a landscaped area or a sidewalk.
   (2)   Pedestrian circulation. All parking lots in Business, Mixed Use,
Industrial Zoning Districts shall be subject to the following standards to
provide a safe pedestrian environment:
      a.   Parking areas shall include a direct and continuous pedestrian
network within and adjacent to parking lots to connect building entrances,
parking spaces, public sidewalks, transit stops, and other pedestrian
destinations.
      b.   At least 1 pedestrian route shall be provided between the main
building entrance and the public sidewalk that is uninterrupted by surface
parking and driveways.
      c.   In larger parking lots or where parking lots serve more than 1
building or destination, provide designated pedestrian pathways for safe travel
through the parking lot.
      d.   All pedestrian routes within a parking lot shall include a clear
division from vehicular areas, with a change in grade, soft landscaping, or a
change in surface materials.
      e.   Where pedestrian routes cross street access driveways and other
major drive aisles, crossings shall be clearly marked and sight distance for
both pedestrian and vehicles shall be unobstructed.
   (3)   Parking area island landscape standards. All parking lot islands or
medians in Business, Mixed-Use and Industrial Zoning Districts shall be
landscaped in accordance with Subsection
1001.24.
   (4)   Parking area stormwater management design requirements.
      a.   Rainwater and snowmelt shall be managed to encourage infiltration,
evapotranspiration, and water re-uses to achieve water quality and quantity
measures specified in the Surface Water Management Plan. Design practices for
managing stormwater may include, but are not limited to, the following
practices:
         1.   Permeable paving for parking spaces, drive aisles, overflow
parking, snow storage areas, and other hard surfaces in the parking lot.
         2.   Restricting the use of impervious curbing in landscaped areas.
         3.   Planting of trees, shrubs, and other absorbent landscaping
throughout the parking lot to provide shade and places for water uptake.
         4.   Creation of bio-retention areas, such as swales, vegetated
islands, and overflow ponds.
         5.   Inclusion of catch basin restrictors and oil/grit separators as
appropriate.
         6.   Creation of opportunities to harvest rainwater from rooftops and
other hard surfaces for landscape irrigation.
      b.   Where installed, bio-retention areas shall be appropriately designed
and located to filter, store, and/or convey the expected stormwater flows from
surrounding paved areas.
      c.   Elm Creek Watershed District shall have final review and permitting
authority for all surface water management measures proposed.
Subd. 7   Required Off-Street Parking Spaces and Garages
   (1)   General factors that determine the required number of parking spaces
for specified uses. The number of parking spaces required is based on several
primary factors:
      a.   For residential uses, the number of dwelling units;
      b.   For most office and business uses, the floor area in square feet of
a specific use;
      c.   For some industrial and public service uses, the number of employees
(usually on the major shift);
      d.   For service businesses (clinics, mortuaries, and the like), the
number of offices, vehicles, or other operational unit;
      e.   For gathering places, the seating capacity;
      f.   For multiple function uses (including uses that may have more than 1
subuse), the sum of the individual requirements.
   (2)   Calculation of parking requirements.
      a.   Floor area. For the purpose of determining off-street parking
requirements, the term “floor area” shall mean the sum of the gross horizontal
areas of the several floors of a building, including interior balconies,
mezzanines, basements, and attached accessory buildings, but exempting that
area primarily devoted to window display, storage, fitting rooms, stairs,
escalators, unenclosed porches, detached accessory buildings utilized for dead
storage, heating and utility rooms, inside off-street parking, or loading
space. Measurements shall be made from the inside of exterior walls.
      b.   1.   Multiple types of use in a single building, or in a complex of
several buildings on a single site. In instances where more than 1 type of use
occupies the same building or parcel, the total number of required spaces shall
be based upon the parking requirements for each use. Parking need will be based
on existing and potential uses of the building.
         2.   In cases where potential future uses will generate additional
parking demand, the City may require proof of parking plan for the difference
between the immediate and potential parking needs. In cases where potential
users are unknown, parking shall be calculated using 80% of the gross floor
area of the building.
      c.   Bench seating. In stadiums, sports arenas, churches, and other
places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews, or
other similar seating facilities, each 18 inches of the seating facilities
shall constitute 1 seat for the purpose of calculating required parking.
      d.   Reduced parking requirement. The City recognizes reuse of sites and
that the strict interpretation of the parking standards of this section may not
be appropriate for each specific use or lot. Therefore, the City Council may
approve alternative parking standards through the City review process provided
the applicant can demonstrate, based upon documented parking studies and site
specific analysis, that a need exists to provide more or fewer parking stalls
than the maximum or minimum parking standards or to deviate from pervious
paving/paver system standards. Factors to be considered in such determination
include (without limitation) national parking standards, parking standards for
similar businesses or land uses, size of building, type of use, number of
employees, expected volume and turnover of customer traffic and expected
frequency and number of delivery or service vehicles and appropriate soils and/
or site conditions to support pervious paving/paver systems.
      e.   Joint parking facilities.
         1.   Off-street joint parking facilities. Off-street parking
facilities for a combination of mixed buildings, structures, or uses may be
provided collectively in any Business or Industrial District in which separate
parking facilities for each separate building, structure, or use would be
required, provided that the total number of spaces provided shall equal the sum
of the separate requirements of each use and properties are contiguous to each
other. The joint use of parking facilities shall be protected by a recorded
covenant acceptable to the City.
         2.   Joint or combined parking facilities or adjoining parking
facilities on separate lots as authorized and when constructed adjacent to a
common lot line separating 2 or more parking areas are not required to observe
the parking area setback from the common lot line.
         3.   Joint parking facility reductions. The City Council may, after
receiving a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission, approve a
CUP for 1 or more businesses that would allow the number of required spaces to
be reduced if the following conditions are found to exist:
            (a)   Entertainment uses. Up to 50% of the parking facilities
required for a theater, bowling alley, or similar commercial recreational
facility may be supplied by the off-street parking facilities provided by type
of uses specified as primarily daytime uses in Subsection
1001.19, Subd. 7(2)j.2. below.
            (b)   Nighttime or Sunday uses. Up to 50% of the off-street parking
facilities required for any use specified under Subsection
1001.19, Subd. 7(2)j.2. below as primarily daytime uses may be supplied by the
parking facilities provided by the following nighttime or Sunday uses:
auditoriums incidental to public or parochial school, churches, bowling alleys,
theaters, or apartments.
            (c)   Schools, auditorium, and church uses. Up to 80% of the
parking facilities required by this section for a church or an auditorium
incidental to a public or parochial school may be supplied by the off-street
parking facilities provided by uses specified under Subsection
1001.19, Subd. 7(2)j.2.(g) through (j) below as primarily daytime uses.
            (d)   Daytime uses. For the purpose of this section, the following
uses are considered as primarily daytime uses: banks, business offices, retail
stores, personal service shops, service shops, manufacturing, wholesale, and
similar uses.
            (e)   Additional criteria for joint parking. In addition to the
preceding requirements, the following conditions are required for joint parking
usage:
               i.   Proximity. The building or use for which application is
being made to utilize the off-street parking facilities provided by another
building or use shall be located within 300 feet of the parking facilities.
               ii.   Conflict in hours. The applicant shall demonstrate in
documented fashion that there is no substantial conflict in the principal
operation hours of the 2 buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street
parking facilities is proposed.
               iii.   Written consent and agreement. A legally binding
instrument, executed by the parties concerned, for joint use of off-street
parking facilities, duly approved as to title of grantors or lessons, and form
and manner of execution by the City Attorney, shall be filed with the City and
recorded with the Hennepin or Wright County Recorder or Registrar of Titles,
and a certified copy of the recorded document shall be filed with the City
within 60 days after approval of the joint parking use by the City.
      f.   Proof of parking. The City may permit parking banking of up to 25%
of the required parking spaces through the site plan review process.
         1.   Sufficient evidence shall be provided by the applicant that
supports the reduced parking needs.
         2.   The area proposed for banking of parking spaces shall be an area
suitable for parking at a future time.
         3.   Landscaping of the banked area shall be in full compliance of the
zoning regulations and at a minimum landscaped with turf. As a result of the
site plan review process, the City may require additional landscaping of the
land-banked area.
         4.   The parking banking area cannot be used for any other use without
amendment of the site plan.
         5.   As part of the site plan review process, the applicant shall show
the area to be banked on the site plan and marked as “banked future parking.”
         6.   The City, on the basis of increased parking demand for the use,
shall require the conversion of all or part of the banked area to off-street
parking spaces.
      g.   Garage size. The minimum garage size for single and 2-family
dwellings attached or detached, shall be 440 square feet (22' x 20') for each
dwelling unit with a basement and 540 square feet (22' x 24') without a
basement.
      h.   Parking requirements for uses not specified herein. In the event
this chapter does not specify the number of parking spaces for a specific use,
the determination of required parking spaces shall be made using the following
criteria:
         1.   The number of parking spaces required for a use in terms of the
parking demand anticipated to be generated;
         2.   The square footage to be occupied by the proposed use;
         3.   The number of employees and patrons that are anticipated for the
proposed use.
      i.   Fractional spaces. When the calculation of required number of spaces
results in a fraction, each fraction of 1/2 or more shall constitute another
space.
      j.   Required minimum parking. The minimum number of parking spaces for
each use shall be as follows:
         1.   Residential. (Residential minimum parking requirements shall have
flexibility through the development process if a project meets the goals and
policies of the Comprehensive Plan to achieve affordable housing).
            (a)   Single and 2-family dwellings. Each dwelling unit shall
include 2 enclosed spaces and 2 surfaced spaces.
            (b)   Townhouses. Each dwelling unit shall include 2 enclosed
spaces and 2 surfaced spaces, plus an additional 1/2 parking space per dwelling
unit for visitors. Visitor parking may be consolidated in key areas of the
townhouse development or it may be located in driveways leading to garages,
provided that the visitor parking space will not interfere with circulation.
            (c)   Multiple-family dwellings. Two spaces per dwelling unit, 1 of
which must be enclosed, plus an additional 1/2 parking space per every 5
dwelling units for visitors.
            (d)   Senior housing. In connection with multiple dwelling units
that restrict occupancy to senior citizens, the City Council may grant a
variance reducing the parking requirement to a minimum of 1.25 spaces per
dwelling unit, 1 of which must be enclosed for each 3 dwelling units. In
connection with the variance, the City Council will require that the landowner,
for him or herself, his or her successors and assignees, agree to expand
available parking to the full amount required by this section if the occupancy
is not restricted to senior citizens. Adequate land area shall be designated
and set aside for future expansion of the parking to the full amount required
by this section, if needed. For the purpose this section, senior citizens are
defined as persons 55 years of age or older.
            (e)   Manufactured home park. Two parking spaces per unit plus 1/
2 parking space for visitors. Each manufactured home park shall maintain a hard
surfaced off-street parking lot for guest of occupants of at least 1 space for
each 5 coach sites. Visitor parking may be consolidated in key locations of the
manufactured home park development.
            (f)   Special residential.
               i.   Assisted living facility - 1/2 spaces per unit.
               ii.   Daycare nursery - 1 space per teacher/employee on the
largest work shift, plus 1 off street loading space per 6 students.
               iii.   Group dwellings - 1 space per sleeping room or for every
4 beds.
               iv.   Monasteries, convents - 1 space per 6 residents, plus 1
space per employee on the largest work shift, plus 1 space per 5 chapel seats
if the public may attend services.
               v.   Nursing home other than assisted living facility - 1 space
per 6 patient beds, plus 1 space per employee on the largest work shift.
               vi.   Nursing homes - 1 space per 6 patient beds, plus 1 space
per employee on the largest work shift.
               vii.   Retirement housing - for apartment dwelling units, 1
space per unit with a minimum of half of the required spaces as enclosed garage
spaces. The development shall include a proof of parking area sufficient to
meet the parking the City Council determines necessary, and that the
development is not likely to be converted to non-age restricted housing in the
foreseeable future. Townhouse dwelling units shall comply with the requirements
of this subsection vii.
         2.   Non-residential.
            (a)   Bed and breakfast establishments. Two spaces for the
principal dwelling unit plus 1 space for each rental unit.
            (b)   Board and lodging houses. One space for each 4 beds.
            (c)   Day care accessory to business use. One space per employee.
            (d)   Residential facilities. One space for each bed, plus 1 space
for each 3 employees at maximum shift other than doctors.
            (e)   Hotel, motel. One space for each rental unit plus 1 space for
each employee at maximum shift, plus 1 space per 3 persons to the maximum
occupancy load of each public meeting and/or banquet room plus 50% of the
spaces otherwise required for accessory uses (e.g. restaurants and bars).
            (f)   Nursing home, assisted living facility, sanitarium,
convalescent, rest home, or institution. One space for each 6 beds for which
accommodations are offered, plus 1 space for each 2 employees at maximum shift.
            (g)   Schools, elementary and junior high. Three spaces for each
classroom.
            (h)   Schools, high school and all post secondary institutions. One
space for each 4 students based on design capacity, plus 3 additional spaces
for each classroom.
            (i)   Place of worship and other places of assembly. One space for
each 3 seats.
            (j)   Community center, theatre, assembly hall, auditorium, sports
arena. One space per 3 patrons at the maximum occupancy load of the facility,
plus 1 space per employee on the largest work shift.
            (k)   Hospital. One space for each 3 hospital beds, plus 1 space
for each 4 employees other than doctors at maximum shift, plus 1 parking space
for each resident and regular staff doctor. Bassinets shall not be counted as
beds.
            (l)   Medical clinic, dental clinic or animal hospital. Six spaces
per staff doctor or dentist.
            (m)   Animal kennel. Five spaces plus 1 for each 500 square feet
over 1,000 square feet.
            (n)   Health club. One space for each 200 square feet of floor
area.
            (o)   Golf course, tennis or swimming club. Twenty spaces minimum
plus 4 spaces for each 200 square feet floor area.
            (p)   Mini golf course. One and 1/2 spaces per hole plus 1 space
for every employee.
            (q)   Bowling alley. Six parking spaces for each alley, plus
additional spaces as may be required for related uses such as restaurant/bar.
            (r)   Vehicle related retail/service. Two spaces plus 3 spaces for
each service stall, plus 1 space for each 250 square feet of building used for
the sale of goods and services, plus adequate stacking and maneuvering space
for pump island areas.
            (s)   Restaurant, café, bar, tavern, night club. One space for each
2.5 seats based on design capacity and 1 space per employee based on largest
working shift or as determined by the business plan and approved by the City.
            (t)   Restaurant, drive-in or take out. One space for each 15
square feet of floor area allocated to patron service and counter area, plus 1
space for every 2.5 seats based on design capacity.
            (u)   Retail stores. Five spaces for each 1,000 square feet of
floor area.
            (v)   Outdoor storage display of retail. One per 2,000 square feet
in addition to required use.
            (w)   Indoor retail storage facility. One space per employee at
full shift plus 1 space for each 6,000 square feet, 2 parking per dwelling.
            (x)   Cellular/antenna/communication tower. One space per tower for
repair vehicle.
            (y)   Office, banks, public administration. One space for each 200
square feet of floor area.
            (z)   Library, museum, post office. One parking space for each 300
square feet of floor area.
            (aa)   Funeral homes. Eight spaces for each chapel or parlor, plus
1 space for each funeral vehicle maintained on the premises. Aisle space shall
also be provided off the street for making up a funeral procession.
            (bb)   Furniture store, wholesale, auto sales, repair shops. Three
spaces for each 1,000 square feet of floor area. Open sales lots shall provide
2 spaces for each 5,000 square feet of lot area, but not less than 3 spaces.
            (cc)   Industrial, warehouse, manufacturing, processing plant,
storage, printing, publishing, handling of bulk goods, garden supply, and
building material sales. One space for each employee on maximum shift or 1
space for each 2,000 square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
            (dd)   Crude oil, gasoline or other liquid storage tanks. 1 space
for loading.
            (ee)   Research, experimental or testing station. One space for
each 350 square feet floor area.
            (ff)   Shopping centers. Five spaces for every 1,000 square feet of
floor area.
            (gg)   Marinas. One and 1/2 spaces per slip plus 1 space per
employee and a minimum of 20 twelve by twenty-five foot trailer stalls.
            (hh)   Public parks. Parking spaces will be determined on the type
of park developed and the uses found in the park.
            (ii)   All other retail. Ten spaces for every 1,000 square feet of
floor area.
Subd. 8   Off-Street Loading and Unloading Areas
   (1)   Required loading berths. In connection with any structure which is to
be erected or substantially altered and which requires the receipt or
distribution of materials or merchandise by vehicles, there shall be provided
adequate space for loading and unloading all vehicles used incidental to the
operation of the use as determined by the City. The size of the berths will
depend upon the size of the vehicles to be used. Upon receiving an application
for a particular use for a parcel or building which is not adequately provided
with loading and unloading facilities, and which, in the opinion of the City,
is to receive or distribute goods or services which will necessitate the use of
trucking to the extent that special consideration should be given to the
request, it shall be referred to the Planning Commission for study and the City
Council for determination.
   (2)   Location. All required loading berths shall be off-street and shall be
located on the same lot as the building or use to be served. A loading berth
shall not be located less than 25 feet from the intersection of 2 street right-
of-ways, nor less than 50 feet from a Residential District unless within a
building. Loading berths shall not be located in a required front yard.
   (3)   Access. Each required loading berth shall be located with the
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or public alley in a manner
that will least interfere with traffic.
   (4)   Surfacing. All loading berths and access ways shall be improved with a
durable material to control the dust and drainage according to a plan approved
by the City Engineer.
   (5)   Other uses not allowed. Any space allocated as a loading berth or
access drive as required by this chapter shall not be used for the storage of
goods, inoperable vehicles or be included as part of the space requirements
necessary to meet the off-street parking area.
   (6)   Screening. Screening of loading areas, waste storage areas, and
parking from pedestrian activity shall be required as provided in Subsection
1001.24.
Subd. 9   Minimum Parking Space and Aisle Dimensions
   (1)   Table. The parking dimensions for parking stalls, parking lots, and
parking drive aisles shall meet the following:
 
Angle of        Stall Stall  Curb Length Stall Depth Aisle Width Aisle Width
Parking         Width Length per Car                 One-Way     Two-Way
0 degrees       10'   20'    23'         9'          12'         24'
(parallel)
30 degrees      10'   20'    18'         17'4"       12'         24'
45 degrees      10'   20'    12'9"       19'10"      13'         24'
60 degrees      10'   20'    10'5"       21'         18'         24'
90 degrees      10'   20'    10'         20'         24'         24'
(perpendicular)
 
   (2)   Parking stalls length reduction. Parking stall length may be reduced
to 18 feet if sufficient room is provided beyond the parking stall for
automobile overhang. The overhangs shall not detrimentally impact or interfere
with adjacent landscaping or pedestrian movement and shall be free from
surrounding obstructions.
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-26-10; Am. Ord. 2018-11, passed 5-8-2018)
1001.20   SIGNS.
Subd. 1   Findings, Purpose and Effect
   (1)   Findings.
      a.   Exterior signs have a substantial impact on the character and
quality of the environment.
      b.   Signs provide an important medium through which individuals may
convey a variety of messages.
      c.   Signs can create traffic hazards and aesthetic concerns, thereby
threatening the public health, safety and welfare.
      d.   The City's zoning regulations have, since their inception, included
the regulation of signs in an effort to provide adequate means of expression
and to promote the economic viability of the business community, while
protecting the City and its citizens from a proliferation of signs of a type,
size, location and character that would adversely impact upon the aesthetics of
the community and threaten the health, safety and welfare of the community. The
regulation of the physical characteristics of signs within the City has had a
positive impact on traffic safety and the appearance of the community.
   (2)   Purpose and intent.  It is not the purpose or intent of this Section
to regulate the message displayed on any sign; nor is it the purpose or intent
of this Section to regulate any building design or any display not defined as a
sign, or any sign which cannot be viewed from outside a building. The purpose
and intent of this Section is to:
      a.   Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination and other
physical characteristics of signs within the City in order to promote the
public health, safety and welfare.
      b.   Maintain, enhance and improve the aesthetic environment of the City
by preventing visual clutter that is harmful to the appearance of the
community.
      c.   Improve the visual appearance of the City while providing for
effective means of communication, consistent with constitutional guarantees and
the City's goals of public safety and aesthetics.
      d.   Provide for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations
set forth herein under the zoning authority of the City.
   (3)   Effect. A sign may be erected, mounted, displayed or maintained in the
City if it is in conformance with the provisions of this section. The effect of
this Section, as more specifically set forth herein, is to:
      a.   Allow a wide variety of sign types in commercial zones, and a more
limited variety of signs in other zones, subject to the standards set forth in
this Section.
      b.   Allow certain small, unobtrusive signs incidental to the principal
use of a site in all zones when in compliance with the requirements of this
Section.
      c.   Prohibit signs whose location, size, type, illumination or other
physical characteristics negatively affect the environment and where the
communication can be accomplished by means having a lesser impact on the
environment and the public health, safety and welfare.
      d.   Provide for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of
this Section.
Subd. 2   Substitution
   The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this Section may
substitute non-commercial copy in lieu of any other commercial or non-
commercial copy. This substitution of copy may be made without any additional
approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any
inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or
favoring of any particular non-commercial message over any other non-commercial
message. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the
contrary.
Subd. 3   Measurements
   The following criteria shall be used in measuring a sign or building façade
in order to determine compliance with this Subsection:
   (1)   Measurements.
      a.   Sign area, freestanding signs.
         1.   The sign area shall be the area of the largest face including its
border area.
         2.   If it is of an irregular shape, the area shall be computed by
means of the smallest rectangle that will encompass the extreme limits.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e776b805fd11200858c1748733feb8a077c4b552/
IMAGES/0-0-0-290.jpg]               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
e776b805fd11200858c1748733feb8a077c4b552/IMAGES/0-0-0-292.jpg]
TOTAL AREA = (A)(B)                TOTAL AREA = (A)(B)
      b.   Sign area, cabinet.  The sign area is determined by calculating the
measurements of the outer dimensions of the frame or cabinet surrounding the
sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e776b805fd11200858c1748733feb8a077c4b552/
IMAGES/0-0-0-294.jpg]
TOTAL AREA = (A)(B)
      c.   Multiple cabinets.  For freestanding and projecting signs that
contain multiple cabinets on 1 structure, the modules together are counted as 1
sign face in order to compute the sign area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e776b805fd11200858c1748733feb8a077c4b552/
IMAGES/0-0-0-296.jpg]
TOTAL AREA= (A)(B)
      d.   Backed (double-faced) signs.
         1.   When 2 sign faces supported by the same sign structure are placed
back-to- back, or the distance between each sign face does not exceed 2 feet at
any point, the signs shall be regarded as a single sign.
         2.   The sign area shall be the area of the larger sign face.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e776b805fd11200858c1748733feb8a077c4b552/
IMAGES/0-0-0-298.jpg]
TOTAL AREA= (A)(B)
      e.   Round or 3-dimensional signs. Where a sign consists of 1 or more 3-
dimensional objects (i.e., balls, cubes, clusters or objects, sculpture, or
statue-like trademarks), the sign area shall be measured as their maximum
visible surface area from any vantage point.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e776b805fd11200858c1748733feb8a077c4b552/
IMAGES/0-0-0-300.jpg]
TOTAL AREA= (A)(B)
      f.   Individual sign elements.
         1.   When signs are constructed of individual elements, the area of
all sign elements, which together convey a single, complete message, shall be
considered as a single sign.
         2.   The sign area is determined by calculating the area of an
imaginary rectangle drawn around the sign elements.
         3.   Sign elements will be measured as 1 unit when the distance
between the elements is less than 2 times the dimension of each element.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e776b805fd11200858c1748733feb8a077c4b552/
IMAGES/0-0-0-302.jpg]
TOTAL AREA = (A)(B) + (C)(D)
      g.   Supporting framework or bracing on sign mounted to the building that
is clearly incidental to the display itself shall not be computed as sign area.
      h.   Signs on awnings and canopies.
         1.   When signs are incorporated into the awning, or canopy, the sign
area is determined by computing the area of an imaginary rectangle drawn around
the sign copy including all translucent areas of an illuminated awning or
canopy.
         2.   When the ends of awnings, and canopies are parallel and contain
signs, only 1 side is counted in addition to the sign on the front, however,
when a canopy is a freestanding structure, all sign faces shall be calculated.
         3.   Sign copy on a canopy shall not be greater than 25% of the canopy
area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e776b805fd11200858c1748733feb8a077c4b552/
IMAGES/0-0-0-304.jpg]
Opaque Background                  Translucent Background
   (2)   Height of freestanding signs.
      a.   The overall height of a freestanding sign or sign structure is
measured from the average finished grade at the base of the sign to the highest
points of the sign structure.
      b.   No berming or alteration of existing grade shall be permitted to
increase the height of any signs.
   (3)   Clearances. Clearances are measured from the finished grade directly
below the sign to the bottom of the sign structure.
   (4)   Measurement of dominant facade.
      a.   The portion of a principal buildings dominant facade shall be
calculated using the width of the first story exterior wall as described.
      b.   Exterior wall dimensions shall be measured at the base of the ground
floor, excluding screening walls, fences, and the like.
      c.   Alcoves, entryways and extruding portions shall be measured through
as though along a flat wall of a building.
      d.   Only the dominant facade shall be used for sign area calculations.
      e.   The total sign area for the entire building may not exceed the total
sign area allowed based on the dominant facade.
   (5)   Measurement of street frontage. Street frontage shall be measured
along the property line abutting the street right-of-way where access to the
site is obtained.
Subd. 4   Permit Required
   (1)   Except as allowed in Subdivision 5, no sign shall be erected, altered,
improved, reconstructed, maintained or moved in the City without first securing
a permit from the City:
      a.   The content of the message or speech displayed on the sign shall not
be reviewed or considered in determining whether to approve or deny a sign
permit.
      b.   Application for an administrative permit shall be filed by the
property owner or designated agent with the Zoning Administrator on forms to be
provided by the City.
      c.   Application for a permit shall contain the following information
unless waived by the City:
         1.   Names and addresses of the applicant, owners of the sign and lot.
         2.   The address at which any signs are to be erected.
         3.   The lot, block and addition at which the signs are to be erected
and the street on which they are to front.
         4.   Type and size of sign (e.g., wall sign, pylon sign).
         5.   A site plan to scale showing the location of lot lines, building
structures, parking areas, existing and proposed signs and any other physical
features.
         6.   Plans, location and specifications and method of construction and
attachment to the buildings or placement method of the ground.
         7.   Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing that the structure
is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount
required by this and all other laws and ordinances of the City.
         8.   Written consent of the owner or lessee of any site on which the
sign is to be erected.
         9.   Any electrical permit required and issued for the sign.
         10.   A detailed description of any electronic or electrical
components that are proposed to be added to the sign.
         11.   Other information to demonstrate compliance with this and all
other ordinances of the City.
      d.   The application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by
ordinance. Applications for amending administrative permits shall be
accompanied by a fee as established by ordinance.
      e.   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant, in writing, of
an incomplete application within 15 days of the date of submission.
      f.   The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and related
materials and shall determine whether the proposal is in compliance with all
applicable evaluation criteria, codes, ordinances, and applicable performance
standards set forth in this Section within 60 days of submission of a complete
application.
Subd. 5   Permit Not Required
   The following signs shall not require a permit and are allowed in addition
to those signs allowed by Subdivision 9 of this Section. These exemptions,
however, shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the
responsibility of its erection and maintenance, and its compliance with the
provisions of this Section or any other law or ordinance regulating the same.
   (1)   The changing of the display surface on a painted or printed sign only.
This exemption, however, shall apply only to poster replacement and/or on-site
changes involving sign painting elsewhere then directly on a building.
   (2)   Signs 2 square feet or less in size.
   (3)   One sign per property in residential districts not to exceed 9 square
feet.
   (4)   All noncommercial signs of any size posted in any number from August 1
in a state general election year until 10 days following general election, and
13 weeks prior to any special election until 10 days following the special
election.
   (5)   Official signs.
   (6)   Two signs shall be allowed per street frontage when a building is
offered for sale or lease, provided that:
      a.   Within the residential districts, no sign shall exceed 10 square
feet in area and 6 feet in height for single-family, 2-family, townhouse, and
quadraminium units; or 32 square feet in area or 8 feet in height for multi-
family or institutional uses.
      b.   Within all other zoning districts and in those cases where a parcel
of land exceeds 10 acres, regardless of its zoning, no sign shall exceed 32
square feet in area or 12 feet in height.
Subd. 6   Non-Conforming Signs
   Except as otherwise provided herein, permanent signs in existence on the
effective date of this Subsection, which are not in conformance with the
provisions of this Subsection shall be regarded as non-conforming signs and
regulated as provided for by Section
1001.22, Subd. 2.
Subd. 7   General Requirements
   (1)   Except as provided for by this Section, all signs shall be defined as
an accessory use.
   (2)   Design, construction, inspection and maintenance.
      a.   All signs and sign structures shall be properly maintained and shall
be kept in a safe and orderly condition. All signs on a single building shall
be repainted, repaired or replaced.
      b.   When electrical signs are installed, the installation shall be
subject to the Minnesota State Electrical Code and overhead electrical wiring
shall not be allowed.
      c.   Signs and sign structures not used for 12 consecutive months shall
be removed.
      d.   All signs shall incorporate materials and colors which are
compatible with the building upon which the sign is located. Compatible shall
include, but is not limited to, materials that are consistent with the
principal architectural features and colors of the buildings being identified.
All signs shall be of good quality, and shall be designed to include a minimal
amount of attractive and tasteful colors and design elements. The layout of the
sign shall give the sign a near and orderly appearance.
      e.   Except those signs listed in Subdivision 5, Permit Not Required, all
signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and permanently affixed to a
structural support in the ground or on the building.
      f.   No sign permitted by this Subsection shall, by reason of its
location, color or intensity, create a hazard to the safe, efficient movement
of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
      g.   Window signs shall not exceed 25% of the total window area on any
building facade.
      h.   Signs for motor fuel facilities shall be regulated by the sign
provisions for the zoning district in which the facility is located, except
that within a freestanding sign, an area not to exceed 16 square feet shall be
allowed for continuous display (no flashing, scrolling or other animation) of
electronic or non-electronic changeable copy identifying current fuel prices in
accordance with M.S. § 239.751.
   (3)   Placement.
      a.   All freestanding signs shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet from
property lines and shall not be located within drainage and utility easements.
      b.   No sign shall be attached to or shall hang from any building until
the City has approved all necessary wall attachments.
      c.   No berming or other device shall be permitted to increase the
elevation of any freestanding sign above the height allowed by the Subsection
herein.
      d.   No sign shall extend over a sidewalk, walkway, or other space
accessible to pedestrians, unless the bottom of the sign structure has a
minimum 8 foot clearance as measured from the bottom of the sign structure to
the ground directly below the sign. Exceptions are prohibited.
      e.   Building wall signs.
         1.   All signs, including exempt and temporary signs, installed on the
building shall be placed on the sign band. A sign band is the continuous
portion of the building facade that is unbroken by doors or architectural
building features, located between the upper and lower limits defined as
follows:
            (a)   Upper limit.
               i.   The upper limit shall be the windowsill of the second story
or in the absence of a windowsill or second story, 1/2 the distance between the
roof eave or roofline immediately above the lintel, awning, canopy or window
head of the first story.
               ii.   In no case shall the any element of the sign be placed
higher than 24 feet on the building, as measured from finished grade
immediately below the sign.
            (b)   Lower limit. The lower limit shall be 5 feet above finished
grade on the first.
      f.   Signs installed on the exterior building facade may be placed below
the designated sign band when the Building Official can be assured that the
public is satisfactorily protected from the sign and the sign is entirely over
private property.
      g.   Clear view triangle.
         1.   No sign or sign structures taller than 3 feet shall be located
within a clear view triangle area.
         2.   On a corner lot, the clear view triangle area is formed by the
curb lines or edge of street extended and the line connecting 55 feet from the
intersection of the street edges or curb lines extended.
   (4)   Sign illumination and brightness.
      a.   The artificial illumination of signs, either from an internal or
external source, shall be designed to eliminate negative impacts on surrounding
right-of-way and properties.
      b.   The following standards shall apply to all illuminated signs:
         1.   No sign or light source shall create an unduly distracting or
hazardous condition to a motorist, pedestrian or the general public. Colored
lights or colored sign faces shall not be used at a location or in a manner so
as to be confused or construed as traffic control devices.
         2.   External light sources shall be directed and shielded to limit
direct illumination of any object other than the sign.
         3.   Illuminated signs and signs with exposed light sources are
prohibited in all residential zoned properties, unless as allowed by a
conditional use permit.
         4.   Signs shall be illuminated only during business hours.
         5.   Signs shall not have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights, or
other illuminating devices that have a changing light intensity, brightness or
color.
         6.   No sign may be brighter than is necessary for clear and adequate
visibility.
         7.   Signs using an LED (light emitting diode) light source shall not
exceed a luminance of 500 candela per square meter (nits) between sunset and
sunrise (night), and shall not exceed a luminance level of 5,000 candela per
square meter between sunrise and sunset (day).
         8.   Signs using fluorescent, neon, or incandescent light sources
shall not exceed 12 watts per square foot of sign surface area.
         9.   Illumination which mimics movement by means of lighting
arrangement, lighting source, changes in either color or intensity of lighting
or other devices shall not be permitted.
         10.   Dynamic displays must be designed and equipped to freeze the
device in one position if a malfunction occurs. The display must also be
equipped with a means to immediately discontinue the display if it
malfunctions, and the sign owner must immediately stop the dynamic display when
notified by the city that it does not comply with the standards of this
section.
      c.   All signs which are illuminated shall be equipped with a mechanism
that automatically adjusts the brightness to ambient lighting conditions (e.g.
dusk, dawn, etc.) to ensure that the sign does not exceed an intensity of .3
foot-candle above ambient light levels as measured from 100 feet from the
sign’s face.
   (5)   Temporary signs.
      a.   The use of banners, pennants and similar devices shall require a
permit valid for no more than 10 consecutive days. No more than 3 permits per
business shall be granted during any 12-month period. The area of a banner,
pennant or similar devise shall not exceed the area allowances for the specific
zoning district in which the sign is located. Not more than 1 banner, pennant
or similar device shall be displayed upon a property at any one time.
      b.   Portable signs may not exceed 32 square feet and may not be
illuminated with any flashing device. Use of a portable sign shall require a
permit. The permit shall be valid for no more than 10 consecutive days. No more
than 6 permits per property shall be granted during any 12-month period.
   (6)   Multiple occupancy commercial and industrial buildings. When a single
principal building is devoted to 2 or more commercial or industrial principal
uses, signs shall be allowed subject to review and approval of the Zoning
Administrator based upon the following requirements:
      a.   The maximum individual sign sizes for multiple occupancy buildings
and individual businesses that may display a sign shall not exceed the maximum
provisions in the same zoning district in Subdivision 9 of this Section.
      b.   Commercial retail, office, or mixed use multiple occupancy buildings
may display a freestanding sign consistent with the applicable zoning district
provisions in section Subdivision 9 of this Section.
      c.   Individual tenants of a multiple occupancy building within a
commercial or industrial zoning district shall not display separate wall,
canopy, or marquee signs unless the tenant's business has an exclusive exterior
entrance and subject to the following requirements:
         1.   The number of individual wall, canopy, or marquee signs shall be
limited to 1 per tenant space, except that not more than 2 signs may be
displayed for the tenant of a corner suite or a suite that extends through the
building thus having 2 exterior walls.
         2.   Each sign shall be limited to the maximum wall sign size
permitted in the applicable zoning district provisions in Subdivision 9 of this
Section.
         3.   The sign shall be located only on the exterior wall of the tenant
space to which the sign permit is issued, but are not required to face a public
street.
         4.   A comprehensive sign plan is submitted that includes all of the
following information:
            (a)   A site plan to scale showing the location of lot lines,
buildings, structures, parking areas, existing and proposed signs, and any
other physical features of the area included within the proposed comprehensive
sign plan.
            (b)   Elevations to scale of buildings included within the
comprehensive sign plan including the location of existing or proposed wall,
canopy, or marquee signs.
            (c)   To scale plans for all existing and proposed signs of any
type included within the comprehensive sign plan indicating area, dimensions,
height, materials, colors, and means of illumination (if any).
      d.   Freestanding signs.
         1.   One freestanding sign shall be permitted for the entire
development.
         2.   Freestanding signs on individual tax lots located within the
development are not allowed.
         3.   The sign may be a maximum of 11 feet in height and a maximum of
80 square feet in area.
         4.   Additional freestanding sign.
            (a)   One additional freestanding sign may be permitted when there
is a minimum of 2 access streets.
            (b)   The access streets shall be a minimum of 500 lineal feet in
length each. The signs shall be separated by a minimum of 300 lineal feet.
         5.   The freestanding signs shall be either a monument or ground
mounted type sign and shall be designed to blend with the architectural
integrity of the center or complex.
      e.   No permit shall be issued for a new or replacement sign for an
individual tenant except upon a determination by the Zoning Administrator that
it is consistent with the approved comprehensive sign plan.
   (7)   Projecting signs. Where allowed by Subdivision 9, a projecting sign
shall comply with the following requirements:
      a.   Location.
         1.   A projecting sign shall be placed only on the sign band of the
first story facade, as regulated by Subdivision 7.
         2.   The sign may not extend above the windowsill of a second story
building or above the roof eave and/or roofline.
      b.   Clearance.
         1.   A minimum clearance of 8 feet between the bottom of the sign and
the finished grade below the sign is required.
         2.   At alleys when no curb exists a minimum height of 14 feet between
the bottom of the sign and the finished grade below the sign is required.
      c.   Projection from wall. Where a building is built to the property line
for its entire frontage, the projecting sign may extend from the building over
a public sidewalk a maximum of 42 inches and the sign structure shall be no
wider than 36 inches.
      d.   Maximum number, area and height.
         1.   Only 1 sign shall be allowed per building.
         2.   The sign area shall not exceed 20 square feet and shall be
deducted from the sign area allowed on a building.
      e.   Supporting structure. Sign supports and brackets shall be compatible
with the design and scale of the sign.
   (8)   Off premises signs.  Existing off premises signs erected prior to
January 8, 2008 are an allowed use subject to the following requirements:
      a.   The sign is defined as a principal use of the property upon which a
billboard is located. No approval shall be granted for a second principal use
upon a property when one of the principal uses is an off-premises sign allowed
by this Section.
      b.   Off premises signs shall be allowed only in non-residential
districts, on property abutting a federal interstate highway right-of-way.
      c.   Off-premises signs shall be visible and oriented toward a federal
interstate highway.
      d.   Off premises signs shall be freestanding and shall not be installed
on any building.
      e.   All off premises advertising signs shall be spaced a minimum of
1,500 lineal feet apart.
      f.   The sign face shall not exceed 400 square feet or 14 feet in
vertical height and 30 feet in horizontal length, whichever is less. Extensions
beyond the sign face shall not be permitted.
      g.   The off premises sign shall not exceed 24 feet in height, as
measured from finished grade, however, if a variance is granted the maximum
height shall not exceed 35 feet.
      h.   External illumination shall comply with this Subdivision 7.
Electrical wiring to the sign shall be located underground.
      i.   All off premises signs erected or moved shall be installed behind
the legal setback line of each parcel of property as determined by the Zoning
Code of the City of Dayton.
      j.   All structural supports for off premises signs shall be constructed
of steel.
      k.   Only flat, single-faced or double-faced off premises signs shall be
permitted.
      l.   Internally illuminated and/or animated off-premises signs are
prohibited, except that an off-premises sign may be converted to a digital off-
premises sign using LED or similar technology, subject to the following
requirements:
         1.   The conversion of an off-premises sign to a digital off- premises
sign shall be subject to the permitting requirements set forth in Subdivision
4, Permit Required.
         2.   Electrical wiring to the sign shall be located underground and
concealed by the vertical support structure of the digital off-premises sign.
         3.   All digital off-premises signs shall be equipped with ambient
light sensors. The brightness of a digital off-premises sign shall not be
brighter than is necessary for clear and adequate visibility as determined by
the Zoning Administrator and may not exceed the provisions of Subdivision 7(4).
         4.   The graphic display may not change or move more often than once
every 8 seconds. The images and messages displayed must be static, and the
transition from one static display to another must be instantaneous without any
motion, special effects, or active video.
         5.   At least 80% of all sides of the vertical support structure shall
be concealed with architectural embellishments consisting of stone, brick,
masonry panels, stucco, or synthetic material that has the appearance of stone,
brick, or stucco.
         6.   A digital off-premises sign must be at least 1,500 feet from any
residential districts and 4,000 feet from any other digital off-premises sign
on the same right- of-way within the City of Dayton.
         7.   A digital off-premises sign shall provide at least 14 feet of
clearance, as measured from the finished grade to the lowest portion of the
sign structure and shall not exceed 35 feet as measured from the finished grade
to the highest portion of the sign structure.
         8.   The digital off-premises sign face may be upgraded to the
existing square footage of the off-premises sign face square footage in
existence prior to February 13, 2018, and is not to exceed industry standard of
a height of 14 feet by 48 feet wide.
         9.   A digital off-premises sign shall allow for real-time public
safety messages, including Amber Alerts, severe weather alerts, and emergency
or public safety messages. Such messages shall be displayed upon the request of
the City or other governmental entity when such entity determines that the
rapid and effective dissemination of instructions and other essential
information can significantly help reduce loss of life and property. The owner
of the digital off-premises sign shall enter into a written agreement with the
City to post public service messages in an amount not to exceed 5 hours of
cumulative time in any one-month period.
Subd. 8   Prohibited Signs
   (1)   Any sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an
imitation of or resembles any official traffic control device or railroad sign
or signal, or emergency vehicle signs, or which attempts to direct the movement
of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   (2)   All signs larger than 400 square feet except in the Public Recreation
District.
   (3)   Billboards and off-premises signs, except those established prior to
January 8, 2008.
   (4)   Changeable copy signs, electronic, except as specifically allowed by
this Chapter.
   (5)   Content classified as Obscene as defined by M.S. § 617.241.
   (6)   Electronic graphic display signs except as allowed by this Chapter.
   (7)   Flashing signs.
   (8)   Multi-vision signs.
   (9)   Portable signs.
   (10)   Roof signs.
   (11)   Rotating signs.
   (12)   Shimmering signs.
   (13)   Signs painted, attached or in any other manner affixed to trees or
similar natural surfaces, or attached to utility poles, bridges, towers, or
similar public structures.
   (14)   Video display signs.
   (15)   Dynamic display signs except where off-premises signs established
prior to January 8, 2008 are updated to digital off-premises signs as allowed
in Subd. 7(8).
Subd. 9   District Regulations
   In addition to the signs allowed by Subdivision 5 of this Section, the
following signs shall be allowed within the specific Zoning Districts.
   (1)   Within the Agricultural and Residential Districts, the following
additional regulations apply:
      a.   One freestanding sign shall be allowed provided that:
         1.   The area of the sign shall not exceed 32 square feet.
         2.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 6
feet.
         3.   Signs shall be at least 10 feet from all property lines.
      b.   In addition to the sign allowed by Subd. 9(1) of this Subsection,
signs shall be allowed for a subdivision having not less than 5 lots or
dwelling units at its entrance from a major collector or arterial street
defined by the Dayton Comprehensive Plan provided that:
         1.   Not more than 1 sign shall be allowed at each entrance from a
major collector or arterial street.
         2.   The area of each sign shall not exceed 32 square feet.
         3.   Such signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 6 feet.
         4.   Except for those signs established under the provisions of Subd.
9(1)b.5, the sign shall not be illuminated.
         5.   For sign(s) requiring regular long-term maintenance, the sign(s)
shall be located on separate or common space outlots of sufficient size and
area to accommodate said structure:
            (a)   An association or other form of deed restriction and
ownership deemed acceptable by the Zoning Administrator and involving all the
properties within the subdivision shall be required, which shall own and be
responsible for the upkeep, perpetual maintenance, taxes, insurance, utilities
and other costs associated with the sign(s) and the outlot upon which it is
located.
            (b)   The association rules or by-laws, or similar legal document,
shall specify how the aforementioned sign responsibilities will be delegated
and paid for. Such legal document shall be subject to the review and approval
of the City Attorney.
            (c)   Separate or common space outlots for signs shall be
considered and planned for at the time of preliminary plat application and be
included in the final plat. The subdivision development contract between the
City and the developer shall specify the designated use of the outlot(s), its
ownership and the respective responsibilities regarding the outlot.
         6.   The area around the sign shall be landscaped in such a manner to
accent and enhance the sign while remaining sensitive to the natural features
of the site. Detailed site and landscape plans shall be included with each sign
permit application and shall be subject approval by the Zoning Administrator.
         7.   The design and construction of area identification signs shall be
done with masonry materials (brick, stone, etc) to keep maintenance and upkeep
costs to a minimum and to minimize the potential for vandalism. Area
identification signs are to be aesthetically pleasing when designed and
constructed. The sign shall be compatible with nearby structures in the area.
Detailed construction plans and a materials list shall be included with each
sign permit application and shall be subject approval by the Zoning
Administrator.
      c.   Additional signs shall be allowed upon approval of a final plat for
a subdivision having 5 or more lots provided that:
         1.   One (1) sign shall be allowed per project or subdivision or 1
sign for each frontage to a major collector or arterial street, whichever is
greater.
         2.   The area of the sign shall not exceed 32 square feet for parcels
less than 4 acres and not to exceed 64 square feet for parcels 4 acres or
greater.
         3.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 8 feet
for parcels less than 4 acres and a maximum height of 10 feet for parcels 4
acres or greater.
         4.   The sign shall not be displayed for a period to exceed 36 months
from the date a permit is issued for the sign or until building permits have
been issued for 85% of the lots or dwelling units within the subdivision,
whichever is less restrictive.
   (2)   Within the GMU-3, General Mixed Use-Historic Village District/R-O, Old
Village Residential District - V-M, Village Mixed Use District, the following
additional regulations apply:
      a.   One wall, canopy or marquee sign (one per tenant) shall be allowed
provided that:
         1.   The area of the sign shall not exceed 10% of the wall area, up to
a maximum of 64 square feet.
      b.   One temporary sign up to 32 square feet in area as regulated by
Subdivision 9(4) of this Section.
      c.   In addition to the sign area allowances established by a. and b.
above, a sign shall be allowed for a subdivision having not less than 3 lots or
principal buildings at its entrance from a major collector or arterial street
defined by the Dayton Comprehensive Plan provided that:
         1.   Not more than 1 sign shall be allowed at each entrance from a
major collector or arterial street.
         2.   The area of each sign shall not exceed 32 square feet.
         3.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 8
feet.
         4.   The sign(s) shall be located to accommodate said sign and related
landscaping to meet all setback requirements. If the sign(s) are to be located
on outlots, the outlots shall be designated on the preliminary plat and
detailed plans for the area identification signs shall be submitted with the
final plat.
         5.   The area around the sign shall be landscaped in such a manner to
accent and enhance the sign while remaining sensitive to the natural features
of the site. Detailed site and landscape plans shall be included with each sign
permit application and shall be subject to review and approval of the Zoning
Administrator.
         6.   The design and construction of the sign shall be done with
masonry materials (brick, stone, etc) to keep maintenance and upkeep costs to a
minimum and to minimize the potential for vandalism. The signs are to be
aesthetically pleasing when designed and constructed. The sign shall be
compatible with nearby structures in the area. Detailed construction plans and
a materials list shall be included with each sign permit application and shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Zoning Administrator.
      d.   Additional signs shall be allowed upon approval of a final plat for
a subdivision having not less than 3 lots or approval of site and building
plans for 1 lot by the Zoning Administrator provided that:
         1.   One sign shall be allowed per project or subdivision or 1 sign
for each frontage to a major collector or arterial street, whichever is
greater.
         2.   The area of the sign shall not exceed 32 square feet for parcels
less than 4 acres and not to exceed  64 square feet for parcels 4 acres or
greater.
         3.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 8 feet
for parcels less than 4 acres and a maximum height of 10 feet for parcels 4
acres or greater.
         4.   The sign shall not be displayed for a period to exceed 36 months
from the date a permit is issued for the sign or until building permits have
been issued for 85% of the lots or dwelling units within the subdivision,
whichever is less restrictive.
   (3)   Within the B-1, Office Business District, the following additional
regulations apply:
      a.   One freestanding sign shall be allowed provided that:
         1.   The area of the sign shall not exceed 64 square feet.
         2.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 8
feet.
         3.   Signs shall be at least 10 feet from all property lines.
      b.   One wall, canopy or marquee sign (one per tenant) shall be allowed
provided that:
         1.   The area of the sign shall not exceed 10% of the wall area, up to
a maximum of 80 square feet.
      c.   One temporary sign as regulated by Subdivision 7 of this Section.
      d.   In addition to the sign area allowances established by a., b. and c.
of this Subsection, a sign shall be allowed for a subdivision having not less
than 3 lots or principal buildings at its entrance from a major collector or
arterial street defined by the Dayton Comprehensive Plan provided that:
         1.   Not more than 1 sign shall be allowed at each entrance from a
major collector or arterial street.
         2.   The area of each sign shall not exceed 64 square feet.
         3.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 10
feet.
         4.   The sign(s) shall be located to accommodate said sign and related
landscaping to meet all setback requirements. If the sign(s) are to be located
on outlots, the outlots shall be designated on the preliminary plat and
detailed plans for the area identification signs shall be submitted with the
final plat.
         5.   The area around the sign shall be landscaped in such a manner to
accent and enhance the sign while remaining sensitive to the natural features
of the site. Detailed site and landscape plans shall be included with each sign
permit application and shall be subject to review and approval of the Zoning
Administrator.
         6.   The design and construction of the sign shall be done with
masonry materials (brick, stone, etc) to keep maintenance and upkeep costs to a
minimum and to minimize the potential for vandalism. The signs are to be
aesthetically pleasing when designed and constructed. The sign shall be
compatible with nearby structures in the area. Detailed construction plans and
a materials list shall be included with each sign permit application and shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Zoning Administrator.
      e.   Additional signs shall be allowed upon approval of a final plat for
a subdivision having not less than 3 lots or approval of site and building
plans for 1 lot by the Zoning Administrator provided that:
         1.   One sign shall be allowed per project or subdivision or 1 sign
for each frontage to a major collector or arterial street, whichever is
greater.
         2.   The area of the sign shall not exceed  32 square feet for parcels
less than 4 acres and not to exceed 64 square feet for parcels 4 acres or
greater.
         3.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 8 feet
for parcels less than 4 acres and a maximum height of 10 feet for parcels 4
acres or greater.
         4.   The sign shall not be displayed for a period to exceed 36 months
from the date a permit is issued for the sign or until building permits have
been issued for 85% of the lots or dwelling units within the subdivision,
whichever is less restrictive.
      f.   In addition to the freestanding sign allowed by (3)a of this
Subsection, convenience food uses with drive through facilities may display
additional signs, provided that:
         1.   Not more than 1 sign is allowed.
         2.   The sign shall be single sided with an area not to exceed 50
square feet.
         3.   The height of the sign shall not exceed 6 feet including its base
or pole measured from grade to the top of the structure.
         4.   The sign shall not encroach into any principal building setback
and shall be located directly adjacent to the drive through aisle and oriented
in such a manner so that the sign provides information to the drive through
patrons only and does not impair site visibility or obstruct circulation.
   (4)   Within the B-2, Neighborhood Commercial District, the following
regulations apply:
      a.   One freestanding sign shall be allowed provided that:
         1.   The area of the sign shall not exceed 64 square feet.
         2.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 10
feet.
      b.   One wall, canopy or marquee sign (one per tenant) shall be allowed
provided that:
         1.   The area of the sign shall not exceed 10% of the wall area, up to
a maximum of 80 square feet.
      c.   One temporary sign up to 32 square feet as regulated by Subdivision
9(4) of this Section.
      d.   In addition to the sign area allowances established by a., b. and c.
of this Subsection, a sign shall be allowed for a subdivision having not less
than 3 lots or principal buildings at its entrance from a major collector or
arterial street defined by the Dayton Comprehensive Plan provided that:
         1.   Not more than 1 sign shall be allowed at each entrance from a
major collector or arterial street.
         2.   The area of each sign shall not exceed 64 square feet.
         3.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 10
feet.
         4.   The sign(s) shall be located to accommodate said sign and related
landscaping to meet all setback requirements. If the sign(s) are to be located
on outlots, these outlots shall be designated on the preliminary plat and
detailed plans for the area identification signs shall be submitted with the
final plat.
         5.   The area around the sign shall be landscaped in such a manner to
accent and enhance the sign while remaining sensitive to the natural features
of the site. Detailed site and landscape plans shall be included with each sign
permit application and shall be subject to review and approval of the Zoning
Administrator.
         6.   The design and construction of the sign shall be done with
masonry materials (brick, stone, etc) to keep maintenance and upkeep costs to a
minimum and to minimize the potential for vandalism. The signs are to be
aesthetically pleasing when designed and constructed. The sign shall be
compatible with nearby structures in the area. Detailed construction plans and
a materials list shall be included with each sign permit application and shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Zoning Administrator.
      e.   Additional signs shall be allowed upon approval of a final plat for
a subdivision having not less than 3 lots or approval of site and building
plans for 1 lot by the Zoning Administrator provided that:
         1.   One sign shall be allowed per project or subdivision or 1 sign
for each frontage to a major collector or arterial street, whichever is
greater.
         2.   The area of the sign shall not exceed 32 square feet for parcels
less than 4 acres and not to exceed 64 square feet for parcels 4 acres or
greater.
         3.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 8 feet
for parcels less than 4 acres and a maximum height of 10 feet for parcels 4
acres or greater.
         4.   The sign shall not be displayed for a period to exceed 36 months
from the date a permit is issued for the sign or until building permits have
been issued for 85% of the lots or dwelling units within the subdivision,
whichever is less restrictive.
   (5)   Within the B-3, General Business District and B-P, Business Park
District, the following additional regulations apply:
      a.   One freestanding sign shall be allowed provided that:
         1.   The area of the sign shall not exceed 64 square feet.
         2.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 11
feet.
      b.   One wall, canopy or marquee sign (one per tenant or two per tenant
if building fronts on two street right-of-ways) shall be allowed provided that:
         1.   The area of the sign shall not exceed 10% of the wall area, up to
a maximum of 100 square feet.
         2.   Signs shall be placed no higher than 24 feet above grade.
      c.   One temporary sign up to 32 square feet as regulated by Subdivision
9(4) of this Section.
      d.   In addition to the sign area allowances established by a., b. and c.
of this Subsection, a sign shall be allowed for a subdivision having not less
than 3 lots or principal buildings at its entrance from a major collector or
arterial street defined by the Dayton Comprehensive Plan provided that:
         1.   Not more than 1 sign shall be allowed at each entrance from a
major collector or arterial street.
         2.   The area of each sign shall not exceed 64 square feet.
         3.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 10
feet.
         4.   The sign(s) shall be located to accommodate said sign and related
landscaping to meet all setback requirements. If the sign(s) are to be located
on outlots, these outlots shall be designated on the preliminary plat and
detailed plans for the area identification signs shall be submitted with the
final plat.
         5.   The area around the sign shall be landscaped in such a manner to
accent and enhance the sign while remaining sensitive to the natural features
of the site. Detailed site and landscape plans shall be included with each sign
permit application and shall be subject to review and approval of the Zoning
Administrator.
         6.   The design and construction of the sign shall be done with the
masonry materials (brick, stone, etc) to keep maintenance and upkeep costs to a
minimum and to minimize the potential for vandalism. The signs are to be
aesthetically pleasing when designed and constructed. The sign shall be
compatible with nearby structures in the area. Detailed construction plans and
a materials list shall be included with each sign permit application and shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Zoning Administrator.
      e.   Additional signs shall be allowed upon approval of a final plat for
a subdivision having not less than 3 lots or approval of site and building
plans for 1 lot by the Zoning Administrator provided that:
         1.   One sign shall be allowed per project or subdivision or 1 sign
for each frontage to a major collector or arterial street, whichever is
greater.
         2.   The area of the sign shall not exceed 32 square feet for parcels
less than 4 acres and not to exceed 64 square feet for parcels 4 acres or
greater.
         3.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 8 feet
for parcels less than 4 acres and a maximum height of 10 feet for parcels 4
acres or greater.
         4.   The sign shall not be displayed for a period to exceed 36 months
from the date a permit is issued for the sign or until building permits have
been issued for 85% of the lots or dwelling units within the subdivision,
whichever is less restrictive.
      f.   In addition to the freestanding sign allowed by (5)a of this
Subsection, convenience food uses with drive through facilities may display
additional signs, provided that:
         1.   Not more than 1 sign is allowed.
         2.   The sign shall be single sided with an area not to exceed 50
square feet.
         3.   The height of the sign shall not exceed 6 feet including its base
or pole measured from grade to the top of the structure.
         4.   The sign shall not encroach into any principal building setback
and shall be located directly adjacent to the drive through aisle and oriented
in such a manner so that the sign provides information to the drive through
patrons only and does not impair site visibility or obstruct circulation.
   (6)   Within the B-4, Commercial/Industrial District, 1-1, Light Industrial
District and I-2, Heavy Industrial District, the following regulations apply:
      a.   One freestanding sign shall be allowed provided that:
         1.   The area of the sign shall not exceed 64 square feet.
         2.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 8
feet.
      b.   One wall, canopy or marquee sign (1 per tenant or 2 per tenant if
building fronts on 2 street right-of-ways) shall be allowed provided that:
         1.   The area of the sign shall not exceed 10% of the wall area, up to
a maximum of 100 square feet.
         2.   Signs shall be placed below eave of building.
      c.   Off-premises signs as regulated in Subdivision 7 of this Section.
      d.   One temporary sign up to 32 square feet as regulated by Subdivision
7 of this Section.
      e.   In addition to the sign area allowances established by a., b. and c.
of this Subsection, a sign shall be allowed for a subdivision having not less
than 3 lots or principal buildings at its entrance from a major collector or
arterial street defined by the Dayton Comprehensive Plan provided that:
         1.   Not more than 1 sign shall be allowed at each entrance from a
major collector or arterial street.
         2.   The area of each sign shall not exceed 64 square feet.
         3.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 10
feet.
         4.   The sign(s) shall be located to accommodate said sign and related
landscaping to meet all setback requirements. If the sign(s) are to be located
on outlots, these outlots shall be designated on the preliminary plat and
detailed plans for the area identification signs shall be submitted with the
final plat.
         5.   The area around the sign shall be landscaped in such a manner to
accent and enhance the sign while remaining sensitive to the natural features
of the site. Detailed site and landscape plans shall be included with each sign
permit application and shall be subject to review and approval of the Zoning
Administrator.
         6.   The design and construction of the sign shall be done with
masonry materials (brick, stone, etc.) to keep maintenance and upkeep costs to
a minimum and to minimize the potential for vandalism. The signs are to be
aesthetically pleasing when designed and constructed. The sign shall be
compatible with nearby structures in the area. Detailed construction plans and
a materials list shall be included with each sign permit application and shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Zoning Administrator.
      f.   Additional signs shall be allowed upon approval of a final plat for
a subdivision having not less than 3 lots or approval of site and building
plans for 1 lot by the Zoning Administrator provided that:
         1.   One sign shall be allowed per project or subdivision or 1 sign
for each frontage to a major collector or arterial street, whichever is
greater.
         2.   The area of the sign shall not exceed 32 square feet for parcels
less than 4 acres and not to exceed 64 square feet for parcels 4 acres or
greater.
         3.   Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of 8 feet
for parcels less than 4 acres and a maximum height of 10 feet for parcels 4
acres or greater.
         4.   The sign shall not be displayed for a period to exceed 36 months
from the date a permit is issued for the sign or until building permits have
been issued for 85% of the lots or dwelling units within the subdivision,
whichever is less restrictive.
      g.   In addition to the freestanding sign allowed by (7)a of this
Subsection, convenience food uses with drive through facilities may display
additional signs, provided that:
         1.   Not more than 1 sign is allowed.
         2.   The sign shall be single sided with an area not to exceed 50
square feet.
         3.   The height of the sign shall not exceed 6 feet including its base
or pole measured from grade to the top of the structure.
         4.   The sign shall not encroach into any principal building setback
and shall be located directly adjacent to the drive through aisle and oriented
in such a manner so that the sign provides information to the drive through
patrons only and does not impair site visibility or obstruct circulation.
   (7)   Within the Public Recreation District, the following additional
regulations apply:
      a.   Freestanding sign.  The area of a freestanding sign may not exceed
64 square feet each side with a maximum height of 11 feet and may include
electronic changeable copy.
      b.   Wall, canopy, or marquee signs.  No 1 sign shall exceed 64 square
feet.
      c.   Electronic readerboard space shall be allowed separately or in
combination on a sign not to exceed the allowable sign area. The message
displayed on electronic reader board signs shall be depicted in one statement
and not a continuing sentence or flow of information.
Subd. 10   Enforcement and Penalties
   (1)   This Chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may institute in the name of the City
appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator.
   (2)   Inspection. All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject
to inspection by the Zoning Administrator.
   (3)   The City reserves the right to require the removal at the owner's
expense of any sign when the requirements of this Section are not completely
followed and adhered to, or if a sign is not properly maintained or falls into
a state of disrepair. The City shall not have any obligation or liability to
replace any sign when removed by the City.
   (4)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with, or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined or penalized not more than the
maximum levels established by the state for misdemeanor offenses.
Subd. 11   Severability
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Chapter is
for any reason held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the
validity or enforceability of the remaining portions of this Sign Ordinance.
The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the Sign Ordinance
in each section, subsection, sentence, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the
fact that any 1 or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases
be declared invalid.
(Prior Code, § 1001.12, Subd. 2)  (Am. Ord. 2004-01, passed 3-9-2004; Am. Ord.
2008-01, passed 1-8-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-13, passed 9-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2012-06,
passed 4-24-2012; Am. Ord. 2014-04, passed 3-25-2014; Am. Ord. 2018-06, passed
2-13-2018)
1001.21   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND FACILITIES.
Subd. 1   Findings.
   The Federal Communications Act of 1934 as amended by the Telecommunications
Act of 1996 (the Act) grants the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
exclusive jurisdiction over:
   (1)   The regulation of the environmental effects of radio frequency
emissions from telecommunications facilities and the regulation of radio signal
interference among users of the radio frequency spectrum.
   (2)   The Telecommunications Act of 1996 preserves the authority of the City
to regulate the placement, construction, and modification of towers, antenna
support structures and telecommunications facilities, as hereinafter defined,
in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
Subd. 2   Purpose.
   In order to accommodate the communication needs of residents and businesses
while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
community, the Council finds that these regulations are necessary to:
   (1)   Regulate the placement, construction and modification of towers and
telecommunications facilities in accordance with all applicable code
requirements, while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the
development of the competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace in the
City of Dayton.
   (2)   Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to
accommodate new personal wireless service antennas in order to reduce the
number of new towers necessary to serve the community.
   (3)   The specific purposes of this Subsection are:
      a.   To regulate the location of towers and telecommunications facilities
in the City;
      b.   To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and telecommunications facilities;
      c.   To minimize adverse visual impacts of towers and telecommunications
facilities from the view of persons located on property contiguous to the site
through careful design, sitting, landscaping, and innovative camouflaging
techniques that will screen the tower equipment in a manner to complement
existing structures;
      d.   To promote and encourage shared use/collocation of towers and
antenna support structures as a primary option rather than construction of
additional single-use towers;
      e.   To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties caused by towers
and telecommunications facilities by ensuring the structures are soundly and
carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained and removed when no
longer used or determined to be structurally unsound;
      f.   To ensure that towers and telecommunications facilities are
compatible with surrounding land uses;
      g.   To facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunications services
to the residents and businesses of the City in an orderly fashion;
      h.   To require antenna and tower sites to be secured in order to
discourage trespassing and vandalism; and
      i.   To establish criteria under which wireless communication providers
may utilize public utility structures within City controlled public right-of-
way and drainage and utility easements adjacent to public right-of-way for
collocation of antennas.
Subd. 3   Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Subsection, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Antenna
   Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or transmitting
electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to, directional antennas,
such as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and omnidirectional
antennas, such as whip antennas.
   Antenna Support Structure
   Any building or other structure other than a tower which can be used for
location of telecommunications facilities. An Antenna Support Structure must be
at least 75 feet tall.
   Applicant
   Any person that applies for a tower development permit.
   Application
   The process by which the owner of land within the City submits a request to
develop, construct, build, modify, erect or place a tower or antenna upon the
land. Application includes all written documentation, verbal statements and
representations, in whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to the City
concerning the request.
   Engineer
   Any structural engineer licensed by the State of Minnesota.
   Fixed Wireless Signal
   Any commercial nonbroadcast communication signals transmitted via wireless
technology to and/or from a fixed customer location, which may include the
following: audio, video and data communications. This definition does not
include broadcast communication signals such as: AM radio, FM radio, amateur
(“ham”) radio, citizens band (CB) radio, and digital audio radio service (DARS)
signals.
   Initial Loading Capacity
   The weight and effective surface area of the applicant’s telecommunications
facilities that will be installed on the applicant’s tower within 3 months
after construction of the tower is completed.
   Owner
   Any person with fee title or long term (exceeding 5 years) leasehold to any
land within the City who desires to develop, construct, build, modify, erect or
place a tower or antenna upon the land.
   Person
   Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
other legal entity, private or public, whether for profit or not for profit.
   Personal Wireless Services
   Commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier
wireless exchange services.
   Public Utility
   Persons, corporations, or governments supplying gas, electric,
transportation, water, sewer, or landline telephone service to the general
public. For the purpose of this chapter, personal wireless services shall not
be considered Public Utility uses, and are defined separately.
   Stealth
   Any tower or telecommunications facility which is designed to blend into the
surrounding environment. Stealth shall not require towers or telecommunications
facilities to be totally hidden, and does not necessarily exclude the use of
un-camouflaged lattice, guyed or monopole tower designs.
   Telecommunications Facilities
   Any cables, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas and any other equipment or
facilities associated with the transmission or reception of communications
which a person seeks to locate or has installed upon or near a tower or antenna
support structure. However, the term Telecommunications Facilities shall not
include:
   a.   Any satellite earth station antenna 2 meters in diameter or less which
is located in an area zoned industrial or commercial; or
   b.   Any satellite earth station antenna 1 meter or less in diameter,
regardless of zoning category.
   Tower
   Any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure, self-supporting lattice,
guyed or monopole structure, or combination thereof taller than 15 feet,
including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended
primarily for the purpose of supporting telecommunications facilities or
similar apparatus above grade. The term Tower shall not include amateur radio
operator’s equipment, as licensed by the FCC.
   An area of the City specifically designated by the City Council to permit
towers and telecommunications facilities in closer proximity to one another
than allowed in Subdivision 7(3) of this Subsection.
   Tower, Multiuser
   A tower which is designed to accommodate the antennas of more than 1
personal wireless service provider or governmental entity.
Subd. 4   Development of Towers
   (1)   A tower shall be a conditional use of land in all zoning districts. No
person shall build, erect or construct a tower upon any plot of land within any
zoning district set forth above unless a conditional use permit has been issued
by the City Council.
   (2)   The following standards apply to all conditional use permits for
towers and antennae:
      a.   The site must comply with the performance standards set forth in
Subd. 5;
      b.   No outdoor storage shall be permitted on the tower site;
      c.   Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved;
   (3)   The location and construction of a tower or antennae, shall be subject
to all zoning, building code and site plan requirements of the city.
Subd 5.   Performance Standards.
All towers and antennae located within the city must conform to the applicable
performance standards contained in this section.
   (1)   Collocation requirements. In all areas of the city, antennas and
towers shall be located on existing structures, buildings or towers within a
one-mile radius of the proposed location unless the proposed antenna or tower
cannot be accommodated on an existing structure, building or tower due to one
or more of the following reasons:
      a.   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing or approved structure, building or tower, as documented by a qualified
and licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved structure,
building or tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate
planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost.
      b.   The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting
the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the structure, building
or tower as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer and
the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
      c.   An existing or approved structure, building or tower within the one-
mile radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to
function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional
engineer.
      d.   Other unforeseen reasons make it infeasible to locate the planned
telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved structure, building
or tower.
      e.   If the proposed antenna or tower cannot be accommodated on an
existing structure, building or tower for the reasons set forth in this
section, antennas and towers may be located on available public or
institutional land. Antennas placed on public or institutional land
(government, school, utility, public park land, and church sites) in
residential districts shall be incorporated into the principal structure, when
available, rather than placed on a tower separate from the principal building.
On public property, antennas shall be mounted on structures, when available,
that serve other purposes such as light standards or emergency siren poles. If
structures are not available or are unable to accommodate proposed antennas or
towers, a tower separate from the principal structure may be constructed.
         If public or institutional land is not available, antennas and towers
may be located on private property, with a conditional use permit, limited to
the following priority areas:
         1.   Priority one is limited to only B-l, B-2, B-3, B-4, 1-1, 1-2, and
BP zoning districts and/or land guided for commercial or industrial land use on
the adopted Future Land Use Plan.
         2.   Priority two is limited to only RM and RH zoning districts and/or
land guided for medium or high density residential land use on the adopted
Future Land Use Plan.
      f.   Any proposed tower shall be designed, structurally, electrically,
and in all respects, to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and
comparable antennas for at least 2 additional users if the tower is over 100
feet or for at least 1 additional user if the tower is over 75 feet in height.
Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the
tower to accept antennas mounted at varying heights.
   (2)   Antenna collocation requirements. The placement of personal wireless
service antennas on roofs, walls, and existing towers may be approved by the
City, with a building permit. In addition to the submittal requirements
required elsewhere in this Code, an application for a building permit for
antennas to be mounted on an existing structure shall be accompanied by the
following information:
      a.   A site plan showing the location of the proposed antennas on the
structure and documenting that the request meets the requirements of this Code;
      b.   A building plan showing the construction of the antennas and the
proposed method of attaching them to the existing structure, and documenting
that the request meets the requirements of this Code;
      c.   Certification by a qualified and licensed professional engineer
indicating the existing structure’s or tower’s ability to support the antennas.
   (3)   Tower and antenna design requirements. Proposed or modified towers and
antennas shall meet the following design requirements:
      a.   Towers and antennae shall be designed to blend into the surrounding
environment through the use of color and design and camouflaging architectural
treatment;
      b.   Towers shall be of a monopole design unless the City Council
determines that an alternative design would better blend into the surrounding
environment;
      c.   The use of guyed towers is prohibited. Towers must be self-
supporting without the use of wires, cables, beams or other designs; and
      d.   The base of the tower shall occupy no more than 500 square feet and
the top of the tower shall be no larger than the base.
      e.   Antenna attachments to towers shall be as inconspicuous as possible.
      f.   Ground equipment shall be screened from all property lines.
Screening shall be accomplished through landscaping and shall be of an
evergreen type and tall enough to limit the view of the equipment. Any fencing
shall be similarly screening. Any equipment or storage buildings shall meet the
standards of the underlying zoning district for building materials and meet the
following design requirements:
         1.   Include at least 2 major exterior materials in 2 complementary
colors.
         2.   Roof design shall be pitched.
         3.   All service doors shall be painted to match primary materials or
serve as an accent element.
         4.   Colored building elevations shall be submitted at time of
conditional use permit application.
         5.   The City Council may consider alternative designs through the
conditional use permit process.
   (4)   Maximum height.
      a.   The height of towers shall be determined by measuring the vertical
distance from the tower’s point of contact with the ground or rooftop to the
highest point of the tower, including all antennas or other attachments. When
towers are mounted upon other structures, the combined height of the structure
at the tower’s point of attachment and tower must meet the height restrictions
of this section.
      b.   Towers are exempt from the maximum height restrictions of the
districts where located.
      c.   In residential zoned property where a tower or antennae is located
on public or institutional land, the maximum height of any tower, including all
antennas and other attachments, shall not exceed 1 foot for each 2 feet the
tower is set back from abutting residential property up to a maximum height of
120 feet.
      d.   In mixed-use zoned or guided property, antennas and towers are not
permitted.
      e.   In all Non-Residential Zoning Districts, the maximum height of any
tower, including all antennas and other attachments, shall not exceed 1 foot
for each 2 feet the tower is set back from protected residential property, up
to a maximum height of 150 feet. The City Council may allow towers up to 200
feet high if the applicant can demonstrate, based upon the topography of the
site and surrounding area, siting of the antenna, antenna design, surrounding
tree cover and structures and/or through the use of screening, that off-site
views of the tower will be minimized. Owners of certain antenna structures more
than 200 feet above ground level at the site must notify the Federal Aviation
Administration and register with the Federal Communications Commission.
      f.   The City encourages the use of City property in accordance with the
procedures of the City Charter and Code. The City shall have no obligation
whatsoever to use City property for these purposes.
      g.   No telecommunications facilities may be located within a distance
equal to twice the height of the proposed tower of any use that involves the
storage, distribution, or sale of volatile, flammable, explosive, or hazardous
materials such as LP gas, propane, gasoline, natural gas, and corrosive or
dangerous chemicals (hereinafter referred to a flammable storage use) unless
the applicant can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the City, that no danger
exists in locating the telecommunications facilities in the proposed proximity
to the flammable storage use.
      h.   Height exceptions. The following are exceptions to the maximum
height restrictions for towers:
         1.   Multiuser towers. Multiuser towers may exceed the height
limitations of this section by up to 20 feet, provided that if only the
antennas of a single personal wireless service provider will be attached to the
tower at the time of application, the additional 20 feet will not be used but
will remain vacant for use by a second personal wireless service provider.
         2.   Amateur radio antenna. In accordance with the preemption ruling
PRB1 of the Federal Communications Commission, towers supporting amateur radio
antennas that comply with all other requirements of this section are exempted
from the height limitations of this section up to a total height of 70 feet,
provided that such height is technically necessary to receive and broadcast
amateur radio signals.
         3.   Attached to structures. Towers and other antenna devices which
are attached to a structure and not freestanding may be located in residential
zoned districts under the following conditions:
            (a)   The towers and antennas are located upon existing or proposed
structures allowed as principal or conditional uses in the underlying zoning
district and/or upon public structures; and
            (b)   The towers and antennas are limited to a height of 15 feet
projecting above the structure. The City Council may permit antenna heights of
up to 25 feet above the structure if the applicant can demonstrate that, by a
combination of antenna design, positioning of the structure and/or by screening
erected or already in place on the structure, off site views of the antenna are
minimized to accepted levels.
         4.   Public utility structures. Public utility structures, including,
but not limited to, water towers, antennas, lights and signals, power and
telephone poles, and poles supporting emergency warning devices.
         5.   Wireless antennas attached to public utility structures. Wireless
antennas located on or attached to public utility structures within public
right-of-way or in drainage and utility easements adjacent to public right-of-
way allowed pursuant to a lease or master agreement with the City providing for
review of the location, height and safety of the structure and antenna.
Subd. 6   Setbacks.
Towers shall conform with each of the minimum setback requirements:
   (1)   Principal structure setbacks. Towers shall meet the principal
structure setbacks of the underlying zoning district except that towers may be
located 5 feet from the rear property line, provided that the rear property
line abuts industrial or commercial zoned property and the tower does not
encroach upon any easements.
   (2)   Public rights-of-way and roadway easements. Towers shall be set back
from all public rights-of-way and roadway easements by a minimum distance equal
to 1/2 of the height of the tower including all antennas and attachments.
   (3)   Location between principal structure and public street. Towers shall
not be located between a principal structure and a public street, with the
following exceptions:
      a.   In Industrial and Commercial Zoning Districts, towers may be placed
within a side yard abutting an internal industrial street.
      b.   On sites adjacent to public streets on all sides, towers may be
placed within a side yard abutting a local street.
   (4)   Setback reduction. A tower’s setback or its location in relation to a
public street maybe reduced through a conditional use permit, at the sole
discretion of the City Council provided ground equipment is screened.
   (5)   Exceptions. The following are exceptions to the setback provision for
towers and antennas:
      a.   The setbacks in this section shall not apply to antennas collocated
on existing buildings, towers or structures or public utility structures,
including, but not limited to, water towers, antennas, light poles, signals,
power and telephone poles, and poles supporting emergency warning devices that
are located within public rights-of-way or in drainage and utility easements
adjacent to public rights-of-way.
Subd. 7   Separation or Buffer Requirements
   (1)   Towers shall be separated from all residentially and agriculturally
zoned structures by a minimum of 100 feet or 100% of the height of the proposed
tower, whichever is greater.
      a.   The minimum tower separation distance shall be calculated and
applied irrespective of City and county jurisdictional boundaries.
   (2)   Measurement of tower separation distances for the purpose of
compliance with this Subsection shall be measured from the base of a tower to
the base of the closest point of a residential structure.
   (3)   Proposed towers must be separated from existing towers, or towers
previously approved but not yet constructed at the time a development permit is
granted pursuant to this Subdivision, by a minimum of the height of the
proposed tower, unless located within a tower designation site.
      a.   For the purpose of this Subdivision, the separation distances shall
be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the
existing or approved structure and the base of the proposed tower, pursuant to
a site plan of the proposed tower.
   (4)   Towers supporting amateur radio antennas and conforming to all
applicable provisions of this Code shall be allowed only in the rear yard of
residentially zoned parcels.
   (5)   Towers supporting personal wireless service antennas and conforming to
all applicable provisions of this Code shall be allowed only in the following
residentially zoned locations with a conditional use permit:
      a.   Government, school, utility, and institutional sites;
      b.   Park sites, when compatible with the nature of the park;
      c.   Church sites; and
      d.   Property zoned RM or RH and or guided for Medium or High Density
Residential on the adopted Future Land Use Plan.
   (6)   Public utility towers supporting wireless antennas and conforming to
all provisions of this Code allowed pursuant to a lease or master agreement
with the City shall be permitted in public rights-of-way and in drainage and
utility easements adjacent to public rights-of-way.
   (7)   Only 1 tower shall exist at any one time on any 1 residential parcel,
unless additional towers or antennas could be incorporated into existing
structures such as a church steeple, light pole, power line support device, or
similar structure. This provision shall not apply to public utility towers
supporting wireless antennas and conforming to all provisions of this Code
located in public rights-of-way and within drainage and utility easements
adjacent to public rights-of-way that are allowed pursuant to a lease or master
agreement with the City.
Subd. 8   Illumination.
Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not display
strobe lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the Federal
Aviation Administration or other federal or state authority for a particular
tower. When incorporated into the approved design of the tower for camouflage
purposes, light fixtures used to illuminate ballfields, parking lots, or
similar areas may be attached to the tower.
Subd. 9   Signs and Advertisements.
No signage, advertising, or identification of any kind intended to be visible
from the ground or other structures is permitted, except applicable warning and
equipment information signage required by the manufacturer or by federal,
state, or local authorities.
Subd. 10   Fencing.
Any fences constructed around or upon parcels containing towers, antenna
support structures, or telecommunications facilities shall be constructed in
accordance with the applicable fencing requirements applicable in the zoning
district where the tower or antenna support structure is located, unless more
stringent fencing requirements are required by Federal Communication Commission
regulations or the City Council.
Subd. 11   Landscaping.
All landscaping on parcels containing towers, antenna support structures or
telecommunications facilities, including buildings and base stations, shall be
in accordance with the City Council conditional use permit requirements for the
specific site.
Subd. 12   Security.
All towers must be reasonably posted and secured to protect against trespass.
Subd. 13   Access.
All parcels upon which towers are located must provide access during normal
business hours to at least 2 approved surface vehicular parking spaces on site.
Subd. 14   Structural Requirements.
All towers must be designed by an engineer to be structurally sound and, at
minimum, in conformance with the Minnesota Building Code and Dayton City Code,
and any other standards outlined in this Subsection.
Subd. 15   Permit Requirements
   (1)   All towers erected, constructed, or located within the City, and all
wiring therefore, shall comply with the following requirements:
      a.   Building permit. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to erect, construct, place or reerect, replace, or make structural
repairs to any tower without first making application for and securing a
building permit as provided in Subsection
1001.28 of this Code. The building permit must contain the following
information:
         1.   The name, address and telephone number of the owner and lessee of
the parcel of land upon which the tower is to be situated. If the applicant is
not the owner of the parcel of land upon which the tower is situated, the
consent of the owner shall be obtained in writing;
         2.   The legal description, PID number and address of the parcel of
land upon which the tower is situated;
         3.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners of other
usable towers or antenna support structures within a 5 mile radius of the
proposed new tower site, including City-owned property;
         4.   Written documentation that the applicant made diligent efforts to
obtain permission to install or collocate the applicant’s telecommunications
facilities on towers or usable antenna support structures, whether City or
privately owned located within a 5 mile radius of the proposed tower site;
         5.   Written technical evidence that the proposed tower or
telecommunications facilities cannot be installed or collocated on another
person’s tower or usable antenna support structure located within a 5 mile
radius of the proposed tower site and must be located at the proposed site in
order to meet the coverage requirements of the applicant’s wireless
communications system;
         6.   Evidence that the following requirements are met:
            (a)   An effort has been made to locate the new tower in accordance
with the following priorities:
               i.   City owned, public or institutional owned property;
               ii.   Property currently zoned and/or guided for commercial or
industrial use, or zoned for private recreational uses;
               iii.   Property currently zoned and/or guided for medium or high
density residential uses.
         7.   Professional engineer’s report. The applicant shall provide a
report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which demonstrates
the tower’s compliance with the standards set forth in Subdivision 14,
Structural Requirements and all applicable structural and electrical, but not
radio frequency, standards, including, but not limited to, the Minnesota State
Building Code, and includes the engineer’s certification.
      b.   Exceptions. Building permits are not required for:
         1.   Adjustment, repair, or replacement of existing antennas or the
elements of an antenna array affixed to a tower or antenna; provided, that
adjustments or replacement does not reduce the safety factor.
         2.   Routine maintenance (e.g., painting) and other nonstructural
related repairs of towers.
         3.   Antennas and/or towers erected temporarily for test purposes, for
emergency communication, or for broadcast remote pick up operations, provided
that all requirements of Subdivision 14 of this Subsection are met. Temporary
antennas shall be removed within 72 hours following installation, unless
additional time is approved by the Chief Building Official. Temporary towers
erected for emergency purposes may be exempt from setback requirements of this
chapter as determined by the Chief Building Official.
         4.   Public utility structures supporting wireless antennas and
conforming to all provisions of this Code that are located within public right-
of-way allowed pursuant to a lease or master agreement with the City providing
for review of the location, height and safety of the structure and antenna.
      c.   Fee. The fee to be paid is that prescribed under building permit
fees.
      d.   Construction requirements. All antennas and towers erected,
constructed, or located within the City, including all necessary wiring, shall
comply with the following requirements:
         1.   Applicable provisions. All applicable provisions of this Code.
         2.   Certification. Towers and their antennas shall be certified by a
qualified and licensed professional engineer to conform with the latest
structural standards and wind loading requirements of the 2006 International
Building Code, the Electronics Industry Association, the requirements of the
Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications Commission and all
other applicable reviewing agencies or that the tower is exempt from those
regulations.
         3.   Extension over public right-of-way prohibited. With the exception
of necessary electric and telephone service and connection lines approved by
the City and public utility towers supporting wireless antennas and conforming
to all provisions of this Code and allowed pursuant to a lease or master
agreement with the City, no part of any antenna or tower, nor any lines, cable,
equipment, or wires or braces in connection with either shall at any time
extend across or over any part of the right-of-way, public street, highway,
sidewalk, or property line.
         4.   Electrical engineering methods and practices. Towers and their
antennas shall be designed to conform to accepted electrical engineering
methods and practices and to comply with the provisions of the National
Electrical Code.
         5.   Occupational safety and health administration requirement. All
towers shall be constructed to conform to the requirement of the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration.
         6.   Protection against unauthorized climbing. All towers shall be
reasonably protected against unauthorized climbing.
         7.   Zoning restrictions. Antennas and towers may only be erected in
accordance with applicable zoning restrictions.
         8.   Corrosive resistant metal material. Towers shall be constructed
of corrosive resistant metal material.
         9.   Insurance. Persons responsible for all communication towers and
their antennas shall maintain a general liability insurance policy that
provides coverage from any damage to property or injuries to persons caused by
collapse of the tower. The insurance policy shall provide coverage on an
occurrence basis in an amount no less than $1,000,000.
         10.   Inspections. All towers may be inspected at least once each year
by an official of the building and inspection services division to determine
compliance with original construction standards. A deviation from the original
design for which a permit is obtained constitutes a violation of this chapter.
            (a)   Notice of violations shall be sent by registered mail to the
owner of the property and the owner shall have 30 days from the date the
notification is issued to make repairs. The owner shall notify the building and
inspection division that the repairs have been made, and as soon as possible
thereafter, another inspection shall be made and the owner notified of the
results.
      e.   Additional submittal requirements.
         1.   In addition to the information required elsewhere in this Code,
an application for a building permit or conditional use permit for towers and
antennas shall include the following supplemental information:
            (a)   A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer
which states the following:
               i.   The tower height and design including a cross section and
elevation;
               ii.   Documents the height above grade for all potential
mounting positions for collocated antennas and the minimum separation distances
between antennas;
               iii.   Describes the towers capacity, including the number and
type of antennas that it can accommodate.
            (b)   A letter of intent committing the tower owner and his or her
successors to allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in
writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use, so long as
there is no negative structural impact upon the tower and there is no
disruption to the service provided.
Subd. 16   Certifications and Inspections
   (1)   Every 5 years after construction of a tower, the tower owner shall
submit to the Building Official a sworn statement by an engineer certifying
that the tower is structurally sound and conforms to the requirements of the
appropriate building code and all other construction standards set forth by the
City’s Code, federal and state law.
   (2)   The tower owner may be required by the City to submit more frequent
certifications should there be reason to believe that the structural and
electrical integrity of the tower is jeopardized.
   (3)   As a condition of accepting a permit from the City to maintain a tower
within the City, the tower owner authorizes the City or its agents to enter
onto the property upon which a tower is located, between certifications
required above, to inspect the tower for the purpose of determining whether it
complies with the appropriate building code and all other construction
standards provided by the City’s Code, federal and state law.
   (4)   The City reserves the right to conduct inspections at any time, upon
reasonable notice to the tower owner.
   (5)   All expenses related to these inspections by the City shall be borne
by the tower owner.
Subd. 17   Maintenance
   (1)   Tower owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care
and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted
methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to
cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public.
   (2)   Tower owners shall install and maintain towers, telecommunications
facilities, wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in substantial
compliance with the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code and all
Federal Communication Commission, state and local regulations, and in a manner
that will not interfere with the use of other property.
   (3)   All towers, telecommunications facilities and antenna support
structures shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order,
and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property
of any person.
   (4)   All towers shall maintain compliance with current radio frequency
emissions standards of the Federal Communication Commission.
   (5)   In the event the use of a tower is discontinued by the tower owner,
the tower owner shall provide written notice to the City of its intent to
discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued. The owner
shall remove the unused tower within 6 months of the date when the tower use is
discontinued.
Subd. 18   Stealth
   (1)   All towers and antennas (including antenna cables) shall be, to the
greatest extent reasonably possible, in the discretion of the City, of stealth
design and shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment to the
maximum extent possible as determined by the City through the use of building
materials, colors, texture, screening, landscaping, and other camouflaging
architectural treatment, except in instances where the color is dictated by
federal or state authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration.
   (2)   Stealth shall not require towers or telecommunications facilities to
be totally hidden, and does not necessarily exclude the use of un-camouflaged
lattice, guyed or monopole tower designs.
   (3)   Personal wireless service towers shall be of a monopole design unless
the City Council determines that an alternative design would better blend into
the surrounding environment. This provision shall not apply to public utility
towers supporting wireless antennas and conforming to all provisions of this
Code that are located in public rights-of-way or in drainage and utility
easements adjacent to public rights-of-way that are allowed pursuant to a lease
or master agreement with the City.
Subd. 19   Other Telecommunications Facilities
   (1)   Minimum height of antenna support structures.
      a.   Any telecommunications facilities which are not attached to a tower
may be permitted as an accessory use to any antenna support structure at least
45 feet tall (except residential occupancies of less than 3 stories),
regardless of the zoning restrictions applicable to the zoning district where
the structure is located.
      b.   The owner of the structure shall, by written certification to the
City, establish the following at the time plans are submitted for a building
permit:
         1.   That the combined height from grade of the telecommunications
facilities and antenna support structure shall not exceed the height from grade
of the antenna support structure alone, by more than 40 feet;
         2.   That the antenna support structure and telecommunications
facilities appropriate comply with the building codes; and
         3.   That any telecommunications facilities and their appurtenances,
located above the primary roof of an antenna support structure, are set back 1
foot from the edge of the primary roof for each 4 feet in height above the
primary roof of the telecommunications facilities. However, this setback
requirement shall not apply to telecommunications facilities and their
appurtenances located above the primary roof of an antenna support structure,
if the facilities are of stealth design or appropriately screened from view
through the use of panels, walls, fences or other screening techniques approved
by the City. Setback requirements shall not apply to stealth antennas which are
mounted to the exterior of antenna support structures below the primary roof,
but which do not protrude more than 36 inches from the side of an antenna
support structure.
Subd. 20   Existing Towers
   (1)   Any owner upon whose land a tower is located, which contains
additional capacity for installation or collocation of telecommunications
facilities, may allow other persons to install or collocate telecommunications
facilities on a tower. Any collocation shall require amendment of the original
conditional use permit granted for the tower.
   (2)   An existing tower may be modified to accommodate collocation of
additional telecommunications facilities as follows:
      a.   Application for a building permit shall be made to the City Building
Official.
      b.   The total height of the modified tower and telecommunications
facilities attached thereto shall be established by the new conditional use
permit, if granted.
      c.   Permission to exceed the existing height shall not require an
additional distance separation from designated areas as set forth in this
article. The tower’s pre-modification height shall be used to calculate the
distance separations.
      d.   A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the collocate of
additional telecommunications facilities may be moved on site subject to the
setback requirements of this Subsection.
      e.   A tower that is relocated on site shall continue to be measured from
the original tower location for the purpose of calculating the separation
distances between towers as provided herein.
   (3)   Additional site plan review by City Council. The City Council may
grant site plan modifications for setbacks, separation or buffer requirements,
stealth, maximum height, other telecommunications facilities, and minimum
height of antenna support structures based on the criteria set forth in
Subdivision 20 (4) below.
   (4)   Criteria for site plan development modifications.
      a.   The City may grant a site plan modification pursuant to Subdivision
20 (3), if applicant, upon application demonstrates in writing, or as otherwise
required by the City, evidence that:
         1.   The location, shape, appearance or nature of use of the proposed
tower will not change the character of the neighborhood in which the tower is
proposed to be located; and
         2.   The site plan development modification will not create any threat
to the public health, safety or welfare.
      b.   In addition to the requirements of Subdivision 20 (4)a. of this
Subsection, in the following cases, the applicant must also demonstrate in
writing, or as otherwise required, the following:
         1.   In the case of a request for modification to the setback
requirement, that the area of the parcel of land upon which the tower is
proposed to be located makes compliance with Subdivision 6 impossible, and the
only alternative is to locate the tower at another site which poses a greater
threat to the public health, safety or welfare or is closer in proximity to a
residentially zoned land.
         2.   In the case of a request for modification to the separation
requirements of Subdivision 7 (3) that the proposed site is either within a
tower designation site or, at least double the minimum standard for separation
from residentially zoned structures as provided for in Subdivision 7(1).
         3.   In the case of a request for modification of the separation
requirements of Subdivision 7 (1), if the person provides technical evidence
that the proposed tower and telecommunications facilities must be located at
the proposed site in order to meet the coverage needs of the applicant’s
wireless communications system and if the person is willing to create approved
landscaping and other buffers to screen the tower support structures, equipment
and buildings from being visible to residential areas; and the City determines
that there is an adequate fall zone area from any building designed for
residential occupancy.
         4.   In the case of a request for modification of the height limit in
a zoning district for towers and telecommunications facilities that the
modification is necessary to:
            (a)   Facilitate collocation of telecommunications facilities in
order to avoid construction of a new tower; or
            (b)   To meet the coverage requirements of the applicant’s wireless
communications system, which requirements must be documented with written,
technical evidence; provided that in all residentially zoned areas the
applicant must demonstrate that the modification will not have an adverse
impact on property value or use of property within 1 mile of the tower.
   (5)   Antennas and towers in existence as of the effective date hereof which
do not conform or comply with this chapter are subject to the following
provisions:
      a.   Towers may continue in use for the purpose used and existing as of
the effective date hereof, but may not be replaced or structurally altered
without complying in all respects with this chapter.
      b.   If such towers are subsequently damaged or destroyed due to any
reason or cause whatsoever, the tower may be repaired and restored to its
former use, location, and physical dimensions upon obtaining a building permit
for the repair or restoration, but without otherwise complying with this
chapter, provided, however, that if the cost of repairing the tower to the
former use, physical dimensions, and location would be 50% or more of the cost
of a new tower of like kind and quality, then the tower may not be repaired or
restored except in full compliance with this chapter.
Subd. 21   Abandoned or Unused Towers or Portions of Towers.
All abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities shall be removed
within 12 months of the cessation of operations at the site unless a time
extension is approved by the City. In the event that a tower is not removed
within 12 months of the cessation of operations at a site, the tower and
associated facilities may be removed by the City and the costs of removal
assessed against the property. After the facilities are removed, the site shall
be restored to its original or an improved state.
Subd. 22   Interference with Public Safety Telecommunications.
No new or existing telecommunications service shall interfere with public
safety telecommunications.
Subd. 23   Exemptions
   (1)   Exempt. The following antennas are exempt from the requirements under
this chapter except as otherwise provided in subsection (2) of this section:
      a.   Satellite earth station antennas that are 2 meters or less in
diameter and located or proposed to be located in a Business or Industrial
District.
      b.   Except as otherwise provided under Subdivision 23(l)c. of this
Subsection, antennas designed to receive signals as follows, provided the mast
supporting the antennas does not extend more than 15 feet above the roofline of
the building:
         1.   Antennas that are 1 meter or less in diameter and that are
designed to receive direct broadcast satellite service, including direct to
home satellite services, or to receive or transmit fixed wireless signals via
satellite;
         2.   Antennas that are 1 meter or less in diameter and that are
designed to receive video programming services via multipoint distribution
services, including multichannel multipoint distribution services,
instructional television fixed services, and local multipoint distribution
services, or to receive or transmit fixed wireless signals other than via
satellite; or
         3.   Antennas designed to receive television broadcast signals.
      c.   The exception provided for antennas designed to receive or transmit
fixed wireless signals under Subdivision 23(1)b. of this Subsection applies to
“customer end antennas”, which are antennas placed at a customer location for
the purpose of providing service to customers at that location, but does not
apply to hub or relay antennas, which are antennas used to transmit signals to
and/or receive signals from multiple customer locations.
   (2)   Requirements. Antennas exempted under Subdivision 23(l)b. of this
Subsection are subject to the following requirements:
      a.   Antennas (including antenna cables) shall be designed to blend into
the surrounding environment through the use of appropriate colors, except in
instances where the color is dictated by federal or state authorities such as
the Federal Aviation Administration;
      b.   No lighting, signage, advertising, or identification of any kind
intended to be visible from the ground or other structures is permitted, except
applicable warning and equipment information signage required by the
manufacturer or by federal, state, or local authorities;
      c.   Antennas and any guywires or guywire anchors shall not be erected
within a public or private utility and drainage easements, and shall be set
back a minimum of 5 feet from all lot lines. This provision shall not apply to
public utility towers supporting wireless antennas and conforming to all
provisions of this Code that are located in public right-of-way or in drainage
and utility easements adjacent to public right-of-way that are allowed pursuant
to a lease or master agreement with the City;
      d.   Antennas shall meet the setback requirements specified under this
chapter and, to the extent feasible, placed in a position that is not visible
from the street, unless placement in accordance with these requirements would
impair reception of an acceptable signal;
      e.   Antennas shall meet the height limitations in this chapter, unless
the applicable height limitation would impair reception of an acceptable
signal; in which case, antennas shall be limited to the maximum height
necessary to obtain an acceptable signal;
      f.   Antennas shall not be constructed, installed, or maintained so as to
create a safety hazard or cause damage to the property of other persons;
      g.   With the exception of necessary electric and telephone service and
connection lines approved by the City and public utility towers supporting
wireless antennas and conforming to all provisions of this Code that are
located in public rights-of-way or drainage and utility easements adjacent to
public rights-of-way allowed pursuant to a lease or master agreement with the
City, no part of any antenna nor any lines, cable, equipment, or wires or
braces in connection with the antenna shall at any time extend across or over
any part of the right-of-way, public street, highway, sidewalk, or property
line;
      h.   Antennas, masts, and supporting cables shall conform to the latest
structural standards and wind loading requirements of the Building Code and the
Electronics Industry Association and any other applicable reviewing agencies.
   (3)   Residential/Mixed Use District standards. Satellite earth station
antennas in excess of 1 meter in diameter and antennas designed to receive
direct broadcast services or multichannel multipoint distribution services in
excess of 1 meter in diameter may be allowed as a conditional use within the
Residential (R-1, R-2, R-E, R-MH, R-3, RM, RH) and Mixed Use (V-M, H-M) Zoning
Districts of the City and, in addition to the requirements of this chapter,
shall comply with the following standards:
      a.   The lot on which the antenna is located shall be of sufficient size
to assure that an obstruction free receive window can be maintained within the
limits of the property ownership;
      b.   Except where the antenna is screened by a structure exceeding the
antenna height, landscape buffering and screening shall be maintained on all
sides of the antenna in a manner in which growth of the landscape elements will
not interfere with the receive window;
      c.   The antenna is not greater than 3 meters in diameter; and
      d.   The conditional use permit provisions of this chapter are considered
and determined to be satisfied.
   (4)   Business District standards. Satellite earth station antennas in
excess of 2 meters in diameter and antennas designed to receive direct
broadcast services or multichannel multipoint distribution services in excess
of 1 meter in diameter are allowed as a conditional use within the B-l, B-2, B-
3, B-4 and B-P Districts of the City and, in addition to the requirements of
this chapter, shall comply with the following standards:
      a.   The lot on which the antenna is located shall be of sufficient size
to assure that an obstruction free transmit-receive window or windows can be
maintained within the limits of the property ownership;
      b.   Except where the antenna is screened by a structure exceeding the
antenna height, landscape buffering and screening shall be maintained on all
sides of the antenna in a manner in which growth of the landscape elements will
not interfere with the transmit-receive window; and
      c.   The conditional use permit provisions of this Code are considered
and determined to be satisfied.
   (5)   Industrial District standards. Satellite earth station antennas in
excess of 2 meters in diameter and antennas designed to receive direct
broadcast services or multichannel multipoint distribution services in excess
of 1 meter in diameter may be allowed as a conditional use within the 1-1 and
1-2 Districts of the City and, in addition to the requirements of this chapter,
shall comply with the following standards:
      a.   The lot on which the antenna is located shall be of sufficient size
to assure that an obstruction free transmit-receive window or windows can be
maintained within the limits of the property ownership;
      b.   Except where the antenna is screened by a structure exceeding the
antenna height, landscape buffering and screening shall be maintained on all
sides of the antenna in a manner in which growth of the landscape elements will
not interfere with the transmit-receive window; and
      c.   The conditional use permit provisions of this Code are considered
and determined to be satisfied.
Subd. 24   Violations.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2010-18, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord. 2014-14, passed 10-14-2014)
1001.22   NON-CONFORMING USES.
Subd. 1   Non-Conforming Buildings and Uses
   (1)   The lawful use of buildings or land existing on January 31, 1980,
which does not conform to the provisions of this section may be continued
through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance or improvement;
provideds, however, that no non-conforming use of land shall be enlarged or
increased, nor shall any non-conforming use be extended to occupy a greater
area of land than that occupied by the use at the time of the adoption of this
section; nor shall any non-conforming use be moved to any other part of the
parcel of land upon which the same was conducted at the time of the adoption of
this section.
   (2)   Buildings found to be non-conforming only by reason of height, yard or
area requirements shall be exempt from the provisions of this Subsection
1001.22, Subd. 1.
Subd. 2   Discontinuance. In the event that a non-conforming use of any
building or premises is discontinued or its normal operation stopped for a
period of 1 year, the use of the same shall thereafter conform to the
regulations of the district in which it is located.
Subd. 3   General Alteration Provisions
   (1)   The lawful use of a building existing at the time of the adoption of
this Subsection may be continued, although the use does not conform with the
provisions hereof.
   (2)   If no structural alterations are made, a non-conforming use of a
building may be changed to another non-conforming use of the same or more
restricted classification.
   (3)   The foregoing provisions shall also apply to non-conforming uses in
districts hereafter changed.
   (4)   A non-conforming use may be changed to lessen the non-conformity of
that use. Thereafter, the use may not be altered as to increase the non-
conformity. Further, when any non-conforming use has been changed to a
conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to any non-conforming use.
Subd. 4   Business, Industrial and Mixed Use Building Alterations
   (1)   A lawful non-conforming use or building may not be enlarged or
extended in size or intensity except in the following circumstances:
      a.   If the proposed expansion is equal to or less than 20% of the
existing square footage of the building existing on the date of this Subsection
or the proposed expansion is equal to or less than 20% of the building’s value
on the date of this Subsection and the expansion meets current City regulations
with respect to setbacks, lot coverage, height and other dimensional
regulations (hereinafter “dimensional regulations”), the expansion may proceed
by Administrative Permit for Limited Expansion of Non-Conforming Use issued by
the Zoning Administrator. The applicant shall file with the Zoning
Administrator a survey and site plan showing all dimensions for the proposed
expansion, and shall provide such other information as the Zoning Administrator
shall request. Any expansion allowed under this paragraph, shall have a similar
design to and shall have the same exterior materials as the existing building.
      b.   If such enlargement or extension is required by local, state or
federal rules and regulations and exceeds 20% and conforms to the City’s
current dimensional regulations the same may proceed by Permit for Expansion of
Non-Conforming Use, which may be issued by the City Council following notice
and hearing in the same manner as required for the issuance of conditional use
permits. In that event, any expansion over 20% is allowed, the City can impose
such conditions as it deems necessary to have the expansion be consistent with
the area and the proposed uses under the City’s Comprehensive Plan, and shall
require:
         1.   When an existing building is expanded to an extent greater than
20% but equal to or less than 30% of the existing square footage or building
value (based on latest assessed value), whichever is less, the building
addition must meet the standards of City Code with colors complementary to the
existing building. If the building addition is to the front or side of the
building then improvements to the front facade, facing the public street,
meeting the standards of City Code shall be included.
         2.   When an existing building is expanded over 30%, of the existing
square footage or building value (based on latest assessed value), whichever is
less, the building addition plus the existing building area shall meet the
standards of City Code.
      c.   A lawful non-conforming use may be reconfigured if in the discretion
of the City Council it will lessen the non-conformity, abate a nuisance or
promote the public health, safety or welfare. An applicant may apply for such
reconfiguration shall provide a survey and site plan and such other information
as required by the Zoning Administrator. The application shall be processed in
the same manner as provided for a conditional use permit.
      d.   In the event an enlargement, extension or reconfiguration is
allowed, the property owner shall enter into an agreement with the City,
drafted by the City Attorney, stating, among other things, the purpose of the
enlargement, extension or reconfiguration, that the non-conforming use or
building shall remain a legal non-conforming use or building, and shall be
subject to the following. When an existing non-conforming building or use in a
Business, Industrial or Mixed Use District is expanded, after the effective
date of this Subsection, the building expansion must comply with the provisions
of this Code.
Subd. 5   Restoration.
   Whenever a lawful non-conforming structure or use has been damaged by fire
or other peril to the extent of 50% or more of its fair market value as
estimated by the Director of City Planner and approved by the Council, and
building permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the property is
damaged, the Council may impose reasonable conditions upon a building permit in
order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent property. If no building
permit is applied for within 180 days, any future use of the structure or land
shall be in full conformity with the provisions of this Code.
Subd. 6   Normal Maintenance
   (1)   Maintenance of a building or other structure containing or used by a
non-conforming use will be permitted when it includes necessary non-structural
repair and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the non-
conforming building or use.
   (2)   Nothing in this Code shall prevent the placing of a structure in safe
condition when the structure is declared unsafe by the building codes and
standards of the City.
(Ord. 2010-14, passed 7-13-2010)
1001.23   CONDITIONAL USE AND INTERIM USE PERMITS.
Subd. 1   Conditional Use Permits
   (1)   Purpose and scope. The conditional use permit process is intended to
provide the City with an opportunity to review a proposed use that has the
potential to be incompatible with surrounding uses, but can be made compatible
through the establishment of reasonable conditions. Approval of a conditional
use is a site specific approval and does not indicate that the conditional use
is able to be conducted on every parcel within the zoning classification. Every
application for a conditional use permit will be individually reviewed on its
own merits, and the facts surrounding the subject property will determine the
appropriateness of the proposed use. The approval of the conditional use permit
runs with the land and is not impacted by changes in ownership.
   (2)   Application. A request for a conditional use permit shall be initiated
by an owner of property or an authorized representative of an owner through the
submission of a conditional use permit application to the Zoning Administrator
that includes the following:
      a.   A complete application form signed by the property owner and the
applicant (if different from the property owner);
      b.   A thorough written description of the proposed conditional use;
      c.   A legal description of the property;
      d.   Application fee and escrow deposit;
      e.   Certified list and set of mailing labels of the names and addresses
of all property owners within 500 feet of the boundaries of the property in
question. (This item is not required for administrative conditional use permit
applications.)
      f.   A map showing the property in question and the surrounding land use
of all property within 500 feet of the property in question;
      g.   A complete site plan showing all aspects of the proposed use and its
relationship to the surrounding neighborhood;
      h.   Schematic architectural, landscape, grading and utility plans for
projects involving new construction, exterior remodeling or additions;
      i.   A survey may be required if it is determined to be necessary by the
Zoning Administrator; and
      j.   Any other information required by the Zoning Administrator, Planning
Commission or City Council.
   (3)   Process.
      a.   Notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be given
not more than 30 days nor less than 10 days in advance of the public hearing by
publishing a notice in the official newspaper of the City and by mailed notice
to the property owners within 500 feet of any boundary of the property for
which the use is proposed. This notice shall describe the particular
conditional use and shall contain a brief description thereof. The County
Auditor’s records shall be used for determination of ownership and mailing
addresses.
      b.   No hearing will be scheduled and the application will not be deemed
to be complete until all of the application requirements are submitted by the
applicant in a form acceptable to the Zoning Administrator.
      c.   The Planning Commission shall hold at least 1 public hearing on the
proposal to issue a conditional use permit.
      d.   Before any conditional use permit may be granted, the request shall
be referred to the Planning Commission for study concerning the effect of the
proposed conditional use on the Comprehensive Plan and on the character and the
development of the neighborhood. The Planning Commission will make a
recommendation to the City Council regarding reasonable conditions and findings
of fact.
      e.   The approval of a conditional use permit requires that the City
Council shall find that conditions can be established to ensure all of the
following criteria will always be met:
         1.   The proposed use is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and
the purpose of the underlying zoning district.
         2.   The proposed use will not substantially diminish or impair
property values within the immediate vicinity of the subject property.
         3.   The proposed use will not be detrimental to the health, safety,
morals or welfare of persons residing or working near the use.
         4.   The proposed use will not impede the normal and orderly
development of surrounding property.
         5.   The proposed use will not create an undue burden on parks,
schools, streets and other public facilities and utilities which serve or are
proposed to serve the area.
         6.   The proposed use is adequately screened.
         7.   The proposed use will not create a nuisance, including but not
limited to odor, noise, vibration or visual pollution.
         8.   The proposed use will provide adequate parking and loading
spaces, and all storage on the site is in compliance with this Subsection.
         9.   The proposed use will protect sensitive natural features.
         10.   The City Council may attach conditions to the permit, as it may
deem necessary in order to lessen the impact of a proposed use, meet applicable
performance standards and to promote health, safety and welfare.
      f.   Denial. Conditional use permits may be denied by resolution of the
City Council when there is a determination and findings of fact by the City
Council that the proposed use does not meet the criteria for granting a
conditional use permit.
   (4)   Time limit.
      a.   Unless otherwise specified in the conditional use permit, the
operation of the use and/or issuance of building permits for permitted
structures shall begin within 6 months of the date of the conditional use
permit approval. Failure to do so will invalidate the conditional use permit.
Permitted timeframes do not change with successive owners. Upon written
request, 1 extension of 6 months may be granted by the Zoning Administrator if
the applicant can show good cause.
      b.   If a use operating pursuant to an approved conditional use permit is
discontinued for a period of at least 6 months, any further use of the property
shall conform to the requirements of this Subsection. A discontinued
conditional use shall not begin operations again without first obtaining
approval of a new conditional use permit.
   (5)   Revocation.
      a.   In the event that any of the conditions set forth in the permit are
violated, the City Council shall have the authority to revoke the conditional
use permit. Before the revocation is considered, the City Council shall hold at
least 1 public hearing after proper written notice has been issued in
accordance with this section.
      b.   Following the hearing and subsequent discussion, the City Council
may revoke the conditional use permit by adopting findings of fact showing
there has not been substantial compliance with the required conditions.
   (6)   Amendments. A conditional use permit may be amended or modified only
in accordance with the procedures and standards established when originally
securing the conditional use permit. A request for a change in the conditions
of approval of a conditional use permit shall be considered an amendment and
subject to the full review procedure set forth in this Subsection. An
additional application fee may be required before the consideration of the
amendment request.
Subd. 2   Interim Use Permits
   (1)   Purpose and scope. The interim use is a use that is currently
acceptable but in the future may no longer be acceptable. The interim use
permit process is intended to provide the City with an opportunity to allow a
use that meets 1 of the following criteria:
      a.   The use is for a brief period of time until a permanent location is
obtained or while the permanent location is under construction;
      b.   The use is judged by the City Council to be presently acceptable but
with anticipated development or redevelopment, will not be acceptable in the
future or will be replaced in the future by a permitted or conditional use
within the respective district;
      c.   The use is judged by the City Council to reflect the long range
vision for the area and is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan provided
that the use maintains harmony and compatibility with surrounding uses and is
in keeping with the architectural character and design standards of existing
uses and development.
   (2)   Application, process, time limit, revocation and amendments.
      a.   An interim use permit shall be processed according to the standards,
procedures and criteria for conditional use permits. In addition, the proposed
interim use must be allowed in the respective zoning district.
      b.   The interim use permit approval shall contain a date or specific
event that will terminate the use with certainty.
(Ord. 2010-18, passed 9-28-2010)
1001.24   LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING.
Subd. 1   Purpose and Objectives.
   The preservation of existing trees and vegetation as well as the planting of
new trees and vegetation can significantly add to the quality of the physical
environment of the community.  This section provides for the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the City and is intended to: 
   (1)   Promote the reestablishment of vegetation in urban areas for
aesthetic, health and urban wildlife reasons;
   (2)   Establish and enhance a pleasant visual character which recognizes
aesthetics and safety issues;
   (3)   Promote compatibility between land uses by reducing the visual, noise
and lighting impacts of specific development on users of the site and abutting
uses;
   (4)   Unify development, and enhance and define public and private spaces;
   (5)   Promote the retention and use of existing vegetation;
   (6)   Aid in energy conservation by providing shade from the sun and shelter
from the wind;
   (7)   Reduce flooding and erosion by stabilizing soils with trees and
vegetation; and
   (8)   Work in conjunction with the tree preservation ordinance.
Subd. 2   Landscaping Plan.
   A landscaping plan shall be submitted at the time of site plan/preliminary
plat review for any:
   (1)   New development or new building construction in any commercial,
industrial, single-family residential, multiple-family residential, public/
institutional or planned unit development.
      a.   Modification or expansion of a building or improvements to a site
that affect greater than 10% of the existing non-residential structure/site,
and/or when there is a change in land use.  Landscaping requirements shall be
applied to those portions of the site that are directly affected by the
proposed improvements, or change in land use, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.  In all cases appropriate screening and buffering shall be
provided for the entire site.
      b.   No building permit for any non-single family residential
construction shall be issued until a landscape plan, if necessary, is approved
and a security is obtained by the City.
Subd. 3   General Plan Requirements.
   Landscape plans for new developments shall be prepared by a landscape
architect or other qualified person acceptable to the Zoning Administrator at a
legible scale and shall include the following:
   (1)   Boundary lines of the property with accurate dimensions;
   (2)   Locations of existing and proposed buildings, parking lots, islands,
sidewalks, roads and other features or improvements affecting and screening of
the site;
   (3)   Proposed grading plan with 2-foot contour intervals;
   (4)   Location, size and common name of all existing significant trees at
least 6 inches in diameter or greater as measured 54 inches above the ground. 
(For changes to developed sites, the location, size and common name of all
trees and shrubs on the site must be identified.);
   (5)   A planting schedule containing symbols, quantities, common and
botanical names, size of plant materials at installation and full maturity,
root condition and special planting instructions;
   (6)   Planting details illustrating proposed locations of all new plant
materials;
   (7)   Locations and details of other landscape features including berms,
screening, fences and planter boxes;
   (8)   Details of restoration of disturbed areas including areas to be sodded
or seeded;
   (9)   Location and details of irrigation systems; and
   (10)   Details and cross-sections of all required screening.
Subd. 4   Landscape Design Standards and Guidelines.
   All landscape plans shall adhere to the following:
   (1)   General landscaped requirements.
      a.   All open areas of a lot which are not used or improved for required
parking areas, drives or storage shall be landscaped with a combination of
over-story trees, under-story trees, coniferous trees, shrubs, flowers and
ground cover materials.
   (2)   Landscaping requirements in Single-Family Residential Districts.
      a.   Lots must maintain vegetation in the City’s right-of-way and along
the 5-foot perimeter of the property, except in areas where the required
driveway access is located. An exception to this restriction would be landscape
materials (2 to 3 feet in width) adjacent to a residential driveway.
      b.   Number of trees. The minimum number of major or over-story trees on
any given site shall be as indicated below with a minimum percentage of
landscape area for Non-Residential Use Districts. These are the minimum
substantial plantings, in addition to other under-story trees, shrubs, flowers,
and ground cover, deemed appropriate for a complete quality landscape treatment
of the site.
      c.   Each 1 and 2-family residential dwelling unit shall contain trees
totaling at least 8 inches in diameter at installation with a minimum of 2
trees located in front of the home. Each tree must meet minimum size
requirements as indicated in the table in Subdivision 5(3). The Zoning
Administrator may authorize the placement of some of the required trees within
the side or rear yard if, due to the shape of the lot, there are unique
circumstances.
   (3)   Landscaping requirements in multiple family residential, and all non-
residential uses.
      a.   General requirements. General requirements that shall apply in all
Non-Residential Districts and non-residential uses in Residential Districts
include the following:
         1.   Plant diversity. In addition to the 25% plant diversity
requirement, the landscape plan design shall, at a minimum, provide at least 3
of the following required numbers of trees and shrubs in addition to any trees
and shrubs required for screening in Subdivision 7 of this Subsection:
            (a)   One over-story tree per 3,000 square feet of open area.
            (b)   One ornamental tree per 1,500 square feet of open space.
            (c)   One evergreen tree per 3,000 square feet of open area.
            (d)   One deciduous or evergreen shrub per 100 square feet of open
area.
      b.   Building ground cover. A minimum 5-foot strip from the building edge
must be treated with decorative ground cover and/or foundation plantings,
except for garage/loading areas and pedestrian access areas.
      c.   Softening of walls and fences. Plants shall be placed intermittently
against long expanses of building walls, fences, and other barriers to create a
softening effect. Plantings shall also be proportionate to the height of the
building. Additional depth along buildings may be required to accommodate this
landscaping.
      d.   Heat island reduction. To minimize impact on microclimate, human and
wildlife habitat, shading of parking lots is required. At least 1 over-story
tree shall be planted for every 10 parking stalls on site. To satisfy this
requirement trees must be located at least 4 feet and within 10 feet of a curb
adjacent to any internal parking or drive area. The trees shall count toward
meeting the overall site green space and landscaping requirements identified by
this chapter for the underlying zoning district.
   (4)   Parking lot landscaping requirements. The following shall apply to all
new development and redevelopment of parking lots for expansions creating 5,000
square feet or more of impervious surface or disturbance of 1/2 acre or more of
land.
      a.   Parking lot screening. Parking lot screening shall be designed to
reduce the visual impact of surface parking lots; mitigate glare from
headlights; improve the aesthetic quality of the area for users of the site,
adjacent sites, roadways, and sidewalks; and define the perimeter of the
parking lot as follows:
         1.   Off street parking containing 4 or more parking spaces. Between
those portions of an off street parking area containing 4 or more parking
spaces and a different zoning district or a public street.
            (a)   Waiver. Parking lot screening requirements may be waived in
circumstances where perimeter screening is provided or where the elevation of
the parking area relative to the elevation of the street and sidewalk would
make the screening ineffectual as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
      b.   Parking lot screening standards.
         1.   Parking lot screening must be provided within 10 feet of the
perimeter of the parking lot to be screened, except for parking lots adjacent
to rain gardens/bio-retention systems, other landscape features, or where the
traffic sight visibility triangle may be impacted.
         2.   Parking lot screening shall be not less than eighty percent
(100%) opaque and be a minimum of 3 1/2 feet and a maximum of 4 feet in height
as measured from the adjacent finished surface of the parking area. When shrubs
are used to provide the screen, such shrubs must be at least 2 feet tall at
planting and anticipated to grow to at least 3 1/2 feet tall at maturity.
         3.   No landscaping or screening shall interfere with driver or
pedestrian visibility for vehicles entering or exiting the premises.
      c.   Content. Parking lot screening must consist of at least 2 of the
following:
         1.   A compact hedge of evergreen or densely twigged deciduous shrubs
spaced to ensure closure into a solid hedge at maturity;
         2.   A berm with plantings described above;
         3.   Transit shelters, benches, bicycle racks and similar features may
be integrated as a part of the screen;
         4.   Fencing may be integrated as part of the screen. All wood fencing
shall be stained and sealed with a weatherproof product.
   (5)   Landscape requirements specific to Business Districts.
      a.   B-1 Office Business District:
         1.   At least 30% of the land area shall be sodded and landscaped with
approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees.
         2.   At least 8% of the internal parking area shall be landscaped.
This area is counted as part of the overall required “landscape area.”
      b.   B-2 Neighborhood Commercial District business:
         1.   At least 30% of the land area shall be sodded and landscaped with
approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees.
         2.   At least 8% of the internal parking area shall be landscaped.
This area is counted as part of the overall required “landscape area.”
      c.   B-3 General Business District:
         1.   At least 25% of the land area shall be sodded and landscaped with
approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees.
         2.   At least 3% of the internal parking area shall be landscaped.
This area is counted as part of the overall required “landscape area.”
      d.   B-4 Commercial/Industrial District:
         1.   At least 25% of the land area shall be sodded and landscaped with
approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees.
         2.   At least 3% of the internal parking area shall be landscaped.
This area is counted as part of the overall required “landscape area.”
   (6)   Landscape requirements specific to Industrial Districts.
      a.   I-1 Light Industrial District:
         1.   At least 25% of the land area shall be sodded and landscaped with
approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees.
         2.   At least 3% of the internal parking area shall be landscaped.
This area is counted as part of the overall required “landscape area.”
      b.   I-2 Heavy Industrial District:
         1.   At least 25% of the land area shall be sodded and landscaped with
approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees.
         2.   At least 3% of the internal parking area shall be landscaped.
This area is counted as part of the overall required “landscape area.”
      c.   B-P Business Park District:
         1.   At least 30% of the land area shall be sodded and landscaped with
approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees.
         2.   At least 8% of the internal parking area shall be landscaped.
This area is counted as part of the overall required “landscape area.”
Subd. 5   General Landscaping Requirements
   (1)   Sodding and seeding. All front (including boulevards), side or rear
yards facing a right-of-way shall be sodded with the following exceptions:
      a.   Single-family residential lots are not required to be sodded, but
turf must be established within the front yard thereof within 120 days of the
City issuing a certificate of occupancy (excluding time between October 1 and
May 1). All silt fence or hay bale erosion controls must be maintained until
turf is established. A financial security in an amount determined by the City
will be required if turf is not established within the front yard (including to
the rear of the structure abutting the street on a corner lot) prior to
occupancy. Turf must be established for all portions of a yard within 1 year of
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
      b.   Seeding may be used when the City determines sod is not practical or
desirable such as, but not limited to, campus areas of schools, recreational
playfields and open space, sites that are rough graded and areas that cannot be
developed (such as those in a power line easement).
      c.   Seeding of future expansion areas as shown on approved plans.
      d.   Undisturbed areas containing existing viable natural vegetation that
can be maintained free of foreign and noxious plant materials.
      e.   Areas designated as open space or future expansion areas properly
planted and maintained with prairie grass.
   (2)   Tree preservation.
      a.   A tree preservation plan shall be submitted in conjunction with any
proposal that includes a subdivision application, in accordance with Section
1001.25.
      b.   As a condition of subdivision approval or the issuance of grading or
building permit, the City may require the applicant to replace any significant
trees which are damaged or destroyed as a result of development or construction
activities. Significant trees that are damaged or destroyed shall be replaced
by at least 2 trees meeting the minimum planting requirements.
   (3)   Minimum size. All plants must at least equal the following minimum
size in conformance with American Nursery Association standards:
 
                                   Potted/Bare Root    Balled and/or Burlapped
Shade trees*                       2-1/2 inch diameter 2-1/2 inch diameter
Ornamental trees (flowering crabs,
Russian olive, hawthorn and the    6 to 7 feet         2 inch diameter
like)
Evergreen trees                    N/A                 6 feet
Tall shrubs and hedge materials    3 to 4 feet         3 to 4 feet
(evergreen or deciduous)
Low shrubs - deciduous             18 to 24 inch       24 to 30 inch
Low shrubs - evergreen             18 to 24 inch       24 to 30 inch
Low shrub - spreading evergreens   18 to 24 inch       18 to 24 inch
NOTE:
* Type and mode are dependent upon time of planning season, availability, and
site conditions (soils, climate, ground water, manmade irrigation, grading,
and the like)
 
   (4)   Spacing.
      a.   Plant material centers shall not be located closer than 3 feet from
the fence line or property line and shall not be planted to conflict with
public plantings, sidewalks, trails, fences, parking areas, and driveways based
on the judgment of the Zoning Administrator.
      b.   Where plant materials are planted in 2 or more rows, plantings shall
be staggered in rows unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator.
      c.   Deciduous trees intended for screening shall be planted not more
than 20 feet apart. Evergreen trees intended for screening shall be planted not
more than 15 feet apart.
      d.   Where massing of plants or screening is intended, large deciduous
shrubs shall be planted 4 feet on center or closer, and/or, evergreen shrubs
shall be planted 3 feet on center or closer.
   (5)   Design.
      a.   Design (except for pond slopes which shall be subject to the review
and approval of the City Engineer or Zoning Administrator):
         1.   The landscape plan must show some form of designed site amenities
(i.e., composition of plant materials, and/or creative grading, decorative
lighting, exterior sculpture, and the like) which are largely intended for
aesthetic purposes.
         2.   All areas within the property lines (or beyond, if site grading
extends beyond) shall be treated. All exterior areas not paved or designated as
roads, parking, or storage must be planted into ornamental vegetation (lawns,
ground covers, or shrubs) unless otherwise approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
         3.   Turf slopes in excess of 3:1 are prohibited.
         4.   All ground areas under the building roof overhang must be treated
with a decorative mulch, rock cover and/or foundation plantings.
         5.   All principal buildings must have an exterior water spigot or
irrigation system (if required by Subd. 5(10) of this section) to ensure that
landscape maintenance can be accomplished.
         6.   Trees and shrubs shall not be planted in the right-of-way except
for designated parkways and streets as determined by the City Council.
         7.   All plants required as part of an approved landscaping plan shall
be maintained and kept alive. Dead plants shall be replaced in accordance with
the approved landscape plan.
   (6)   Species.
      a.   All trees and plantings used in site developments shall be
indigenous to the appropriate hardiness zone and physical characteristics of
the site.
      b.   All deciduous trees proposed to satisfy the minimum requirements of
this policy shall be long-lived hardwood species.
      c.   The complement of trees fulfilling the requirements of this section
shall be not less than 25% deciduous and not less than 25% coniferous. Single-
family residential development is exempt from this requirement.
      d.   No required tree shall be any of the following:
         1.   A species of the genus Ulmus (elm), including Siberian Elm,
except those elms bred to be immune to Dutch Elm disease;
         2.   Box Elder;
         3.   All species of the genus Populous (poplar) except when counted as
an under-story tree;
         4.   Female ginko;
         5.   Norway Maple;
         6.   Species of Ash;
         7.   Amur Maple;
         8.   Russian Olive;
         9.   Block Locust; or
         10.   Tree of Heaven.
   (7)   Parking lots/planting islands. All parking lots shall meet the design
requirements in Subsection
1001.19, Subd. 6(1) and (3). In addition the following requirements shall be
met:
      a.   Landscape parking lot islands shall be required at the beginning and
end of each parking row and shall contain a minimum of 180 square feet and a
minimum width of 9 feet. Such islands shall be bounded by a raised concrete
curb or approved equivalent and shall contain mulch (wood, bark, or decorative
rock) or turf grass to retain soil moisture. An exception will be made for use
of rain gardens with parking lot islands. This provision shall not apply to
parking structures.
      b.   A minimum of 1 over-story tree shall be provided for each island.
This provision may be waived for islands utilized for stormwater management or
other utility or safety issues as determined by the City Engineer.
      c.   Shrubs, perennials or ornamental grass shall be incorporated in each
landscaped island.
      d.   Islands shall be prepared with topsoil to a depth of 2 feet and
improved to ensure adequate drainage, nutrient and moisture retention levels
for the establishment of plantings.
      e.   All perimeter and interior landscaped areas in parking lots shall be
equipped with a permanent irrigation system, unless drought tolerant plant
materials are used exclusively. Where drought tolerant plant materials are
used, irrigation shall be required only for the 2 year period following plant
installation and may be accomplished using hoses, water trucks, or other
nonpermanent means.
   (8)   Detention/retention ponds. Storm water ponds shall be landscaped with
an average of a 10-foot buffer strip of shade and ornamental trees, evergreens,
shrubbery, natural grasses, groundcover and/or other plant materials to provide
an aesthetically appealing setting. This landscaping shall be in addition to
the required landscaping.
   (9)   Slopes and berms. Final slopes of greater than 3:1 will not be
permitted without special treatment such as terracing or retaining walls. All
berms must incorporate trees and plantings into the design. In no situation
shall berms be used as the sole means of screening.
   (10)   Irrigation system. All new irrigation systems, whether required by
this section or not, shall be required to include a rain sensor and a soil
moisture sensor to prevent overwatering. Irrigation systems shall include
backflow preventer devices. Irrigation systems shall be required in all
landscaped common areas and landscaped parking lot islands.
      a.   New Residential developments. An irrigation system shall be
installed in all landscaped common areas, or areas maintained by an HOA.
      b.   New Commercial or Industrial developments. An irrigation system
shall be installed in all landscaped areas unless otherwise indicated by this
section.
   (11)   Landscape guarantee. All new plants shall be guaranteed for 12 months
from the time planting has been completed. All plants shall be alive, of good
quality, and disease-free at the end of the warranty period or be replaced. Any
replacements shall be warranted for 12 months from the time of planting.
Subd. 6   Parkway Landscaping.
   The following requirements shall apply to all lots abutting parkways and the
ground area within the street right-of-way.
   (1)   The abutting property owner shall be responsible for improving and
maintaining the ground surface of the parkway boulevard with turf or other
plant material and parkway trees.
   (2)   Parkway trees shall be provided not more than 20 feet apart in the
right-of-way adjacent to the parcel and within the median of the parkway.
   (3)   A variety of over-story species should be included in the planting
plan for a specific development.
Subd. 7   Screening, Buffering and Fencing
   (1)   Requirements for fences.
      a.   Historic Village Residential District (RO) fences.
         1.   No fence greater than 3 feet in height shall be erected within 20
feet of any street right-of-way line. Fences in RO District shall follow all
other applicable fence requirements in Subd. 7(1), b.
      b.   All Residential District fences.
         1.   No boundary line fence shall be erected or maintained more than 6
feet in height.
         2.   The finished side of the fence (having no structural supports)
must face to the outside, away from the property being fenced.
         3.   No fence shall be erected in any required front yard, or side
corner lot yard, to a height in excess of 4 feet.
         4.   Fences shall be setback from trails, or sidewalks, or property
lines adjacent to road right-of-way as dictated by the following table:
 
Fence Height                         Setback
4 feet or less                       5 feet*
Greater than 4 feet less than 6 feet 10 feet*
* Fences where the rear property line abuts a major roadway (Neighborhood
Collector or greater) shall be setback a minimum of 15 feet from the edge of
ROW.
 
         5.   Fences which abut a lot line with frontage, either front yard, or
corner lot with road frontage, shall be limited to a maximum of 4 feet in
height; and a minimum of 50% opacity (leaving 50% open for the passage of air
and light); limited to decorative fences, such as picket fences, split rail
fences, and decorative iron fences, or a material as approved by the Zoning
Administrator (or their assignees). Fences along all other parts of the yard
shall be of a fence type (e.g. privacy, chain-link, picket, split rail, etc.)
and material (wood, wrought iron, PVC, maintenance free vinyl, etc.)  common to
residential areas. All fences shall be of a make, and maintained, so as to not
constitute a nuisance.
         6.   The required front yard of a corner lot shall not contain any
fence which may cause danger to traffic on a street or public road by obscuring
the view.  On corner lots in all districts no fence or planting shall be
permitted within the intersection sight distance triangle.  No fence, wall,
hedge, screen, sign, structure, vegetation, planting, snow pile or other
obstruction shall be higher than 3 feet above grade on any corner lot or parcel
in any zoning district requiring front and side yards within the triangular
area formed by the intersecting street right-of-way lines and a straight line
joining the 2 street lines at points which are 30 feet distant from the point
of intersection, measured along or within 20 feet from the intersecting
property lines if there is no curb.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e776b805fd11200858c1748733feb8a077c4b552/
IMAGES/0-0-0-329.jpg]
 
         7.   In those instances where a fence exists as an enclosure which
restricts access from the front to the rear yard, a gate, or other means of
recognizable ingress shall be unobstructed and a minimum of 3 feet in width. 
The location of such ingress points shall be positioned at any point
paralleling the front lot line, between the side lot property line and the
principal structure.
         8.   No physical damage of any kind shall result to abutting property.
         9.   Chain link fences used for the enclosure of tennis courts or
other such recreational purposes shall not exceed 10 feet in height and shall
be located in a rear yard only.
      b.   Commercial and industrial district fences.
         1.   Fences in all commercial and industrial districts shall not
exceed 8 feet in height.
         2.   Boundary line fences abutting residential districts shall conform
to those conditions applying to the residential district.
         3.   Fences on which barbed wire may be placed and are erected
primarily to secure a particular given area may have arms not to exceed 36
inches in length located a minimum of 7 feet and a maximum of 8 feet above the
ground surface.
         4.   Fences erected within the required front yard, along the front
property line, shall not be over 6 feet in height and shall be of a chain link
construction permitting maximum visibility.
   (2)   Buffer yards with screening shall be required under the following
conditions:
      (a)   Where any use, including new residential subdivisions, that abut a
collector or arterial roadway as defined in the City's Comprehensive Plan, that
use or subdivision shall provide a buffer yard with screening along the entire
boundary of the roadway.
      (b)   Where any business or industrial use (i.e. structure, parking or
storage) abuts property zoned or guided for residential use, that business or
industry shall provide a buffer yard with screening along the boundary of the
residential property. Screening shall also be provided where a business or
industry is across the street from a residential zone, except on the side of a
business or industry considered to be the front (as determined by the Zoning
Administrator). The buffer area and screening shall also be provided where a
business or industry is across the street from a residential zone or use.
      (c)   Where a buffer yard or screening is required for a specific use as
required in this Title.
      (d)   Size of buffer:
         1.   Any business, industrial or medium and high density residential
use that is abutting a less intense zoning district, or across the street from
a less intense zoning district shall provide a minimum of 20 feet wide buffer
along the adjacent boundaries.
         2.   Any use that abuts a collector or arterial roadway as defined in
the City's Comprehensive Plan shall provide a minimum of 35 feet wide buffer
along the entire boundary of the roadway.
   (3)   Purpose:
      Protect the character, appearance and value of land and neighborhoods
through the use of landscaping, screening and buffering techniques that present
a more natural and aesthetically pleasing appearance.
      Encourage creativity, innovation and incorporation of existing
vegetation, topography and other site features into the design and placement of
landscaping.
      Buffer the visual impact of development from streets rights-of-way,
provide for adequate protective screening for residential uses adjacent to or
near non-residential zoning districts or uses.
      Establish the minimum standards for the design, installation, and
maintenance of landscaping, screening and buffer between uses.
   (4)   Buffer yard design. Except in areas of steep slopes or where natural
vegetation is acceptable, as approved by the City, buffer yards shall consist
of a variety of species of deciduous trees, evergreen trees, shrubs and berms
(where additional height is needed) of adequate height and density to provide
an effective visual year-around screen sufficient to buffer the visual impact
of development from abutting properties or rights-of-way:
      a.   Plantings. All designated buffer yards must be seeded or sodded
except in areas of steep slopes where natural vegetation is acceptable as
approved by the City.
         1.   Planting screens shall be fully irrigated, consist of healthy,
hardy plants, a minimum of 6 feet in height and designed to provide a year
round visual screen at the time of installation whenever screening or buffering
is required.  A minimum of 6 trees per 100 feet of property boundary adjacent
to impacted property or the roadway shall be provided. Additional trees may be
required to accomplish required screening.  A variety of species, including
deciduous, non- deciduous trees and shrubs shall be provided.
         2.   Plant material centers shall not be located closer than 5 feet
from the fence line and property line, and shall not conflict with public
plantings, sidewalks, trails, and the like.
         3.   Landscape screen plant material shall be staggered to avoid
single rows.
         4.   Shrubs shall be arranged to lessen the visual gaps between trees.
Along arterial streets, all plantings of deciduous trees shall be supplemented
with shrubs such that the buffer yard contains a continuous band of plants.
         5.   Deciduous shrubs shall not be planted more than 4 feet on center,
and/or evergreen shrubs shall not be planted more than 3 feet on center.
         6.   Deciduous trees intended for screening shall be planted not more
than 40 feet apart. Evergreen trees intended for screening shall be planted not
more than 15 feet apart.
   (5)   Berms.  In order to accomplish screening heights and opaqueness a berm
may be required. Berms shall be designed based on the following standards:
      (a)   Berms shall have side slopes no steeper than a 4:1 ratio.
      (b)   To provide visual variation, the height of the berm shall vary with
undulating character. Such variations shall not reduce the berm height so as
not to provide the screening benefits intended by the berm. In areas where the
height of the berm is reduced landscape Screening must be provided to fulfill
the purpose of the berm.
      (c)   An illustrative (cross section) plan shall be submitted with the
landscaping plan to illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed buffer yard,
screening and berm.
   (6)   Screening of mechanical equipment. All rooftop and ground mounted
mechanical equipment of residential buildings having 5 units or more and of
non-residential buildings shall comply with the following standards:
      a.   All rooftop and ground mounted mechanical equipment shall be
screened so as to mitigate noise.
      b.   All rooftop and ground mounted mechanical equipment shall be
designed (including exterior color) and located so as to be aesthetically
harmonious and compatible with the building. Screening of and landscaping
around the equipment may be required where the design, color, and location of
the equipment are found to not effectively buffer noise or provide aesthetic
harmony and compatibility. Screening shall be constructed of durable materials
which are aesthetically compatible with the structure and which may be an
integral part of the structure. Applicable requirements for access to the
equipment shall be observed in the design and construction of the screening.
      c.   Rooftop mechanical equipment less than 3 feet in height may be
exempt from screening requirements by the Zoning Administrator.
   (7)   Waste and recycling receptacles and enclosures. All waste and
recycling receptacles shall be stored within the principal structure or within
an accessory enclosure area, totally screened from eye level view. All
enclosures and receptacles shall be kept in a good state of repair and waste
receptacles shall include secure lids or covers to properly contain the waste.
All waste and recycling receptacles not contained within principal structures
shall be enclosed in conformance with the following:
      a.   Exterior walls. Exterior wall treatment shall be of similar color
and materials, and/or complement the principal structure. Exterior walls shall
be at least 6 feet in height and provide a minimum opacity of 100%.
      b.   Location. The enclosure shall be located in the side or rear yard
and comply with setback requirements.
      c.   Accessibility. The enclosure must be accessible to waste and
recycling collection vehicles.
         1.   Screening. The trash/recycling receptacles shall be fully
screened from view of adjacent properties and the public right-of-way.
         2.   Trash enclosure. The design and construction of the trash
enclosure shall require a building permit and shall be subject to the approval
of the Building Official.
         3.   Recycling space. Recycling space shall be provided as required by
the Minnesota State Building Code.
         4.   Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided surrounding trash
enclosures to screen the structure from view of the public right-of-way and
residential properties.
   (8)   Fencing may be integrated as part of the screen. All wood fencing
shall be stained and sealed with a weatherproof product.
      a.   Fence and screening device installation and maintenance:
         1.   All fences and/or screening devices shall be properly maintained
so they do not become unsightly, or hazardous.
         2.   A fence permit is required prior to installation of a fence
within the City. The permit fee and procedures shall be established by the City
and may be revised from time to time.
         3.   If there is a nice side and a back side of the fence, the nicer
side of the fence shall face outward, and the back side of the fence or less
attractive side of the fence shall be constructed to face the interior of the
property constructing the fence unless specifically allowed in writing by the
adjacent property owner to be constructed differently. Adjacent to a public
right-of-way or road easement, City approval is necessary to have the back side
of the fence face the right-of-way/easement.
         4.   All screening and fencing shall be constructed in a workmanlike
manner, including method of construction and materials.
   (9)   Completion of screening and landscaping.
      a.   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the landscaping is
completed in accordance with approved plans unless a financial guarantee
acceptable to the City is provided to the City to cover the amount of the
landscape improvements.
      b.   All screening and landscaping shall be constructed in a workmanlike
manner, including method of construction and materials.
Subd. 8   Security
   (1)   When screening, landscaping or other similar improvements to property
are required by this chapter, a security shall be supplied by the owner in an
amount equal to 125% of the City Engineer’s estimate of the value of such
screening and landscaping.  The security shall be provided prior to the
issuance of any building permit and shall be valid for a period of time equal
to 2 full growing seasons after the actual date of installation of the
landscaping.  In the event construction of the project is not completed within
the time prescribed by building permits and other approvals, or if the plant
materials have died within 2 full growing seasons, the City may, at its option,
complete the work required or replace the landscaping at the expense of the
owner and the security.
   (2)   The City may allow an extended period of time for completion of all
landscaping if the delay is due to conditions that are reasonably beyond the
control of the developer.  The Zoning Administrator may grant extensions for a
period not to exceed nine months, due to seasonal or weather conditions.  When
an extension is granted, the City shall require such additional security as it
deems appropriate.
Subd. 9   Installation of Landscape Materials.
   All landscaping elements must be installed with professional horticultural
standards as established with the most current edition of the Landscape
Construction Reference Manual as published by the Minnesota Nursery and
Landscape Association within 90 days of the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy, or by June 15 for homes for which a certificate of occupancy is
issued between September 1 and March 1.
Subd. 10   General Mandatory Landscaping and Maintenance
   (1)   Length of weeds and grass.
      a.   Weeds or grass, excluding natural prairie grasses, in excess of 8
inches in length, on any lot in the following zoning districts that has a
building constructed on it, is a public nuisance and is prohibited.
 
B-3, General Business District
I-1, Light Industrial District
I-2, Heavy Industrial District
B-2, Neighborhood Commercial District
B-1, Office Business District
R-1, Single Family Residential District
R-O, Old Village Residential District
R-M, Mobile Home District
PUD, Planned Unit Development
 
            b.   Weeds or grass, excluding natural prairie grasses, in excess
of 8 inches in length, on any lot in the following zoning districts that abuts
a lot that has a building constructed on it, is a public nuisance and is
prohibited.
 
B-3, General Business District
I-1, Light Industrial District
I-2, Heavy Industrial District
B-2, Neighborhood Business Commercial District
B-1, Office Business District
R-1, Single Family Residential District
R-O, Old Village Residential District
R-M, Mobile Home District
PUD, Planned Unit Development
 
   (2)   Notice - failure to comply. After giving the owner or occupant of a
lot not in compliance with the length limitation for grass and weeds 7 days
advance written notice of the noncompliance, the City may cut, or cause to be
cut, the grass and weeds and may assess the cost against the property in
accordance with M.S. § 429.061, as may be amended from time to time.
   (3)   General.
      a.   All exposed ground areas, including street boulevards, and areas not
devoted to off-street parking, drives, sidewalks, patios or other such
improvements shall be landscaped with grass, shrubs, trees (except in boulevard
portions of the public right-of-way) or other ornamental landscape materials
within 1 year following the date of building occupancy.  A final certificate of
occupancy may be issued upon compliance with this Subsection.
      b.   All landscaped areas shall be maintained by the property owner and
kept neat, clear and uncluttered, and where landscaping is required as part of
City approvals, any plant material which is diseased or dies shall be replaced
with like kind of the original size. No landscaped area shall be used for the
parking of vehicles or for the storage or display of materials, supplies or
merchandise, unless specifically approved by the City.
      c.   Fences and/or plantings placed upon utility easements are subject to
removal by the City or utility company if required for maintenance or
improvement of the utility. In such case, costs for removal and replacement
shall be the responsibility of the property owner. Trees on utility easements
containing overhead wires shall not exceed 15 feet in height, and such trees
shall be the property owner’s responsibility to maintain.
(Ord. 2006-04, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 2010-07, passed 3-23-10; Am. Ord. 2010-
18, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-12, passed 9-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2012-06,
passed 4-24-2012; Am. Ord. 2014-04, passed 3-25-2014; Am. Ord. 2016-11, passed
4-12-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 4-10-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-20, passed 8-29-
2018; Am. Ord. 2018-22, passed 11-28-2018)
1001.25   TREE PRESERVATION AND REPLACEMENT, TREE DISEASE AND LANDSCAPING
REQUIREMENTS.
Subd. 1   Purpose
      (1)   Purpose. It is the policy of the City of Dayton to recognize and
protect the integrity of the natural environment of the community through the
preservation, protection, and planting of trees. The city recognizes that
preservation and planting of trees is important in new development sites in
order to maintain a healthy and desirable community. The city also recognizes
that a certain amount of tree loss is an inevitable consequence of the urban
development process. These tree regulations provide a balance between property
owner’s rights to develop property and the need of the community to protect all
aspects of the natural environment (particularly the rural character), while
providing housing and employment opportunities. The objectives of this
subdivision shall include, but are not limited to:
         a.   The reasonable protection of existing tree canopy through, root
protection by eliminating or reducing compaction, filling or excavation beyond
thresholds;
         b.   Prevention of soil erosion and sedimentation;
         c.   Reduced storm water runoff;
         d.   Improved air quality;
         e.   Improved water quality;
         f.   Reduced noise pollution;
         g.   Enactment of M.S. Ch. 18.023, as may be amended from time to
time, and Regulations, Ch. 4, AGR 101-120 of the Minnesota Department of
Agriculture to control the spread of tree diseases from affected trees to
healthy trees;
         h.   Enhancement of the city’s physical and aesthetic environment;
         i.   Enhancement of the quality of life and the general welfare of
residents;
         j.   Energy conservation through natural insulation and shading;
         k.   Control of the urban heat island effect;
         l.   Increased property values;
         m.   Protection of privacy by establishing and maintaining buffers
between conflicting land uses;
         n.   Providing habitat for wildlife, including birds that help in the
control of insects; and
         o.   To provide an ecosystem approach to planning and development.
      (2)   Scope. This subdivision shall apply to the following in the City of
Dayton:
         a.   Any formal land use application in the city, including but not
limited to subdivisions, minor subdivisions, site plans, rezoning and
conditional use permits.
         b.   All sites for which application for a subdivision review is being
made.
         c.   All sites for which application for a site plan review is being
made.
         d.   Any pre-emptive cutting of forests or woodland within 1 year of
any formal land use application.
         e.   Grading permits that are not associated with a development, or
redevelopment.
         f.   Removal of diseased trees.
      (3)   Intent. It is the intent of this subdivision to:
         a.   Preserve tree canopy throughout the site and extending into
adjoining properties whenever possible (continuous green/wildlife corridors);
         b.   Preserve specimen trees;
         c.   Preserve mix of tree ages, sizes, and species;
         d.   Preserve the existing under-story and forest floor vegetation;
         e.   Preserve both front and backyard trees in residential
developments with custom lot development and site specific roadway alignments;
         f.   Encourage building types, sizes and footprints appropriate to
site specific conditions; and
         g.   Support and augment the comprehensive park, trails and open space
plan.
Subd. 2   Definitions
      For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      Caliper Inches
      The length, in inches, of a straight line measured through the tree trunk
of a certified nursery raised tree at 12 inches above the ground.
      Critical Root Zone
      The root system within the dripline is generally considered to be the
critical root zone. The dripline is an imaginary line, which extends from he
outermost branches of a tree’s canopy to the ground. To protect these critical
root zones, a tree protection area shall be established around each tree or
group of trees to be retained.
         a.   The tree protection area shall include no less then the total
area beneath the tree canopy as defined by the dripline of the tree or group of
trees collectively.
         b.   Wherein authorized excavations it becomes necessary to expose or
cut roots more then 1 inch in diameter, it shall be the duty of the contractor
to protect such root(s) under advice of the City.
         c.   All open trenching is prohibited.  Utility installation within
the dripline of protected trees, during construction or thereafter, can only
occur using trenchless methods.
         d.   The mowing, clearing, and grubbing of brush located under the
dripline of protected trees may be allowed, provided such mowing, cleaning, of
grubbing is accomplished by hand or by mower. The use of heavy equipment for
this purpose shall not be allowed. 
      Diameter at Breast Height (DBH)
      The diameter of a tree’s trunk measured 4.5 feet above the ground.
      Disturbance Zone
      Any area which will be physically altered from its natural state. This
will include all areas of grading, utility installation, building pads,
driveways, and parking areas.
      Drip Line
      The farthest distance away from the trunk of a tree that rain or dew will
fall directly to the ground from the leaves or branches of the tree or 1 foot
per 1 inch of diameter, whichever is greater.
      Tree
         a.   Common Tree
            A deciduous overstory tree including ash, aspen, basswood, box
elder, catalpa, cottonwood, elm, hackberry, locust, poplar, silver maple,
willow, and any other tree species not defined as hardwood deciduous tree or a
coniferous/evergreen tree.
         b.   Coniferous/Evergreen Tree
            A tree that bears cones and evergreen needle-like or scale like
leaves year-round which reaches a height of at least 15 feet at maturity.
         c.   Nuisance or Hazard Tree
            1.   Any living or standing tree or part thereof infected to any
degree with a shade tree disease or shade tree pest unless properly treated
under the direction of a professional arborist/forester.
            2.   Any logs, stumps, branches, firewood, or other part of dead or
dying trees infected with a shade tree disease or shade tree pest.
            3.   Any standing dead or living trees or limbs which may threaten
human health or property.
         d.   Protected, Preserved or Undistributed Tree
            Any tree with no less than 60% of the critical root zone left
undisturbed or which has been protected during the construction process by the
tree protection methods described therein.
         e.   Significant Tree
            A healthy tree measuring a minimum of 8 inches DBH for hardwood
deciduous trees, 12 inches DBH for common trees, or 12 feet in height for
coniferous/evergreen trees.
      Tree Certification
      A certified inventory of trees on the site after work is complete listing
all trees and their final disposition, which is signed by a licensed forester
or landscape architect.
      Tree Preservation Plan
      A plan and inventory certified by a forester or landscape architect
indicating all of the significant trees and their locations in the proposed
development or on the lot. The Tree Preservation Plan shall include the size,
species, tag numbers, and location of all significant trees proposed to be
saved and removed on the area of development, and the measures proposed to
protect the significant trees to be saved.
      Tree Protection
      Snow fencing or polyethylene laminar safety netting placed at the drip
line of the significant trees to be preserved. The Tree Protection Measures
shall be shown on tree preservation plan drawings and remain in place until all
grading and construction activity is terminated.
Subd. 3   Removal Threshold
      (1)   Development in residential districts may remove or disturb up to
50% of the total inches of significant trees DBH. Any removal or disturbance
beyond this threshold shall require restoration. Significant trees removed for
water quality treatment ponds, public trails, sidewalks and collector or
arterial roads are exempt from the removal threshold calculation.
      (2)   Development in non-residential districts may remove up to 70% of
the total inches of significant trees DBH. Any removal or disturbance beyond
shall require reforestation. Significant trees removed for water quality
treatment ponds, public trails, sidewalks and collector or arterial roads are
exempt from the removal threshold calculation.
Subd. 4   Tree Inventory Requirements
      Subdividers:
      (1)   Subdividers shall:
         a.   Prepare a tree inventory plan superimposed on the grading plan.
         b.   Ensure the trees proposed to be preserved is followed during the
planned development (mass grading).
      (2)   The tree inventory plan must be certified by a forester or
landscape architect. The forester or landscape architect shall indicate on the
plan the following items:
         a.   Mass graded areas and proposed grades.
         b.   Custom graded lots.
         c.   Size, species, tag numbers, and location of all significant
trees.
         d.   Identification of all significant trees proposed to be saved and
significant trees proposed to be removed.
         e.   Calculation of removed or disturbed significant trees on the site
divided by the total significant trees on the site.
         f.   Measures proposed to protect significant trees, to be saved,
shall include, but are not limited to:
            1.   Installation of snow fencing or polyethylene laminar safety
netting at the drip line.
            2.   Placing fill against the trunk of the tree, on the root crown,
and under the drip line of the tree shall be prohibited.
            3.   Installation of erosion control measures.
            4.   Prevention of change in soil chemistry due to concrete washout
and leakage or spillage of toxic materials such as fuels or paints.
            5.   Pruning of oak trees must not take place from April 15 through
May 1. If wounding of oak trees occurs, a nontoxic tree wound dressing must be
applied immediately. Excavators must have a nontoxic tree wound dressing with
them on the development site.
      (3)   During preliminary plat review, the tree inventory plan will be
reviewed according to the best available layout to preserve significant trees
and the efforts of the subdivider to mitigate damage to significant trees.
      (4)   After mass grading has been completed and streets and utilities
installed, the forester or landscape architect shall:
         a.   Certify in writing to the city the status of all trees indicated
as save trees in the approved plan;
         b.   Certify in writing to the city whether tree protection measures
were installed; and
         c.   Certify the status of any remove designated trees that were
saved.
      (5)   If a significant tree indicated to be saved on the tree inventory
plan is destroyed or damaged, the tree replacement policy will be enforced by
the city (see tree replacement guidelines).
      (6)   Removal of tree preservation measures shall require written
approval from the City Engineer or Zoning Administrator. Tree preservation
measures shall not be removed from the site until the City Engineer or Zoning
Administrator has approved the grading as built plans for a mass graded site
nor prior to the release of financial securities held by the city.
      (7)   Custom graded lots:
         a.   The city will require an individual lot tree preservation plan
prepared and incorporated on the required site survey for each custom graded
lot with at least 1 significant tree or any lot with trees designated as custom
save. The plan shall be consistent with the original tree preservation plan for
the plat. The homeovmer, builder and the forester or landscape architect shall
meet prior to the development of the individual lot tree preservation plan to
determine the placement of the home where the fewest significant trees would be
destroyed or damaged. The builder will be responsible for ensuring the tree
preservation plan is followed during building construction. On mass graded lots
with at least 1 significant tree to be saved, builders are required to follow
the tree preservation plan for the plat.
         b.   The individual lot tree preservation plan must be certified by a
forester or landscape architect and signed by the homeowner. The forester or
landscape architect will indicate on the plan the following:
            1.   Size, species, and location of all significant trees.
            2.   Identification of all significant trees proposed to be saved
and significant trees proposed to be removed.
            3.   Measures proposed to protect significant trees shall include,
but are not limited to:
               (a)   Installation of snow fencing or polyethylene laminar
safety netting placed at the drip line.
               (b)   Placing fill against the trunk of the tree, on the root
crown, and under the drip line of the tree shall be prohibited.
               (c)   Installation of erosion control methods.
               (d)   Prevention of change in soil chemistry due to concrete
washout and leakage or spillage of toxic materials such as fuels or paints.
               (e)   Pruning of oak trees must not take place from April 15
through July 1. If wounding of oak trees occurs, a nontoxic tree wound dressing
must be applied immediately. Excavators must have a nontoxic tree wound
dressing with them on the development site.
         c.   Home builders will be required to furnish the following items for
tree preservation at the time the building permit application is submitted for
all lots with at least 1 significant tree:
            1.   Security of $1,000 per lot for tree protection requirements.
            2.   Certified tree plan.
            3.   Builders are liable for subcontractors that destroy or damage
significant trees that were indicated to be saved on the individual lot tree
preservation plan.
         d.   Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and release
of tree preservation security, the forester or landscape architect shall
certify to the city in writing the final disposition of safe trees on the lot
and that all the tree protection measures identified on the tree preservation
plan were installed from the start of construction to the end of construction
and tree replacement is completed, if necessary.
Subd. 5   Tree Replacement Policy
      (1)   If a development exceeds the allowable removal or disturbance
threshold specified in Subd. 3 the subdivider shall reforest appropriate areas
within the site (or outside the site if appropriate locations within the site
are not available). For each 4 inches that is removed or disturbed beyond the
threshold, the subdivider shall replant 1 inch new trees. Replacement trees
must consist of nursery stock and be no less than the following sizes:
         a.   Deciduous trees: No less than 2.5 inches in diameter.
         b.   Coniferous trees: No less than 6 feet high.
            Replacement trees shall be species similar to the trees which were
destroyed or damaged and can include those species shown on the following
table:
 
Deciduous Trees:                    
                 Maples            Oak
                 Linden (Basswood) Ash
                 Green Ash         Birch
                 Hackberry         Ironwood
                 Bitternut Hickory Black Cherry
                 Quacking Aspen     
Coniferous Trees:                   
                 Fir               Black Hills Spruce
                 White Pine        Colorado Blue and Green Spruce
                 Scotch Pine       Red Pine
 
            Only species native to this region are to be used.
      (2)   Replacement trees shall not be placed on easements or street
rights-of-way. The city shall determine the locations of tree replacement for
subdividers’ tree plans. If tree replacement is required on the individual lot
because the builder destroyed or damaged a tree which was to be saved, the
forester or landscape architect shall determine where the replacement trees
shall be installed.
Subd. 6   Requirements for Reforestation Plans
      (1)   The reforestation plan shall be prepared and signed by a licensed
forester or a registered landscape architect and shall meet the following
criteria:
         a.   All reforestation trees by location, size (diameter) and species;
         b.   No more than 1/4 of the trees may be from any 1 species;
         c.   Plant materials shall be of similar vegetation as found on site
and preference given for less than 6 feet high;
         d.   Minimum sizes shall be:
            1.   Deciduous - no less than 2.5 inches caliper;  and
            2.   Coniferous - no less than 6 feet high;
         e.   Installation shall follow city standard details;
         f.   Trees shall be from certified nursery stock as defined and
controlled by M.S. §§ 18.44 through 18.61, the Plant Pest Act, as may be
amended from time to time;
         g.   A list of recommended species for tree replacement can be
obtained for each natural environment type at the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources, subject to review and approval of the city; and
         h.   Trees shall be covered by a minimum 2-year guarantee.
Subd. 7   Tree Protection Measures
      (1)   The following measures for the preservation and protection of trees
shall be required:
         a.   Required protective measures. Measures required to protect
significant trees and significant woodlands shall include:
            1.   Installation of orange polyethylene laminate safety netting,
or an equivalent form of safety netting, and metal stakes placed along the
disturbance zone, and around significant trees (at least 1 foot outside the
drip line) to be saved;
            2.   Prevention of soil compaction or alteration of existing grades
in critical root zones (at least 1 foot outside of the drip line);
            3.   Placement of utilities in common trenches outside of the
critical root zone of significant trees, or use of tunneled installation;
            4.   Prevention of change in soil chemistry due to concrete washout
and leakage or spillage of toxic materials, such as fuel or paints;
            5.   Calculation of critical root zones of all significant trees
near disturbance zone and adherence to maximum 25% removal of critical root
zone;
            6.   Root pruning during construction along all disturbance zones
shall be done by hand with a chainsaw or with a machine designed for root
sawing (machine will shatter roots);
            7.   Tree stumps to be removed by grinding, not with a bulldozer,
in all areas where root pruning does not occur;
            8.   Natural ground cover (not sod) shall be maintained where
clusters or areas of significant trees exist;
            9.   No vehicles or equipment parking or driving out of the
construction boundaries;
         b.   Optional protective measures. Measures to protect significant
trees and significant woodlands may include, but are not limited to:
            1.   Installation of retaining walls to preserve trees;
            2.   Reduced row and paved areas when it can be illustrated that
such variances save trees;
            3.   On-site layout of roads and house pads;
            4.   Flaglots and other unconventional lot shapes when it can be
illustrated that such variances save trees;
            5.   Variable setbacks when it can be illustrated that such
variances save trees;
            6.   Larger lots in treed areas;
            7.   Common washout pond for cement, paint etc., outside of woods;
            8.   Basements dug with backhoe and material removed from site;
            9.   Concrete pumped in;
            10.   Specified stockpile areas;
            11.   Prioritize trees to be saved; and
            12.   PUD zoning.
(Ord. 2006-04, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 2014-04, passed 3-25-2014; Am. Ord.
2016-19, passed 8-24-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-14, passed 5-23-2018)
1001.26   STEEP SLOPES.
Subd. 1   Purpose.
   The City finds that development, excavation, or construction on certain
slopes within the City may result in the building of unstable structures,
increase dangers or erosion and thereby endanger the natural character of the
land, and jeopardize the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the
City.
Subd. 2   Definitions 
   For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
given to them.
Development
   Any activity which first requires the procurement of a building or land
alteration permit from the City.
Steep Slopes
   Slopes over 12% and of elevation difference of 30 feet or more in a given
parcel.
Subd. 3   Review by Planning Commission and Council of Development on Steep
Slopes
   (1)   Development on steep slopes. No development shall be conducted on a
steep slope without first receiving a permit therefor from the Council.
Approval or rejection of the proposed development shall be obtained in the
following manner:
      a.   Allowable uses within steep slopes are:
         1.   New structures, including but not limited to, principal
buildings, decks, and accessory buildings, except stairways and landings are
prohibited on the bluff and must be set back from the top of the bluff, the toe
of the bluff, and the side of a bluff at least 30 feet.
            (a)   On parcels of land on which a building has already been
constructed, on August 1, 2008, the setback from the top of the bluff is 5 feet
or existing setback, whichever is more, for additions to an existing building.
Any new buildings will have to meet the 30-foot setback.
         2.   Stairways, paths and lifts may be permitted in suitable sites
where construction will not redirect water flow direction and/or increase
drainage velocity. Major topographic alterations are prohibited. Stairways,
paths and lifts must receive an earthwork permit and must meet the following
design requirements:
            (a)   Stairways, paths and lifts may not exceed 4 feet in width on
residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties, public
open space recreational properties, and planned unit developments.
            (b)   Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts, or
landings.
            (c)   Stairways, paths, lifts and landings may be either
constructed above the ground on posts or placed into the ground, provided they
are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion.
            (d)   Stairways, paths, lifts and landings must be located in the
most visually inconspicuous portions of lots.
            (e)   Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for
physically handicapped persons are also allowed, provided that the dimensional
and performance standards complied with of subsections (a) to (e).
         3.   Removal or alteration of vegetation within a bluff impact zone is
prohibited except for limited clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning
and trimming of trees to provide a view from the principal dwelling site and to
accommodate the placement of stairways and landings and access paths.
         4.   Removal or alteration of vegetation must receive prior approval
of the community development director or designee. An on-site review will be
made to determine if the removal or alteration of vegetation will require new
ground cover. In no case shall clearcutting be permitted. City staff will work
with the property owner to develop a means of creating a view while minimizing
disturbance to the bluff impact zone.
         5.   An earthwork permit will be required for the movement of more
than 10 cubic yards of material within bluff impact zones. The permit shall be
granted if the proposed alteration does not adversely affect the bluff impact
zone or other property. Topographic alterations/grading and filling within the
bluff impact zone shall not be permitted to increase the rate of drainage. The
drainage from property within the bluff impact zone may not be redirected
without a permit from the City. Fill or excavated material shall not be placed
in bluff impact zones.
         6.   Roads, driveways, and parking areas must meet structure setbacks
and must not be placed within bluff impact zones when other reasonable and
feasible placement alternatives exists. If no alternatives exist, they may be
placed within these areas, and must be designed to not cause adverse impacts.
         7.   Lawful non-conforming structures that have been damaged or
destroyed may be reconstructed provided that it is reconstructed within 1 year
following its damage or destruction and provided the nonconformity is not
materially increased.
      b.   Application. Prior to any development on a steep slope, an
application for permit shall be made to the City which shall contain a detailed
plan for the development which sets forth:
         1.   The time period during which the proposed development is to take
place.
         2.   The soil types which are found on the site of the development.
         3.   A map showing the topography of the area to be developed.
         4.   A map showing any alteration in the topography that would result
from the proposed development.
         5.   A description of the soil quality in the area to be developed
including permeability of the soil, susceptibility of the soil to erosion,
drainage of the soil, distance of the soil from underlying bedrock,
susceptibility of the soil to changes in physical volume when moistened and/or
during periods of frost.
         6.   Information relative to whether the proposed development will
cause and/or be affected by any erosion problems.
         7.   A description of any disturbance to vegetation and other natural
features that will result from the development plus the manner in which the
applicant proposes to protect vegetation and other natural features that will
not be disturbed.
         8.   A copy of all specifications, blueprints and other detailed plans
for the development.
         9.   Information relative to the adequacy for the slope conditions and
soil type of the foundation and underlying material of any structure, including
roads.
         10.   Information relative to the adequacy of controls and protection
existing uphill from the proposed development which are designed to guard
structures or roads from being affected by mud, uprooted trees or other
materials.
         11.   Information relative to the adequacy of construction of any
retaining wall in excess of 30 feet.
      c.   Such other information as the Planning Commission shall request from
the application either prior or subsequent to the initial review of the
proposed development by the Planning Commission.
      d.   The Planning Commission shall review and make a recommendation to
the Council as to whether the permit should be issued or denied.
      e.   The Council may then authorize or deny issuance of the permit.
      f.   The review by the Planning Commission and final decision by the
Council shall be based on the consideration of the following factors:
         1.   Whether the application is complete, accurate and in all respects
conforms with Subd. 3(1) of this Section.
         2.   Whether, and the degree to which, the proposed development will
cause and/or be affected by erosion problems.
         3.   Whether any structure erected as part of the development will
have adequate foundations and underlying materials.
         4.   Whether, and the degree to which, the development will alter
vegetation, topography, or other natural features of the land.
         5.   Any other factors relating to whether the proposed development
will cause any risk or harm to any persons, property or animals.
      g.   If the Council decides to authorize issuance of a permit, it may do
so subject to compliance with reasonable conditions which shall be specifically
set forth in the permit. Such conditions may, among other matters, limit the
size, kind or character of the proposed work, require the construction of other
structures, require replacement of vegetation or other natural features,
establish required monitoring procedures and maintenance activity, stage the
work over time, require the alteration of the site design to ensure buffering,
or require a performance bond.
      h.   An applicant shall begin the work authorized within 60 days from the
date of authorization of the issuance of the permit unless a different date for
the commencement of the work is designated by the Council. The applicant shall
complete the work authorized within the time limit specified herein, the permit
shall become void; provided, however, that if prior to the date established for
commencement of that work, the applicant makes written requests to the Council
for an extension of time to commence the work setting forth the reasons for the
required extension, the Council may grant such extension.
      i.   Notice of completion. An applicant shall notify the Council in
writing when the work has been completed. No work shall be deemed to have been
completed until approved in writing by the City Engineer following such written
notification.
   (2)   General provisions.
      a.   Responsibility. Neither the issuance of a permit nor compliance with
the condition thereof, nor with the provision of this Section shall relieve any
person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons
or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose
liability on the City or its officers, employees, agents and/or consultants for
injury or damage to persons or property. An approval of an application issued
pursuant to this Section shall not relieve the applicant of the responsibility
of complying with any other requirement established by law, regulation or City
Code revision.
(Ord. 2008-17, passed 9-8-2008)
1001.27   WETLANDS.
Subd. 1   Purpose.
   The City Council of the City of Dayton finds that wetlands serve a variety
of beneficial functions. Wetlands maintain water quality, reduce flooding and
erosion, provide food and habitat for wildlife, provide open space, and are an
integral part of the City's environment. Wetlands are also important physical,
educational, ecological, aesthetic, recreational and economic assets to the
City. They are critical to the City's stormwater management and other aspects
of the public health, safety and general welfare. Regulating wetlands and the
land uses around them is therefore in the public interest.
Subd. 2   Definitions 
   For the purposes of this Section, the following terms shall have the
meanings given to them.
Applicant
   The individual or entity submitting a land use application to the City.
DNR Mapped Area
   Locations identified by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (DNR)
as high quality natural areas and/or sites of biodiversity significance.
Native Vegetation
   Plant species indigenous to or naturalized to the Hennepin County region of
the State of Minnesota or plant species classified by the Minnesota Department
of Natural Resources as native in the Minnesota Native Plant Database. Native
Vegetation does not include weeds as defined by this Section.
Non-native Vegetation
   Species not indigenous to or naturalized to the Hennepin County region of
the State of Minnesota by the Department of Natural Resources or plant species.
Ordinary High Water Level (OHWL) for Watercourses
   This is an elevation that is defined by the Department of Natural Resources
as the top of bank. The OHWL at a location along the watercourse is determined
by averaging the elevations of the top of channel banks, with consideration
given to the degree of slope (gradient) of the watercourse and the character of
the channel and channel banks.
Setback
   The minimum horizontal distance between a structure and the nearest edge of
the upland buffer zone.
Upland Buffer Zone
   An area or areas of vegetated ground cover around the perimeter of a wetland
that, either in its natural condition or through intervention, is critical to
the protection of that wetland. An Upland Buffer Zone protects the edge of a
wetland from erosion and filter sediment, chemicals and other nutrients from
the runoff that drains into the wetland. An Upland Buffer Zone also provides
wildlife habitat and assists in maintaining diversity of both plant and animal
species within the City. It also reduces human disturbances to the wetland by
providing a visual and physical transition area from a yard to a wetland.
WCA
   The Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act of 1991, M.S. 103G.222-.2373. The
City of Dayton shall be designed as the local government unit for the purposes
of the WCA.
Weeds
   Noxious weeds as defined and designated pursuant to the Minnesota Noxious
Weed Law, M.S. §§ 18.76 through 18.88, as amended from time to time, or any
volunteer plants, including, but not limited to, spotted knapweed (Centaurea
Maculosa) or burdock (Arctium Minus). For the purposes of this Section, Weeds
shall not include dandelions or clover. The City Weed Inspector and/or
Assistant City Weed Inspector shall maintain a current list of plants that are
defined as Weeds for purposes of this Section.
Wetland
   A land that is transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where
the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by
shallow water. For purposes of this Section, in order for a land to be
considered a Wetland, it must have all of the following characteristics:
      (a)   A predominance of hydric soils;
      (b)   Be inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and
      (c)   Under normal circumstances, support a prevalence of hydrophytic
vegetation.
Subd. 3   General Provisions
   (1)   In order to protect wetlands, this Section incorporates by reference
the WCA and any future amendments to the WCA that are adopted by the
Legislature. In the event that any requirements of this Section are
inconsistent with the WCA, the stricter provision that provides the most
protection for wetlands shall apply.
   (2)   Applicability. This Section shall apply to all property containing
wetlands in the following circumstances:
      a.   When any new development activity occurs on the property. For
purposes of this Section, New Development Activity means:
         1.   Any subdivision or minor subdivision which results in a net
increase in the number of lots.
         2.   Construction of a principal structure on an existing vacant lot.
   (3)   Exemptions. The upland buffer zone and setback requirements of this
Section shall not apply to the following:
      a.   Any land use application that has received final or preliminary plat
approval by the City Council prior to the effective date of this Section;
      b.   Any previously buildable parcel existing prior to the effective date
of this Section which is rendered unbuildable under City Code because of the
implementation of the upland buffer zone and buffer setbacks as required by
this Section and other restrictions in the Zoning Ordinance.
Subd. 4   Application Materials
   An applicant shall submit the following information to the City along with
all other materials required by City Code with respect to any land use
application or permit application:
   (1)   A grading plan (if grading is proposed), including the area and volume
of land disturbance.
   (2)   The square footage of the proposed structure and any impervious
surface.
   (3)   A wetland delineation report. It is the responsibility of the
applicant to determine whether wetlands exist on the property by completing a
wetland delineation and submitting a wetland delineation report. The following
shall apply to the wetland delineation report:
      a.   The report shall delineate and document the boundaries of any
wetlands on the property in accordance with the WCA requirements.
      b.   The City will require that the wetland delineation be performed by a
certified wetland delineator. The wetland delineation must be performed
according to the 1987 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual
and subsequent amendments, and be acceptable to the City Engineer. The City
Engineer shall have complete discretion in determining whether the wetland
delineation report is acceptable.
      c.   Wetland delineations shall be completed by the applicant between
April 20 and October 20 of the given year and must be submitted to the City for
review no later than November 1.  A wetland delineation completed outside these
dates or submitted later than November 1 may be considered to be incomplete.
   (4)   A certificate of survey or site plan describing the proposed activity
and showing the upland buffer zones to the wetlands on the property.
   (5)   An upland buffer zone landscaping plan, if required.
   (6)   Any submittals required by the WCA.
   (7)   Legal descriptions of the upslope edge of the upland buffer zones to
be used for the conservation easement. Wetlands and upland buffer zones shall
be protected by a conservation easement to be granted to the City; and
   (8)   Deposit funds in an amount to be determined by the City to be used for
any expenses incurred by the City in completing its review of the wetland
delineation report, wetland ordinance compliance, and, if appropriate,
developing a wetland boundary estimate and determining if the upland buffer
zones proposed by the applicant meet the requirements of this Section.
Subd. 5   Upland Buffer Zone and Required Structure Setbacks
   (1)   If a new development activity, as defined in Subdivision 3(2)a. of
this Section, is proposed, the following upland buffer zone and structure
setbacks shall be required for each wetland within or adjacent to the subject
property:
      The upland buffer zone adjacent to wetlands is required to have an
average width of 25 feet, with a minimum width of 10 feet. The principal
structure setback from the upland buffer zone is required to be 15 feet.
      A minimum 50-foot upland buffer zone and 20-foot principal structure
setback from the upland buffer zone is required adjacent to Elm Creek, Rush
Creek, North Fork Rush Creek and Diamond Creek. The upland buffer zone will be
taken from the delineated wetland edge or ordinary high water level as defined
by the Department of Natural Resources if there is not an adjacent wetland.
   If approved by City staff, the width of the upland buffer zone may vary
along the wetland's boundaries, so long as the following conditions are met:
      a.   The upland buffer zone's width does not fall below the minimum
upland buffer zone width at any location;
      b.   The total area of the upland buffer zone meets or exceeds the total
area which would be required if the upland buffer zone average width was
utilized; and
      c.   Areas that are within an upland buffer zone with a preconstruction
slope exceeding 12% must meet or exceed the upland buffer zone average width
requirement.
   (2)   All upland buffer zones shall be measured from the edge of the
delineated wetland, as approved by the City, into the adjacent upland area.
   (3)   The total area required for an upland buffer zone is not required to
exceed 300% of the area of the adjacent wetland unless the wetland is adjacent
to Elm Creek, Rush Creek, North Fork Rush Creek and Diamond Creek. If it is
adjacent to these creeks it will need to meet the 50-foot requirement.
   (4)   Where existing structures or impervious surfaces are located within an
area that would be required to be included in an upland buffer zone,
alternative methods to protect the wetland may be approved by the City staff in
order to avoid creating unreasonable impacts on the existing use of the
property. Such methods may include, but are not limited to, upland buffer zone
width averaging below the minimum required, redirection of drainage to a
different area where an upland buffer zone is feasible while still maintaining
the drainage to the wetland, or the use of rainwater gardens, vegetated swales
or other best management practices for treating runoff.
   (5)   For roadways, trails, and driveways, or portions thereof that are
routed across a wetland pursuant to an approved WCA permit application, upland
buffer zones will be required on the till slope but fill shall not be expanded
to accommodate the upland buffer zone requirement. Mitigation of the upland
buffer zone will be required as described in Subdivision 10 of this Section.
Subd. 6   Alterations Within Wetlands and Upland Buffer Zones
   (1)   The area within wetlands and upland buffer zones shall be preserved
predominately in their natural states, except to the extent set forth below.
Wetlands and upland buffer zones must be protected by a conservation easement
granted to the City by the applicant in a form provided by the City. The
conservation easement will preserve the natural state of the wetland and upland
buffer zones by restricting the activities that are allowed within the easement
areas. The easement will give the City the authority to enforce the
conservation easement restrictions. Additional public uses within the
conservation easement, such as a trail, will not be required by the City for
these purposes but may be required pursuant to other applicable City
requirements.
   (2)   Any alterations within the wetland and upland buffer zone, except
those stated below, shall be prohibited, including, but not limited to, the
installation or placement of structures and impervious surfaces, the
destruction or removal of trees, shrubs or other vegetation, the introduction
of any non-native vegetation, any mowing, dredging or excavation activities and
the placement or storage of any fill material or trash and the application of
fertilizer. The following activities are permitted:
      a.   Activities described within an upland buffer zone landscaping or
mitigation plan that was approved by the City;
      b.   The removal of non-native vegetation;
      c.   The removal of dead or diseased trees that pose a hazard;
      d.   The installation of utility poles, underground utility lines, light
poles, traffic regulatory signs and signals, mailboxes, and other equipment
that is determined by the City to provide an essential public service;
      e.   The installation of public and private flood control structures,
ponding and drainage facilities and associated accessory appurtenances as
approved by the City;
      f.   The installation of environmental monitoring or control facilities,
including those related to water quality and wildlife regulation;
      g.   The mowing of or installation of permeable pathways not to exceed 4
feet in width to allow reasonable access to the wetland;
      h.   The installation of boardwalks, docks or other structures to allow
reasonable access to the wetland or lake. These structures shall not exceed 4
feet in width or have poles greater than 2 feet in diameter;
      i.   The installation of public trails, if required. The temporary and
permanent trail disturbance shall not exceed 9 feet in width and must be
located outside of the minimum width of the required upland buffer zone.
Subd. 7   Upland Buffer Zone Markers
   All upland buffer zones shall identified with markers. The applicant shall
be responsible for the costs of obtaining and installing the markers. At a
minimum, 1 marker shall be placed per lot at the upslope edge of the upland
buffer zone and then placed every 250 feet thereafter and on all common lot
lines.
   (1)   Proposed locations of the markers shall be shown on the grading or
site plan for the property. The location of the markers shall capture the
portion of the upland buffer zone that extends the furthest upslope into the
lot. A plan that shows the location of the marker shall be provided to the City
for its review and approval.
   (2)   Artwork and verbiage on the sign shall face away from the wetland.
   (3)   Sign dimensions, specifications, verbiage, and artwork shall be
specified by the City and provided to the applicant.
Subd. 8   Vegetation Performance Standards
   Upland buffer zones shall meet the following vegetation performance
standards:
   (1)   Where acceptable natural vegetation exists in an upland buffer zone,
disturbance is allowed only with approval from the City. An upland buffer zone
will be considered to have acceptable natural vegetation if it:
      a.   Is composed of less than 25% weeds; and
      b.   Is covered by native vegetation with less than 5% exposed soil;
unless exposed soil is due to native canopy cover; and
      c.   Does not contain maintained turf grass.
   (2)   Where an upland buffer zone or a portion thereof is not considered
acceptable or is to be disturbed, an upland buffer zone landscaping plan must
be submitted to the City Engineer for approval. At a minimum, the landscaping
plan shall include the following information:
      a.   A plan sheet that shows the location of the upland buffer zones. The
plan sheet must also show upland buffer zones that are considered to be
acceptable in their current state and identify them as areas that will not be
disturbed during grading. The City may require silt fencing around these areas
in order to protect them from erosion and disturbance during grading and
construction;
      b.   The species, planting and seeding locations for upland buffer zones
that were determined to be unacceptable by the City. This shall involve the
seeding or planting of a minimum of at least 4 species of native grasses and 5
species of native forbs and a cover crop. The seed mix shall consist of at
least 15 pounds of pure live seed (PLS) per acre and the cover crop shall be at
least 20 pounds per acre. If planting is proposed, spacing between plants shall
not exceed 3 feet unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer; and
      c.   Detailed specifications that describe sequencing, scheduling,
materials, installation and maintenance execution for the seeding, planting, or
weed removal within the upland buffer zones.
   (3)   In cases where an upland buffer zone landscaping plan is required, the
City may require an approved form of a financial guarantee equal to 150% of the
estimated cost of the vegetation installation. The financial guarantee shall be
valid for 2 years and may be used by the City for compliance inspections and
establishment of the required vegetation if not completed by applicant or if
deemed unsuccessful by the City. Vegetation will be deemed by the City to be
successful if the area has a minimum of 1 plant per square foot from the
specified seed mix or planting plan and less than 25% of the area is inhabited
by weeds.
Subd. 9   Maintenance
   The property owner or homeowners' association shall be responsible for
maintaining the upland buffer zones on the property. Maintenance shall include
the following:
   (1)   Maintain and repair any damage to the wetland buffer zone caused by
activities such as mowing, cutting or grading, unless the activities are
approved by the City.
   (2)   Ensure that all soil surfaces in the wetland buffer zone are planted
with native vegetation and that there is less then 5% of open soil surface
which may result in erosion.
Subd. 10   Upland Buffer Zone Mitigation
   (1)   In cases where a wetland permit approval results in upland buffer zone
alteration mitigation is required for the upland buffer as well as the wetland.
   (2)   The following shall be required by the City for any upland buffer zone
mitigation:
      a.   Upland buffer zones shall be required to be replaced on the fill
slope and elsewhere along the edge of the existing wetland to meet the upland
buffer areas for the associated classification of the wetland. If a wetland is
to be completely filled pursuant to an approved wetland permit, the upland
buffer zone area requirement associated with the classification of that wetland
will be required for the replacement wetland unless the replacement is
occurring adjacent to a wetland with a classification that requires a wider
upland buffer zone. In that event, the upland buffer zone requirement for the
wider upland buffer zone shall apply.
      b.   Upland buffer zone plantings that are completed for mitigation shall
meet the standards for vegetation specified in this section.
      c.   Upland buffer zones may be utilized for wetland mitigation credits
if they meet the requirements of the WCA.
Subd. 11   Wetland Restoration Requirement
   An applicant will be required to provide a hydrologic restoration plan and
implementation of the plan for wetlands within a proposed subdivision if all
the following criteria are met:
   (1)   The wetland has been hydrologically altered by ditching, drain tile,
or a lower outlet elevation but still exists in a partially drained state.
Wetlands that have been entirely drained by ditches or tile lines and are no
longer jurisdictional wetlands will not have a hydrologic restoration
requirement.
   (2)   The wetland, if restored, can be reasonably designed to only impact
the hydrology of the property in which it is located. If the restoration will
impact the hydrology or drainage of an adjacent landowner, the landowner shall
be contacted to determine if they are willing to allow the alteration. If the
landowner is not willing to except the alteration, then the wetland restoration
will not be required.
   (3)   The hydrologic restoration can be designed in a way to limit the
conversion of upland to wetland. If the wetland is restored, the applicant will
be allowed to grade up to the delineated wetland edge to maintain the
developable upland of the property. If grading to reduce wetland expansion is
not practical and there is a net increase of 5% or more of upland converted to
wetland the applicant will not be required to restore the basin.
   (4)   All wetlands within a subdivision will be required to be
hydrologically restored if they meet criteria (1) through (3) above unless it
is proven that it is technically or economically not feasible. The goal of the
restoration shall be to restore to the previous (prior to hydrologic
alteration) wetland type.
Subd. 12   Variance
   A variance from the requirements of this Section may be granted by the City
Council in accordance with the variance provisions of the City Code, so long as
the variance does not violate the Wetland Conservation Act or any other
applicable state statutes or rules.
Subd. 13   Enforcement
   (1)   Investigation.  When a violation of this Section is either discovered
by or brought to the attention of the City, the City shall immediately
investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of the violation.
   (2)   Notice of the violation. If a violation is found to exist, the City
shall notify the offending party of the requirements of this Section, all other
applicable official controls and the nature and extent of the suspected
violation of these controls. If the structure or use is under construction or
development, the City may order the construction or development to be
immediately stopped until the property is brought into compliance with this
Section. If the construction or development has already been completed, then
the City may issue an order identifying the corrective actions that must be
made within a specified time period to bring the use or structure into
compliance with this Section.
   (3)   Appeal.  The offending party may appeal the City's correction order to
the City Council. An appeal must be brought in writing no later than 10 days
from the date of the notice.
   (4)   Failure to correct. If the offending party does not correct the work
within the specified date on the notice and no appeal has been taken within 10
days of the notice, the City may enter the property and perform the corrective
work. Any amount incurred by the City in performing the corrective work may be
certified by the City to the county for collection with the property taxes.
   (5)   Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this Section shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a maximum fine or maximum
period of imprisonment, or both, as specified by M.S. § 609.03.  Each
additional day that the property remains in violation of this Section shall
constitute an additional violation of this Section and may be prosecuted
accordingly.
   (6)   Nothing contained herein shall prevent the City from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of this
Section, including, but not limited to, seeking a civil injunction or
restraining order.
(Ord. 2008-16, passed 9-8-2008; Am. Ord. 2012-06, passed 4-24-2012; Am. Ord.
2014-04, passed 3-25-2014; Am. Ord. 2017-12, passed 9-25-2017)
1001.28   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
Subd. 1   Administration/Zoning Administrator
   (1)   The office of Zoning Administrator is hereby established. The City
Council shall appoint the Zoning Administrator.
   (2)   The duties of the office shall include the following:
      a.   Issue certificates of occupancy and maintain records thereon, in
conjunction with the Building Inspector.
      b.   Periodically inspect buildings, structures, and uses of land to
determine compliance with the terms of the Zoning Section.
      c.   Notify, in writing, any person responsible for violating a provision
of the Zoning Section, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the
action necessary to correct it.
      d.   Order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or
structures.
      e.   Order removal of illegal buildings, structures, additions,
alterations.
      f.   Order discontinuance of illegal work being done; or take any other
action authorized by this Subsection to insure compliance with or to prevent
violation of its provisions, including cooperation with the City Attorney in
the prosecution of complaints, both civilly and criminally.
      g.   Maintain permanent and current records of the Zoning Section,
including all maps, amendments, conditional uses, and variances.
      h.   Maintain a current file of all permits, all certificates, and all
copies of notices of violation, discontinuance, or removal for the time as
necessary to insure a continuous compliance with the provisions of the Code
and, on request, provide information to any person having a proprietary or
tenancy interest in any specific property.
      i.   Provide clerical and technical assistance to the Planning
Commission.
      j.   Submit each month to the Planning Commission an itemized summary of
certificates and permits granted and other significant activity of the
preceding month.
      k.   Receive, file and forward to the Planning Commission all
applications for conditional use permits, variances, amendments or development
plans as required herein.
   (3)   Zoning Administrator appeals. Any person aggrieved by any procedure or
decision of the Zoning Administrator may appeal the decision to the City
Council.
   (4)   Zoning Administrator appeals process.
      a.   The appeal of the Zoning Administrator’s decision shall be made no
later than 20 days following the decision.
      b.   Application for an appeal of the Zoning Administrator’s decision
under the provisions of this Subsection shall be made to the City Clerk, in the
form of a written application as prescribed by the City and shall be
accompanied by payment of a fee as established by the City.
      c.   Accompanying the application should be a written narrative
explaining the disagreement with the Zoning Administrator’s decision that led
to the appeal and any supporting graphic evidence, such as surveys, site plans,
and the like.
   (5)   Referral to the Planning Commission and City Council decision.
      a.   Before any appeal may be considered by the City Council, the appeal
shall be referred to the Planning Commission for study concerning the effect of
the proposed appeal on the Comprehensive Plan and on the character and
development of the neighborhood, and for its recommendation to the City
Council.
      b.   Following receipt of the Planning Commission recommendation, the
City Council shall make a decision on the appeal.
Subd. 2   Zoning Ordinance Text and Map Amendments
   (1)   Purpose. This section specifies the procedures for amendments to the
text of this Zoning Section or associated official Zoning Map.
   (2)   Application.
      a.   An amendment to the text of this chapter or a change in the
boundaries or designations in the official Zoning Map may be initiated by a
simple majority of the City Council or Planning Commission. Any persons owning
property within the City, or their designated agent, may initiate an
application to amend the district boundaries or designation on the official
Zoning Map for property in which they have a real estate interest.
      b.   A request for an amendment to the text of this chapter or a change
in the boundaries or designations in the official Zoning Map shall be filed
with the City on an official application form. The application shall be
accompanied by a fee as set forth in a resolution by the City Council. The
application shall include detailed written and graphic materials fully
explaining the request. The City may require that the applicant submit the
following information before the application can be deemed complete:
         1.   The name and address of the applicant or applicants;
         2.   The legal description of the area proposed to be rezoned, the
name and addresses of all the owners of property lying within such area, and a
description of the property owned by each;
         3.   The present zoning classification of the area and the proposed
zoning classification;
         4.   The application shall be accompanied by an escrow deposit in an
amount to be set by the Zoning Administrator to defray legal, engineering,
planning and other consultant costs associated with the application;
         5.   A description of the present use of each separately owned parcel
within the area and the intended use of any parcel of land therein;
         6.   If determined by the City, a site plan showing the location and
extent of the proposed building, parking, loading, access drives, landscaping,
and other improvements;
         7.   A statement of how the rezoning would fit in with the general
zoning pattern of the neighborhood and the zoning plan of the entire City;
         8.   A survey showing the property to be rezoned and the present
zoning of the surrounding area for at least a distance of 500 feet, including
the street pattern of the area, together with an abstractor’s certificate with
the names and addresses of the owners of the land in each area;
         9.   Proof of ownership of the property; and
         10.   Such other information as the City may require.
   (3)   Notice.
      a.   Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, an application for an amendment to
the text of this Zoning Section or a change in the boundaries or designations
in the official Zoning Map shall be approved or denied within 60 days from the
date of its official and complete submission. The 60 day review period can be
extended an additional 60 days pursuant to Minnesota Statute. If the initial 60
day review period is extended, the City must provide written notice of the
extension to the applicant before the end of the initial review period.
      b.   Upon receipt of a complete application, as determined by the City,
and following preliminary staff analysis of the application, the City, when
appropriate, shall set a public hearing following proper hearing notification.
Notice of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper at least 10
days prior to the hearing. Written notification of the hearing shall also be
mailed at least 10 days prior to the hearing to all owners of land within 500
feet of the boundary of the property in question.
      c.   Failure of a property owner to receive the notice shall not
invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this chapter, provided a
bona fide attempt to comply with the provisions of this Zoning Section has been
made. A copy of the notice and a list of the property owners and addresses to
which the notice was sent shall be made a part of the record.
   (4)   Procedure.
      a.   Findings of fact. The Planning Commission recommendation and City
Council decision on any zoning amendment, whether text or map amendment, is a
matter of legislative discretion that is not controlled by any particular
standard other than conformance with the Comprehensive Plan.
      b.   The Planning Commission and City staff shall have the authority to
request additional information from the applicant.
      c.   The applicant or the applicant’s representative may appear before
the Planning Commission in order to present information and answer questions
concerning the proposed request.
      d.   The Planning Commission shall make findings of fact and make a
recommendation on the request. The recommendation shall be in writing and
accompanied by the report and recommendation of the City staff.
      e.   Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning
Commission and the City staff, the City shall schedule the application for
consideration by the City Council. The reports and recommendations shall be
entered in and made a part of the permanent record of the City Council meeting.
      f.   Approval of a request shall require passage by a majority vote of
the entire City Council, except an amendment changing a district from
Residential to Commercial or Industrial that shall require a 2/3 majority vote.
Subd. 3   Final Site Plan and Building Plan Regulations
   (1)   Applicability and the approval process.
      a.   Final site and building plans shall be approved by the City Council
prior to the issuance of any permits for new development or building
construction/expansion in any Non-Residential Zoning District.
      b.   Prior to consideration for approval, the City Council shall receive
a report from the Planning Commission and the staff, specifying any recommended
modifications to the final site and building plans.
      c.   At the time of approval of final site and building plans, the City
Council may modify final site and buildings plans and specify any additional
development standards necessary to assure that the proposed development meets
the intent of the zoning district and to assure that the proposed development
is appropriately related to adjoining public streets and adjacent land uses.
   (2)   Content. The developer shall submit final site and building plans,
which include the following information:
      a.   A location map which indicates property ownership surrounding the
proposed development and existing and future land uses;
      b.   Maps of existing and proposed site features at a scale of 1 to 50 or
larger which indicate topography in 2 foot contours; building outlines;
structures, location of significant vegetation; location of streets, drives,
and parking areas; and other significant features;
      c.   Detailed drawings of all proposed structure elevations, including
signs. Proposed exterior materials and colors shall be noted on the elevation
drawings;
      d.   Proposed floor plans for all floor levels, including locations of
electrical, mechanical and gas metering equipment, and storage areas for trash
and recyclable materials;
      e.   A landscape plan indicating location, size and type of tree, shrub
and groundcover species, screening, fencing, provisions for plant material
watering and luminaire locations;
      f.   A circulation plan indicating pedestrian and vehicular movement
systems. This plan shall also include service access and screening for
receiving, truck loading area, and trash removal;
      g.   A lighting and photometric plan showing fixture height and type, and
lighting levels in foot candles;
      h.   A rooftop equipment and screening plan and elevation drawings of
rooftop equipment and screening. Rooftop equipment shall not be visible from
ground level views from the property, from adjacent property or from adjacent
streets;
      i.   A drainage, grading, utilities, and erosion and sedimentation
control plan. The plans shall comply with the requirements of this Code, local
watershed requirements and state regulations;
      j.   Identification of all wetlands on the site, copies of documents
completed in making the wetlands identification, qualifications of the person
performing the identification, a description of any wetlands which are to be
burned, filled, or drained pursuant to the development, and a wetland
mitigation and replacement plan if burning, filling, or draining of wetlands is
to occur. The requirement of the documentation may be waived in instances where
it is determined from aerial photographs, the National Wetlands Inventory, on-
site observation, or other pertinent information that the site contains no
wetlands;
      k.   A written report completely describing the proposal and indicating
covenants or agreements which will influence the use and maintenance of the
proposed development; and
      l.   Any other information deemed necessary by the City Council in order
to evaluate plans.
   (3)   Findings. The City Council shall find the following prior to the
approval of final site and building plans.
      a.   The proposed development is not in conflict with the Comprehensive
Plan;
      b.   The proposed development is not in conflict with the zoning district
provisions;
      c.   The proposed development is compatible with existing and anticipated
future development; and
      d.   Conform to the exterior building material requirements of the Zoning
Code.
   (4)   Revisions. Minor changes to final site and building plans approved by
the City Council may be made by the Zoning Administrator provided that the
changes do not involve the following:
      a.   An increase in floor area of structures exceeding 10% of the total
floor area within any 5 year period;
      b.   Variance from any zoning ordinance requirement;
      c.   Change in exterior building material;
      d.   Significant changes in the character, function or appearance of the
site plan; and
      e.   Alteration of any condition attached or modification to the final
site and building plans made by the City Council.
   (5)   Standard conditions. All approved final site plans and building plans
shall meet the following standard conditions, unless specifically waived by the
City Council:
      a.   All fire lanes, and fire apparatus access road as defined by the
Dayton Fire Department, must be maintained in good condition, kept clear and
have “No Parking - Fire Lane” signs installed.
      b.   All new and remodeled non-residential buildings, including additions
shall be equipped with a fire sprinkler system as approved by the Dayton Fire
Marshal.
      c.   A building collapse zone shall be defined on the site as established
by the Dayton Fire Marshal.
      d.   A minimum 1 hour rated fire wall shall separate attached side-by-
side residential dwelling units. All multiple story multi-family residential
apartments or condominiums shall be equipped with a fire sprinkler system as
approved by the Dayton Fire Marshal.
      e.   Handicap parking stalls and access shall be noted on the site plan
and installed on the site as per State Code requirements.
      f.   Any vehicles parked on the premises shall be in good working order
and currently licensed in accordance with state law.
      g.   All parking, storage areas, and driveways shall be paved to a
specification approved by the City Engineer.
      h.   All drainage and storm water plans are subject to review and
approval by the City Engineer and/or the Elm Creek Watershed Management
Commission.
      i.   All proposed lighting shall be downcast style only, and subject to
review and approval by the City before installation.
      j.   If applicable, hours of operation shall be as defined by the City
Council.
      k.   A letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the City, is required
for site improvements, including but not limited to: roads, sidewalks, trails,
utility and/or septic system installation, parking lot paving, curbing, and
landscaping. City staff to determine the amount of the letter of credit and is
typically set at 150% of the estimated cost for the improvements.
      l.   Landscaping must be maintained in good condition and is subject to
City review periodically.
      m.   No building or structure may be constructed on the site unless the
structure was identified on the approved site plan.
      n.   No business parking for employees shall be allowed on public
streets, unless approved as part of a conditional use permit.
      o.   The use of loudspeakers, bells, buzzers or whistles, is limited to
the Industrial Districts and must conform to noise regulations. Intercoms may
be used as part of a drive-up facility. Use of the equipment is allowed only
under a conditional use permit.
      p.   No occupancy of the building(s) may be permitted until the City has
granted a final certificate of occupancy. Final inspections may include the
following staff members: Building Official/Building Inspector, Fire Marshal,
City Engineer, and Zoning Administrator. No certificate of occupancy may be
granted until all conditions applicable to the proposed development have been
satisfied or a suitable financial guarantee and agreements are in place and
acceptable to the City to complete all required improvements.
      q.   Joint access and circulation agreements/easements will be required
when contiguous non-residential properties front on collector or arterial
streets.
      r.   No part of any non-residential structure shall be used for living
quarters, unless approved by the City Council.
      s.   All new developments, including redevelopments, will require
underground utilities as part of the approved final site and building plan.
   (6)   Development proposals. On development proposals requiring site plan
review pursuant to this Subsection, the City Council upon the recommendation of
the Planning Commission shall act with respect to variances from this chapter
proposed by the site plan.
Subd. 4   Building Permits
   (1)   Compliance with regulations.
      a.   No person shall erect, alter, wreck, or move any building or part
thereof without first securing a building permit therefor; except that no
permit shall be required for an alteration costing less than $500 if no
structural alteration of the building is involved.
      b.   No building permit shall be issued unless the proposed building
conforms to all provisions of this Code and other applicable regulations.
   (2)   Application.
      a.   Application for a building permit shall be made to the Building
Official on blank forms to be furnished by the City. Each application for a
permit to construct or alter a building shall be accompanied by a plan drawn to
scale showing the dimensions of the lot to be built upon and the size and
location of the building and accessory buildings to be erected.
      b.   Applications for any kind of building permit shall contain such
other information, including a certificate of survey, as requested or as may be
deemed necessary, by the Building Official, for the proper enforcement of this
Subsection or any other Subsection. The fee for a building permit shall be
determined by the City Council. The Building Official shall issue the building
permit only after determining that the buildings plans, together with the
application comply with the terms of this section.
Subd. 5   Certificate of Occupancy
   (1)   Application. A certificate of occupancy shall be obtained before:
      a.   Any building that is erected or structurally altered is occupied or
used; or
      b.   The use of any building is altered.
   (2)   Procedure.
      a.   Application for a certificate of occupancy for a new building or for
an existing building which has been altered shall be made to the Zoning
Administrator as part of the application for a building permit as required in
Subsection
1001.28. This certificate shall be issued within 10 days after a written
request for the same has been made to the Zoning Administrator only if the
erection or alteration of the building or part thereof has been completed in
conformity with the provisions of all ordinances and applicable governmental
regulations. Pending the issuance of a certificate, the Zoning Administrator
may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for a period of not exceeding 6
months during the completion of the erection or alteration of the building. The
temporary certificate shall not be construed as in any way altering the
respective rights, duties or obligations of the owners or of the City relating
to the use or the occupancy of the premises or any other matter except under
the restrictions and provisions as will adequately insure the safety of the
occupants.
      b.   Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or
proposed use of a building or land complies with all provisions of law and of
this Subsection. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on
file in the office of the Zoning Administrator and copies shall be furnished on
request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building
or land affected. No fee shall be charged for a certificate of occupancy.
      c.   No building permit for the alteration of a building shall be issued
before the application has been made for a certificate of occupancy.
   (3)   Non-conforming uses.
      a.   It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to issue a
certificate of occupancy for a lawful non-conforming use, or refusal of the
Zoning Administrator to issue a certificate of occupancy for the non-conforming
use shall be prima facie evidence that the non-conforming use was either
illegal or did not lawfully exist at the effective date of this Subsection.
      b.   An annual inspection shall be made by the Building Inspector, of all
buildings which have a certificate of occupancy, and if it is found that the
building does not conform to the applicable requirements, the certificate of
occupancy may be revoked and the building shall not be occupied until the time
as the building is again brought into compliance with the requirements.
Subd. 6   Administrative Fees
   (1)   Fixed administrative costs. Each applicant shall be charged fees and
escrow deposit as required by the City to cover the costs incurred by the City
in administratively processing, reviewing and issuing of permits and approvals.
   (2)   Additional charges. No person shall be issued a permit pursuant to
this Subsection until each applicant shall have paid to the Clerk/Treasurer
fees charged by the City in reviewing the application as provided for this
section, if not paid through the escrow deposit.
Subd. 7   Violations and Penalties
   (1)   Violations and penalties.
      a.   A person who violates, fails to comply with or assists, directs or
permits the violation of a provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor. A person who violates, fails to comply with or assists, directs or
permits the violation of a performance standard required by this chapter must
reimburse the City or its agent for the actual cost of the tests, measurements
or other procedures necessary to demonstrate that violation. In addition, the
person must pay a fee twice that which is specified in the City’s fee schedule
for any application that is submitted in connection with or as a result of the
violation. Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate offense.
      b.   If a building or structure is erected, constructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained or if a building, structure, or land is used
in violation of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator may initiate any lawful
action or proceeding in the name of the City and has the powers of a peace
officer to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation.
      c.   A violation of this chapter or of a condition imposed under the
authority of this chapter is a public nuisance, except if enforcement of the
violation would result in the removal or relocation of a principal or accessory
structure, or a part of it.
      d.   No section or part of this chapter designating the duties of an
official, employee or appointee of the City may be construed to make that
official, employee or appointee liable for the penalty provided for violation
of this chapter.
      e.   Nothing in this section shall preclude the enforcement of this
section by way of any appropriate remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction
pursuant to M.S. § 462.362, as may be amended from time to time.
Subd. 8   Notice.
   Failure to give notice or to give adequate notice when such is required by
this Zoning Section shall not invalidate any proceeding, provided that a good
faith attempt has been made to comply with the notice requirement.
(Ord. 2010-18, passed 9-28-2010)
1001.29   VARIANCES.
Subd. 1   Purpose.
   The variance process enables the City Council to provide limited relief from
the literal provisions of this Subsection in instances where strict enforcement
would cause practical difficulties because of circumstances unique to the
individual property under consideration and when it is demonstrated that such
actions are consistent with this Subsection. Variances shall not be granted to
allow a use not permitted by the zoning district, nor to merely remove
inconveniences or financial burdens that the requirements of this chapter may
impose on property owners in general. Variances are intended to address
extraordinary, exceptional, or unique situations that where not caused by the
applicant's act or omission. Variances are not to be used in the place of
ordinance amendments to address situations applicable to numerous properties.
Subd. 2   Initiation.
   Variances shall only be initiated by an owner of the property at issue or an
authorized representative of the owner.
Subd. 3   Criteria.
   All requests for a variance shall be subject to a determination that the
variance request complies with the requirements of Minn. Stat. § 462.357 and
any amendments thereto, which include, but are not limited to:
   (1)   A variance shall only be permitted when it is in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of City Code and consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan.
   (2)   A variance may only be permitted when the applicant establishes that
there are practical difficulties in complying with the zoning ordinance,
meaning:
      a.   The property owner proposes to use the lot or parcel in a reasonable
manner not permitted by the zoning code.
      b.   The plight of the property owner must be due to non-economic)
circumstances that are unique to the lot or parcel and not created by the
property owner.
      c.   The variance must not alter the essential character of the locality.
      d.   Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to, inadequate
access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems.
Subd. 4   Procedure.
   (1)   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on any complete
application for a variance and provide the City Council, based on the criteria
in Subd. 3, with a recommendation for granting of the variance, with any
conditions, or for the denial of the variance.
   (2)   Upon receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission and
written reports of the City Staff, the City Council, serving as the Board of
Adjustments and Appeals, shall make findings of fact and decide upon a request
for a variance by approving or denying the request for the variance consistent
with Subd. 3. The City Council may impose conditions on the granting of a
variance that are directly related to and bear a rough proportionality to the
impact created by the variance.
Subd. 5   Subsequent Application.
   Whenever an application for a variance has been considered and denied by the
City Council, a similar application for the variance affecting substantially
the same property shall be considered an incomplete application and shall not
be considered again by the Planning Commission or City Council for at least 6
months from the date of its denial unless a decision to reconsider such matter
is made by not less than 4/5 of the full City Council.
(Ord. 2010-18, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-02, passed 1-10-2012)
1001.30   VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY.
   Should any provision or Subsection of this section be declared to be invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, the decision shall not affect the
validity of the Code as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so
declared to be invalid.
(Prior Code, § 1001.15)
1001.31   REPEAL OF ORDINANCE.
   Ord. 80-1 of the City of Dayton adopted January 7, 1980, and all amendments
thereto is hereby repealed.
(Prior Code, § 1001.16)
1001.32   EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This section shall be retroactively effective upon publication as of January
31, 1980.
(Prior Code, § 1001.17)
1001.33   CONSTRUCTION SITE RUNOFF CONTROL.
Subd. 1   Intent. 
   To promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Dayton,
Minnesota, by requiring stormwater management practices for construction
activity.
Subd. 2   Statutory Authorization.
   This section is adopted pursuant to M.S. § 462.351.
Subd. 3   Findings.
   The City of Dayton hereby finds that uncontrolled land-disturbing activity
at construction sites are subject to soil erosion and other pollutants which
enter into receiving water bodies adversely affecting the public health, safety
and general welfare by impacting water quality, creating nuisances, impairing
other beneficial uses of environmental resources and hindering the ability of
the City of Dayton to provide adequate water, sewage, flood control and other
community services. 
Subd. 4   Purpose.
   The purpose of the section is to promote, preserve and enhance the natural
resources within the City of Dayton and protect them from adverse effects
occasioned by poorly sited development or incompatible activities by regulating
land-disturbing activities that would have an adverse and potentially
irreversible impact on water quality and environmentally sensitive land; by
minimizing conflicts and encouraging proper installation and maintenance of
best management practices (BMPs) for land-disturbing activities; and by
requiring detailed review standards and procedures for land-disturbing
activities proposed for such areas, thereby achieving a balance between
development,  redevelopment and protection of water quality and natural areas.
Subd. 5   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivatives shall have the meaning stated below.  When inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number.  The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely
directive.
Applicant
   Any person who wishes to obtain a building permit, zoning or Subdivision
approval.
Best Management Practice (BMP)
   Erosion and sediment control and water quality management practices that are
the most effective and practicable means of controlling, preventing, and
minimizing the degradation of surface water, including construction-phasing,
minimizing the length of time soil areas are exposed, prohibitions, and other
management practices published by state or designated area-wide planning
agencies.
Detention Facility
   A permanent natural or man-made structure, including wetlands, for the
temporary storage of runoff which contains a permanent pool of water.
Discharge
   The release, conveyance, channeling, runoff, or drainage, of stormwater
including snowmelt, from a construction site.
Exposed Soil Areas
   All areas of the construction site where the vegetation (trees, shrubs,
brush, grasses and the like) or impervious surface has been removed, thus
rendering the soil more prone to erosion. This includes topsoil stockpile
areas, borrow areas and disposal areas within the construction site. It does
not include stockpiles or surcharge areas of gravel, concrete or bituminous.
Once soil is exposed it is considered exposed soil until it meets the
definition of “final stabilization.”
Final Stabilization
   All soil-disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and a
uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of 75% of the cover for
unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures has been
established, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures have been employed.
Simply sowing grass is not considered final stabilization.
Land-disturbing or Development Activities
   Any change of the land surface including removing vegetative cover,
excavating, filling, grading and the construction of any structure.
Person
   Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, franchise, association or
governmental entity.
Public Waters
   Waters of the state as defined in M.S. § 103G.00S, Subdivision 15.
Retention Facility
   A permanent natural or man-made structure that provides for the storage of
storm water runoff by means of a permanent pool of water.
Sediment
   Solid matter carried by water, sewage or other liquids.
Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)
   A joint stormwater and erosion and sediment control plan that is a document
containing the requirements of this section, that when implemented will
decrease soil erosion on a parcel of land and off-site nonpoint pollution.
Structure
   Anything manufactured, constructed or erected which is normally attached to
or positioned on land, including portable structures, earthen structures,
roads, parking lots, paved storage areas, fences and retaining walls.
Waters of the State
   As defined in M.S. § 115.01, Subdivision 22, the term waters of the state
includes all streams, lakes, ponds, marches, watercourses, waterways, wells,
springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all
other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or
artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or
border upon the state or any portion thereof.
Wetlands
    Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water
table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow
water. For purposes of this definition, wetlands must have the following 3
attributes:
      a.   Have a predominance of Hydric soils;
      b.   Are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of Hydrophytic vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and
      c.   Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such vegetation.
Subd. 6   Scope and Effect
   (1)   Applicability.  Every applicant for a building permit, Subdivision
approval, or a permit to allow land disturbing activities greater than or equal
to one acre or part of a larger common plan or development greater or equal to
one acre must submit a storm water pollution prevention plan to the Zoning
Administrator. No building permit, Subdivision approval, or permit to allow
land disturbing activities shall be issued until approval of the storm water
pollution prevention plan or a waiver of the approval requirement has been
obtained in strict conformance with the provisions of this section. The
provisions of  Subd. 6(2) of this section apply to all land, public or private.
   (2)   Exemptions.  The provisions of this section do not apply to:
      a.   Any part of a Subdivision if a plat for the Subdivision has been
approved by the City Council on or before the effective date of this section;
      b.   A lot for which a building permit has been approved on or before the
effective date of this section;
      c.   Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other
kinds of posts or poles.
      d.   Emergency work to protect life, limb or property.
      e.   Tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural or
silvicultural (forestry) crops.
Subd. 7   Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan Submittal Procedures
   (1)   Application.  A written application for Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Plan approval, along with the proposed  Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Plan, shall be filed with the City and shall include a statement
indicating the grounds upon which the approval is requested, that the proposed
use permitted by right or as an exception in the underlying zoning district,
and adequate evidence showing that the proposed use will conform to the
standards set forth in this section. Prior to applying for approval of a Storm
Water Pollution Prevention Plan, an applicant may have the Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plan reviewed by the appropriate departments of the City.
   Two sets of clearly legible blue or black lined copies of drawings and
required information shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator and shall
be accompanied by a receipt from the City Clerk evidencing the payment of all
required fees for processing and/or financial securities in accordance with the
City. Drawings shall be prepared to a scale appropriate to the site of the
project and suitable for the review to be performed. At a minimum, the scale
shall be 1 inch equals 100 feet.
   (2)   Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan.  At a minimum, the Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plan shall contain the following information:
      a.   Existing site map.  A map of existing site conditions showing the
site and immediately adjacent areas, including:
         1.   The name and address of the applicant, the section, township and
range, north point, date and scale of drawing and number of sheets;
         2.   Location of the tract by an insert map at a scale sufficient to
clearly identify the location of the property and giving such information as
the names and numbers of adjoining roads, railroads, utilities, Subdivisions,
towns and districts or other landmarks;
         3.   Existing topography with a contour interval appropriate to the
topography of the land but in no case having a contour interval greater than 2
feet;
         4.   A delineation of all streams, rivers, public waters and wetlands
located on and immediately adjacent to the site, including depth of water, a
description of all vegetation which may be found in the water, a statement of
general water quality and any classification given to the water body or wetland
by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency, and/or the United States Army Corps of Engineers;
         5.   Location and dimensions of existing storm water drainage systems
and natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the site
delineating in which direction and at what rate storm water is conveyed from
the site, identifying the receiving stream, river, public water, or wetland,
and setting forth those areas of the unaltered site where storm water collects;
         6.   A description of the soils of the site, including a map
indicating soil types of areas to be disturbed as well as a soil report
containing information on the suitability of the soils for the type of
development proposed and for the type of sewage disposal proposed and
describing any remedial steps to be taken by the applicant to render the soils
suitable;
         7.   Vegetative cover and clearly delineating any vegetation proposed
for removal; and
         8.   100-year floodplain, flood fringes and floodways.
      b.   Site construction plan.  A site construction plan including:
         1.   Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing
activities;
         2.   Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt
stockpiles;
         3.   Locations and dimensions of all construction site erosion control
measures and best management practices (BMPs) necessary to meet the minimum BMP
requirements listed in Subd. 9 of this section;
         4.   Schedule of anticipated starting and completion date of each land
disturbing activity including the installation of construction site erosion
control measures needed to meet the requirements of this section; and
      c.   Plan of final site conditions.  A plan of final site conditions on
the same scale as the existing site map showing the site changes including:
         1.   Finished grading shown at contours at the same interval as
provided above or as required to clearly indicate the relationship of proposed
changes to existing topography and remaining features;
         2.   A landscape plan, drawn to an appropriate scale, including
dimensions and distances and the location, type, size and description of all
proposed landscape materials which will be added to the site as part of the
development;
         3.   A drainage plan of the developed site delineating in which
direction and at what rate storm water will be conveyed from the site and
setting forth the areas of the site where storm water will be allowed to
collect;
         4.   The proposed size, alignments and intended use of any structures
to be erected on the site;
         5.   A clear delineation and tabulation of all areas which shall be
paved or surfaced, including a description of the surfacing material to be
used; and
         6.   Any other information pertinent to the particular project which
in the opinion of the applicant is necessary for the review of the project.
      d.   A copy of MPCA Permit Number for discharging storm water from
construction activity (MN R 100001). 
Subd. 8   Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan Review Process
   (1)   Process. Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plans meeting the
requirements of Subd. 7 and minimum BMP requirements of Subd. 9 will be
reviewed by the Zoning Administrator or designated representative which may
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the Storm Water Pollution Prevention
Plan. If the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan is part of a large
Subdivision, the City may require the SWPPP be reviewed by the Planning
Commission. The Planning Commission may approve, approve with conditions, or
deny the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan.  Following Planning Commission
action, the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan shall be submitted to the
City Council at its next available meeting. City Council action on the Storm
Water Pollution Prevention Plan must be accomplished within 120 days following
the date the application for approval is filed with the City.
   (2)   Duration.  Approval of a plan submitted under the provisions of this
section shall expire one year after the date of approval unless construction
has commenced in accordance with the plan. However, if prior to the expiration
of the approval, the applicant makes a written request to the City for an
extension of time to commence construction setting forth the reason for the
requested extension, the planning department may grant one extension of not
greater than 1 single year. Receipt of any request for an extension shall be
acknowledged by the City within 15 days. The City shall make a decision on the
extension within 30 days of receipt. Any plan may be revised in the same manner
as originally approved.
   (3)   Condition.  A Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan may be approved
subject to compliance with conditions reasonable and necessary to insure that
the requirements contained in the section are met. Such conditions may, among
other matters, limit the size, kind or character of the proposed development,
require replacement of vegetation, establish required monitoring procedures,
stage the work over time, or require alteration of the site design to insure
buffering.
   (4)   Financial security.  Prior to approval of any Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Plan, the applicant shall submit a financial security in the amount
specified by the current City fee and security structure. The securities shall
guarantee completion and compliance with conditions within a specific time,
which time may be extended in accordance with Subd. 8(2). The adequacy,
conditions and acceptability of any financial security shall be determined by
the City Council or any official of the City of Dayton as may be designated by
resolution of the City Council.
Subd. 9   Minimum Construction Site Best Management Practices
   (1)   No Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan which fails to meet the
standards contained in this section shall be approved by the City Council or
designated representative.
   (2)   Site dewatering. Water pumped from the site shall be treated by
temporary sedimentation basins, grit chambers, sand filters, upflow chambers,
hydrocyclones, swirl concentrators or other appropriate controls as
appropriate.  Water may not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion,
scour, or flooding of the site or receiving channels or a wetland.
   (3)   Construction site waste. 
      a.   Solid waste.  Collected sediment, asphalt and concrete millings,
floating debris, paper, plastic, fabric, construction and demolition debris and
other wastes must be disposed of properly and must comply with MPCA disposal
requirements.
      b.   Hazardous materials.  Oil, gasoline, paint and any hazardous
substances must be properly stored, including secondary containment, to prevent
spill, leaks or other discharge. Restricted access to storage areas must be
provided to prevent vandalism. Storage and disposal of hazardous waste must be
in compliance with MPCA regulations.
      c.   Liquid waste. All other non-storm water discharges (concrete truck
washout, vehicle washing, maintenance spills and the like) conducted during the
construction activity shall not be discharged to the municipal storm sewer,
wetlands, natural drainageways, or waters of the state.
   (4)   Tracking.  Vehicle tracking of sediment onto paved surfaces must be
removed by street sweeping as needed to prevent discharge of sediment-laden
water from entering the City storm sewer system.
   (5)   Drain inlet protection.  All storm drain inlets shall be protected
during construction until final establishment has been accomplished or until
approval from the City.
   (6)   Site erosion control.  The following criteria (a. through c.) apply
only to construction activities that result in storm water leaving the site.
      a.   Channelized runoff from adjacent areas passing through the site
shall be diverted around disturbed areas, if practical. Otherwise, the channel
shall be protected as described below.  Sheetflow runoff from adjacent areas
greater than 10,000 square feet in area shall also be diverted around disturbed
areas, unless shown to have resulted runoff rates of less than 0.5 ft./sec.
across the disturbed area for the 1-year storage.  Diverted runoff shall be
conveyed in a manner that will not cause erosion, scour or flooding of the
conveyance at receiving channels.
      b.   All activities on the site shall be conducted in a logical sequence
to minimize the area of bare soil exposed at any one time.
      c.    Runoff from the entire disturbed area on the site shall be
controlled by meeting either subsections (6)(c)1. and 2. or (6)(c)2. and 3.
below:
         1.   All exposed soil areas with a continuous positive slope within
200 lineal feet of a surface water, must have temporary erosion protection or
permanent cover for the exposed soil areas year round, according to the
following table of slopes and time frames:
 
Type of slope     Time
Steeper than 3:1  7 days
10:1 to 3:1       14 days
Flatter than 10:1 21 days
 
         2.   For sites with more than 10 acres disturbed at one time, or if a
channel originates in the disturbed area, one or more temporary or permanent
sedimentation basin shall be constructed.  Each sedimentation basin shall have
a surface area of at least 1% of the area draining to the basin and at least 3
feet of depth and constructed in accordance with accepted design
specifications. Sediment shall be removed to maintain a depth of 3 feet. The
basin discharge rate shall also be sufficiently low as to not cause erosion,
scour or flooding along the discharge channel or the receiving water.
         3.   For sites with less than 10 acres disturbed at one time, silt
fences or equivalent control measures shall be placed along all side slopes and
down slope sides of the site. If a channel or area of concentrated runoff
passes through the site, silt fences shall be placed along the channel edges to
reduce sediment reaching the channel. The use of silt fences or equivalent
control measures must include a maintenance and inspection schedule.
      d.   Any soil or dirt storage piles containing more than 10 cubic yards
of material should not be located with a downslide drainage length of less than
25 feet from the toe of the pile to a roadway or drainage channel.  If
remaining for more than 7 days, they shall be stabilized by mulching vegetative
cover, tarps or other means. Erosion from piles which will be in existence for
less than 7 days shall be controlled by placing straw bales or silt fence
barriers around the pile. In-street utility repair or construction soil or dirt
storage piles located closer than 25 feet of a roadway or drainage channel must
be covered with tarps or suitable alternative control. If exposed for more than
7 days, the storm drain inlets must be protected with an appropriate filtering
barrier.
   (7)   Inspection and maintenance.  All stormwater management BMPs shall be
inspected by the applicant weekly or after every .5-inch rain event. If
sediment has reached 1/3 the capacity of the sediment control practice,
appropriate maintenance or replacement of the BMP must be completed to ensure
maximum effectiveness.
Subd. 10    Completion of Work.
   Work will be considered complete when all exposed soil areas have undergone
final stabilization, as defined in Subd. 5, is constructed to finish grade and
is in conformance with all permit conditions of approval to the satisfaction of
the City. The applicant or representative shall notify the City when the land-
disturbing operations are ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not
be given until all work, including installation of all drainage facilities and
their protective devices, and all erosion control measures, have been completed
and final stabilization has occurred in accordance with this subdivision.
Subd. 11    Enforcement Procedures
   (1)   Right of entry. The applicant shall promptly allow the City and its
authorized representatives, upon presentation of credentials, to:
      a.   Enter upon the permitted site for the purpose of obtaining
information, examination of records, conducting investigations, inspections or
surveys;
      b.   Bring such equipment upon the permitted site as is necessary to
conduct such surveys and investigations;
      c.   Examine and copy any books, papers, records or memoranda pertaining
to activities or records required to be kept under the terms and conditions of
this permitted site;
      d.   Inspect the storm water pollution control measures;
      e.   Sample and monitor any items or activities pertaining to storm water
pollution control measures; and/or
      f.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to the safe and easy access
of such an inspection shall be promptly removed upon the inspector's request.
The cost of providing such access shall be borne by the applicant.
   (2)   Warning letter.  If upon inspection by the City or designated
representative, the applicant fails to implement the erosion and sediment
control practices outlined in the approved stormwater pollution prevention plan
or minimum BMP standards outlined in Subd. 5, the City will notify the
applicant with a letter of warning which outlines the issues of noncompliance
and a timeline for completion of any work to bring the site into compliance. 
   (3)   Action against the financial security.  If appropriate actions by the
applicant have not been completed within 7 days after notification by the City,
the City may act against the financial security if any of the conditions listed
below exist. The City shall use funds from this security to finance any
corrective or remedial work undertaken by the City or a contractor under
contract to the City and to reimburse the City for all direct cost incurred in
the process of remedial work including, but not limited to, staff time and
attorney's fees.
      a.   The applicant ceases land disturbing activities and/or filling and
abandons the work site prior to completion of the City-approved grading plan.
      b.   The applicant fails to conform to any city approved grading plan
and/or the storm water pollution control plan as approved by the City, or
related supplementary instructions.
      c.   The techniques utilized under the storm water pollution control plan
fail within 1 year of installation.
      d.   The applicant fails to reimburse the City for corrective action
taken.
      e.    Emergency action under part (4) below.
   (4)   Emergency action.  If circumstances exist such that noncompliance with
this section poses an immediate danger to the public health, safety and
welfare, as determined by the City Engineer, the City may take emergency
preventative action. The City shall also take every reasonable action possible
to contact and direct the applicant to take any necessary action. Any cost to
the City may be recovered from the applicant's financial security.
Subd. 12   Penalty.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section
shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $500 for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 4-10-07)
1001.34   STORM WATER ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLICIT CONNECTION.
Subd.1   Intent. 
   To promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Dayton,
Minnesota, by requiring stormwater management practices for construction
activity.
Subd. 2   Statutory Authorization.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to M.S. § 462.351.
Subd. 3   Findings. 
   The City of Dayton hereby finds that non-storm water discharges to the
City's municipal separated storm sewer system (MS4) are subject to higher
levels of pollutants which enter into receiving water bodies adversely
affecting the public health, safety and general welfare by impacting water
quality, creating nuisances, impairing other beneficial uses of environmental
resources and hindering the ability of the City of Dayton to provide adequate
water, sewage, flood control and other community services. 
Subd. 4   Purpose.
   The purpose of this section is to promote, preserve and enhance the natural
resources within the City of Dayton and protect them from adverse effects
occasioned by non-storm water discharges by regulating discharges that would
have an adverse and potentially irreversible impact on water quality and
environmentally sensitive land.
Subd. 5   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivatives shall have the meaning stated below. When inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely
directive.
Best Management Practice (BMP)
   Sediment and erosion control and stormwater management practices used to
mitigate adverse effects of land use activities, runoff, sedimentation, and
non-point source pollution on stream bank erosion, stream hydrology, surface
and groundwater replenishment.
City
   The City of Dayton.
Discharge
   Adding, introducing, releasing, leaking, spilling, casting, throwing or
emitting any pollutant, or placing any pollutant in a location where it is
likely to pollute waters of the state in the County.
Erosion
   The process by which ground surface is worn away by action of wind, water,
ice or gravity.
Groundwater
   Water contained below the surface of the earth in the saturated zone
including, without limitation, all waters whether under confined, unconfined,
or perched conditions, in near-surface unconsolidated sediment or regolith, or
in rock formations deeper underground. 
Illicit Connection
   Either of the following:
      a.   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including any non-
storm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water and
any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
      b.   Any drain or conveyance connected from a residential, commercial or
industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in
plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement
agency.
Illicit Discharge
   Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the storm sewer system,
except as exempted in Subd. 8 of this section.
MPCA
   The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4)
   The system of conveyances (including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or
storm drains) owned and operated by the City and designed or used for
collecting or conveying storm water, and which is not used for collecting or
conveying sewage.
NPDES
   The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System; the program for
issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring, and enforcing
permits under the Clean Water Act (Sections 301, 318, 402, and 405) and United
States Code of Federal Regulations Title 33, Sections 1317, 1328, 1342, and
1345 authorizing the discharge of pollutants to water of the United States.
Person
   Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, franchise, association or
governmental entity.
Pollutant
   Any substance which, when discharged, has potential to or does: interfere
with state designated water uses, obstruct or cause damage to waters of the
state, change water color, odor, or usability as a drinking water source
through causes not attributable to natural stream processes affecting surface
water or subsurface processes affecting groundwater, add an unnatural surface
film on the water; adversely change other chemical, biological, thermal, or
physical conditions, in any surface water or stream channel, degrade the
quality of ground water; or harm human life, aquatic life, or terrestrial plant
and wildlife.  Pollutant includes dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, garbage, wastewater, wastewater sludge, chemical waste, biological
materials, radioactive materials, rock, sand, dust, industrial waste, sediment,
nutrients, toxic substance, pesticide, herbicide, trace metal, automotive
fluid, petroleum-based substance, and oxygen-demanding material.
Pollute
   To discharge pollutants into waters of the state.
Pollution
   The direct or indirect distribution of pollutants into waters of the state.
State
   The State of Minnesota.
State Designated Water uses means uses specified in state water quality
standards.
Storm Sewer System
   A conveyance or system of conveyances that is owned and operated by the City
or other entity and designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water. 
Storm Water
   As defined under Minnesota Rule 7077.0105, Subpart 41(b), storm water is
defined as “precipitation runoff, storm water runoff, snowmelt runoff, and any
other surface runoff and drainage.” 
Surface Waters
   All waters of the state other than ground waters, which include ponds,
lakes, rivers, streams, tidal and nontidal wetlands, public ditches, tax
ditches and public drainage systems except those designed and used to collect,
convey or dispose of sanitary sewage.
Waters of the State
   As defined in M.S. § 115.01, Subd. 22, waters of the state include all
streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs,
reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies
or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial,
public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the
state or any portion thereof.
Subd. 6   Administration.
   The City and its authorized representatives are authorized to administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this section. 
Subd. 7   Illegal Disposal and Dumping
   (1)   No person shall throw, deposit, place, leave, maintain or keep any
substance upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin
conduit or drainage structure, business place, or upon any public or private
plot of land, so that the same might be or become a pollutant, except in
containers, recycling bags, or other lawfully established waste disposal
facility.
   (2)   No person shall intentionally dispose of grass, leaves, dirt, or
landscape material into a water resource, buffer, street, road, alley, catch
basin, culvert, curb, gutter, inlet, ditch, natural watercourse, flood control
channel, canal, storm drain or any fabricated natural conveyance.
Subd. 8   Illicit Discharges and Connections
   (1)   No person shall cause any illicit discharge to enter the storm sewer
system or any surface water unless such discharge:
      a.   Consists of non-storm water that is authorized by an NPDES point
source permit obtained from the MPCA;
      b.   Is associated with firefighting activities or other activities
necessary to protect public health and safety; or
      c.   Is one of the following exempt discharges:  water line flushing or
other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted
stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including
active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning
condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian
habitat or wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pools and any other water
source not containing pollutant. 
   (2)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the City prior to the time of the test.   
   (3)   No person shall use any illicit connection to intentionally convey
non-storm water to the City's storm sewer system. 
   (4)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm sewer system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly
includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past regardless
of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of connection.
   (5)   A person is considered to be in violation of this section if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the storm sewer system, or allows
such a connection to continue. 
Subd. 9   Good Housekeeping Provisions.
   Any owner or occupant of property within the City shall comply with the
following good housekeeping requirements: 
   (1)   No person shall leave, deposit, discharge, dump, or otherwise expose
any chemical or septic waste in an area where discharge to streets or storm
sewer system may occur. This section shall apply to both actual and potential
discharges. 
      a.   Individual septic systems must be maintained to prevent failure,
which has the potential to pollute surface water. 
      b.   No part of any individual septic system requiring on-land or in-
ground disposal of waste shall be located closer than 150 feet from the
ordinary high-water level in the case of DNR-protected waters, or the wetland
boundary in the case of all other water bodies, unless it is proven by the
applicant that no effluent will immediately or gradually reach the water bodies
because of existing physical characteristics of the site or the system.   
      c.   Recreational vehicle sewage shall be disposed to a proper sanitary
waste facility. Waste should not be discharged in an area where drainage to
streets or storm sewer systems may occur. 
      d.   For pools, water should be allowed to sit 7 days without the
addition of chlorine to allow for chlorine to evaporate before discharge.
   (2)   Runoff of water from residential property shall be minimized to the
maximum extent practicable. Runoff of water from the washing down of paved
areas in commercial or industrial property is prohibited unless necessary for
health or safety purposes and not in violation of any other provisions in City
codes.
   (3)   Mobile washing companies (carpet cleaning, mobile vehicle washing and
the like)  shall dispose of wastewater to the sanitary sewer. Wastewater should
not be discharged where drainage to streets or storm sewer system may occur.
   (4)   Storage of materials, machinery, and equipment.
      a.   Objects, such as motor vehicle parts, containing grease, oil or
other hazardous substances, and unsealed receptacles containing hazardous
materials, shall not be stored in areas susceptible to runoff. 
      b.   Any machinery or equipment that is to be repaired or maintained in
areas susceptible to runoff shall be placed in a confined area to contain
leaks, spills, or discharges. 
   (5)   Debris and residue shall be removed, as noted below:
      a.   All motor vehicle parking lots and private streets shall be swept,
at a minimum of once a year in the spring, to remove debris. Such debris shall
be collected and properly disposed. 
      b.   Fuel and chemical residue or other types of potentially harmful
material, such as animal waste, garbage or batteries shall be removed as soon
as possible and disposed of properly. Household hazardous waste may be disposed
of through the county collection program or at any other appropriate disposal
site and shall not be placed in a trash container. 
Subd. 10   Industrial Activity Discharges. 
   Any person subject to an industrial activity NPDES storm water discharge
permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance
with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to the
allowing of discharges to the storm sewer system. All facilities that have
storm water discharges associated with industrial activity must adhere to the
following guidelines:
      (1)   Any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may
be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said
person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the storm sewer system.
   (2)   These BMPs shall be part of a storm water pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
Subd. 11   Notifications of Spills.
   Not withstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response
for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release
of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or
pollutants discharging into the storm sewer system, or water of the state said
person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and
cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials
said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the
occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of
nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the City no later than the
next business day.
Subd. 12   Access to Buildings for Inspection, Monitoring, and/or Dye Testing
   (1)   The City shall be permitted to enter and inspect all buildings under
this section as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this
section. 
   (2)   Facility operators shall allow the City ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, dye testing, examination
and copying of records that relate to the discharge of storm water. 
   (3)   The City shall have the right to set up at any building such devices
as are necessary to conduct monitoring, sampling and/or dye testing of the
facility's storm water discharge. 
   (4)   The City has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. 
   (5)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the City access to a facility is a
violation of this section. 
   (6)   If the City has been refused access to any part of the premises from
which storm water is discharged, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this section, or that there is a need
to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this section or any order issued hereunder,
or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community,
then the City may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.
Subd. 13   Suspension of Storm Sewer System Access
   (1)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The City
may, without prior notice, suspend storm sewer system discharge access to a
person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the storm sewer
system or waters of the state. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the City may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the storm sewer system or waters of
the state, or to minimize danger to persons. 
   (2)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person(s)
discharging to the storm sewer system in violation of this section may have
their storm sewer system access terminated if such termination would abate or
reduce an illicit discharge. A person commits an offense if the person
reinstates storm sewer system access to premises terminated pursuant to this
section, without the prior approval of the City. 
Subd. 14   Enforcement
   (1)   Notice of violation.  Whenever the City finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this section, the
City may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible
person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
      a.   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
      b.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
      c.   That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and
desist; 
      d.   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and
      e.   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
and 
      f.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   (2)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation
or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should
the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the
work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the
expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
   (3)   If the bill received for abatement and/or restoration is not paid
within 30 days, the City may draw the amount of the bill from any financial
guarantees the City may hold or may assess the property from which the offense
originated. After notice and hearing as provided pursuant to M.S. § 429.061,
the City Council may then spread the charges against the property benefitted as
a special assessment under M.S. §  429.101 for certification to the County
Auditor and collection along with the current taxes the following year or in
annual installations not exceeding 10 as the Council may determine in each
case. 
Subd. 15   Penalty. 
   The offending party will be issued an administrative citation for the
unsatisfactory condition at the time the written notice of violation is given.
The City may also enforce M.S. § 169.42 with the maximum penalty for a
misdemeanor as prescribed by state law.   
Subd. 16   Compensatory Action.
   In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and remedies authorized by
this section, the City may impose alternative compensatory actions upon a
violator, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops,
creek cleanup and the like.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 4-10-07) 
 1001.35     ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
Subd. 1   Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide performance standards for the
erection, siting and use of accessory buildings, structures and uses that may
be allowed within the various zoning districts to ensure compatibility with the
principal use and with surrounding properties, as well as to protect the
general health, safety, and welfare of the community.
Subd. 2   General Regulations
   (1)   No accessory building or structure shall be permitted on any lot, in
any district, prior to the time of construction of the principal building to
which it is accessory, except for a building devoted exclusively to
agricultural use, and on a parcel of land at least 10 acres in size and zoned
A-l or A-2 or 20 acres in size and zoned S-A.
   (2)   The City Council may allow the construction of an accessory building
prior to the principal structure being constructed if a building permit is
taken out for both structures and an appropriate escrow deposit and agreement
is made between the applicant and the City to provide for forfeiture in the
event the principal structure is not built within the time specified.
   (3)   All accessory storage buildings 200 square feet in area or less except
those used for agricultural purposes shall be located in the rear yard between
the rear property line and the rear of the main structure no closer than 5 feet
to any property line or 20 feet to a side lot line, if adjacent to any public
street right-of-way.
   (4)   In case an accessory building is attached to the main building it
shall be made structurally a part of the main building and shall comply in all
respects to the main building. An accessory building, unless attached to and
made a part of the main building shall not be closer than 10 feet to the main
building, except as otherwise provided in this Subsection.
   (5)   Accessory building design requirements:
      a.   The exterior materials of the proposed accessory building shall be
complementary in color, texture or materials and of equal or greater quality
with those of the principal dwelling. No accessory building shall be
constructed of canvas, plastic, fabric or other similar nonrigid materials.
      b.   In all Residential Zoning Districts, no post frame construction
shall be constructed in whole or in part on lots less than 80,000 square feet.
For purposes of this section, a post frame construction is defined as a
structure, the basic support and framework of which is provided by wooden poles
inserted vertically into the ground similarly to telephone poles.
      c.   Architectural metal siding can be used as a permitted material
provided it is complementary in color to the principle structure. Any exposed
screws or fasteners shall match the color of the siding. Roof material shall be
asphalt shingles or standing seam metal roof material.
      d.   Vertical siding shall be in 2 colors on all 4 sides of the
structure. Horizontal siding shall match the principle structure and include
trim or other design element to provide a visual break in the siding.
      e.   The accessory building shall include design elements that match the
principal structure. This shall include additional accenting through the use of
a porch, complementary building trim, window/door trim, dormer, wainscoting, or
other elements that are complementary to the principle building.
      f.   Any application for a post frame construction accessory structure in
residential districts shall require a site plan review and approval by the
Planning Commission prior to issuance of a building permit and shall be
accompanied by a color photo of the existing primary structure on site and a
colored elevation plan of the proposed accessory structure with exterior
building materials indicated. A fee for site plan review by the Planning
Commission to cover administrative costs shall also accompany the application
and shall be determined by the current adopted Fee Schedule.
   (6)   For Commercial and Industrial Districts, the exterior materials shall
meet the exterior building materials requirements as specified in this Code.
   (7)   All accessory storage buildings in any zone, shall be maintained and
kept in a neat and orderly fashion, specifically, structurally sound, no
excessive flaking or peeling; if a metal building, no excessive rusting upon or
through the walls, floor or roof. Any building which is not so maintained shall
be removed by the property owner or upon due notice, the building may be
removed by the City at the property owner’s expense.
   (8)   No permanent accessory storage building shall be located in any public
utility easement or easements of record. Where any question arises as to the
location or design of accessory buildings, the City Administrator or designee
may refer the matter to the City Council for final determination.
   (9)   All accessory buildings shall be suitably anchored to the ground.
   (10)   Any accessory building in excess of 200 square feet shall require a
building permit issued by the City of Dayton and shall be constructed to the
standards of the Minnesota State Building Code.
   (11)   For the purpose of this Subsection, gazebos, decks, patios, and other
unenclosed residential uses of property similar in nature shall be excluded
from the definition of the term accessory building.
   (12)   Consideration shall be given to provide for the future expansion and/
or replacement of the septic system. Any application for an accessory structure
in a non-sewered site shall be accompanied by a certified septic compliance
certificate and a site plan showing both the primary and a secondary site
suitable for a septic system. The City may deny the requested permit or alter
the location to account for future septic system needs.
   (13)   No accessory building or structure shall be permitted on any lot, in
any district, without an approved building permit and/or site plan and a
declaration of use statement signed by the applicant.
   (14)   Accessory buildings are not permitted in Mixed Use or Business
Districts.
Subd. 3   Conditional Use Permits.
   Application for a conditional use permit under this chapter shall be
regulated by Subsection
1001.23 of this Code. Such a conditional use permit may be granted provided
that:
   (1)   There is a demonstrated need and potential for continued use of the
structure for the purpose stated.
   (2)   No accessory building or private garage shall be utilized for all or a
portion of a home occupation, for commercial activities or for commercial
storage.
   (3)   No accessory buildings shall be constructed in Business Districts
zoned B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 or Mixed Use Districts zoned V-M, H-M, 125th Avenue-
M without a CUP.
   (4)   The accessory building has an evident reuse or function related to a
single-family residential environment in urban service areas, agriculture
environment in nonurban service areas, business or industrial use in urban
areas of the City.
   (5)   Detached accessory buildings shall be maintained in a manner that is
compatible with the adjacent residential uses and does not present a hazard to
public health, safety and general welfare.
   (6)   The performance standards and criteria of Subsection
1001.14 of this Code shall be considered and a determination made that the
proposed activity is in compliance with such criteria.
   (7)   There is a demonstrated need and potential for an accessory structure
taller than the principal structure in all Residential, Mixed Use, Commercial
and Industrial zoned districts.
Subd. 4   Agricultural Districts
   (1)   Conditional use permit. No building permit shall be issued for the
construction of detached accessory buildings on an agriculture parcel exceeding
the limits stated below, except by conditional use permit.
   (2)   Site plan approval.
      a.   Building permit required. Detached accessory buildings greater than
200 square feet in floor area shall require a building permit. The Building
Official shall review the site plan and construction drawings to determine
compliance with the Building Code and other applicable ordinances, laws, and
regulations.
   (3)   Setbacks and encroachment.
 
A-1, Agricultural District
A-2, Agricultural District
S-A, Special Agricultural District
Setbacks
Front, side or rear to a street           30 feet
Front, side or rear to an arterial street 50 feet
Side yard                                 10 feet
Rear yard                                 10 feet
*Accessory building height shall not exceed the principle dwelling height
 
   (4)   Accessory building performance standards.
      a.   Accessory buildings and structures constructed for agricultural
purposes in Agricultural Districts (A-1, A-2, S-A) are permitted as impervious
coverage allows in Section
1001.05 Subd. 9 and Subd. 10.
      b.   On parcels of less than 1 acre there shall be no more than 2
detached accessory structures and the total area of all detached accessory
buildings shall not exceed the footprint of the principal dwelling.
      c.   The footprint of the principal building includes attached garage
area, if any.
      d.   The exterior materials for residential accessory buildings must be
comparable to the exterior materials of the principal dwelling. Residential
accessory buildings shall have eaves and overhangs.
      e.   No new accessory structures are permitted on the non-homestead
outlot. Existing structures at the time of creation of the outlot will become
legal non-conforming structures.
Subd. 5   Residential Districts
   (1)   Conditional use permit required. No building permit shall be issued
for the construction of more than 1 detached accessory building on a single
parcel in addition to 1 private garage (attached or detached), except by
conditional use permit.
   (2)   Site plan approval.
      a.   Building permit required. Detached accessory buildings greater than
200 square feet in floor area shall require a building permit. The Building
Official shall review the site plan and construction drawings to determine
compliance with the Building Code and other applicable ordinances, laws, and
regulations.
   (3)   Setbacks and encroachment.
 
R-1, Single-Family Residential District (less than 50,000 sq. ft.)
R-1A, Single-Family Residential District with Lot Averaging
R-3, Single-Family Attached and Detached
Front, side or rear to a street           30 feet*
Front, side or rear to an arterial street 50 feet
Side yard                                 5 feet
Rear yard                                 5 feet
Height                                    16 feet**
Size limit                                800 square feet
* Cannot be placed in front yard
** Cannot exceed the height of the principal structure
 
 
R-1, Single-Family Residential District (more than 50,000 sq. ft.)
Front, side or rear to a street           30 feet*
Front, side or rear to an arterial street 50 feet
Side yard                                 5 feet
Rear yard                                 5 feet
Height                                    35 feet**
Size limit                                1,200 square feet
*   Cannot be placed in front yard
**   Cannot exceed the height of the principal structure
 
 
R-2, Single Family Residential District
R-E, Single Family Estate Residential District
Front, side or rear to a street           30 feet*
Front, side or rear to an arterial street 50 feet
Side yard                                 10 feet
Rear yard                                 15 feet
Height                                    35 feet**
Size Limit
   Under 2.5 acres                     1,250 sq. ft.
   2.51-4.75 acres                     1,750 sq. ft.
   4.75-9.9 acres                      2,000 sq. ft.
   10+ acres                           As per impervious coverage limits
* Cannot be placed in front yard
** Cannot exceed the height of the principal structure
 
 
R-M, Medium Density Residential District
R-H, High Density Residential District
Front, side or rear to a street           30 feet*
Front, side or rear to an arterial street 25 feet
Side yard                                 10 feet
Rear yard                                 10 feet
Height                                    10 feet**
Size limit                                800 square feet
* Cannot be placed in front yard
** Limited to 1 story with maximum sidewall of 10 feet measured from floor
surface to underside of the ceiling member
 
 
RMH, Manufactured Housing District
Front, side or rear to a street           15 feet*
Front, side or rear to an arterial street 5 feet
Side yard                                 10 feet
Rear yard                                 5 feet
Size limit                                800 square feet
* Cannot be placed in front yard
** Cannot exceed the height of the principal structure
 
   (4)   Detached accessory buildings not exceeding 200 square feet in floor
area.
      a.   All detached accessory buildings less than 200 square feet shall be
set back at least 6 feet from any other building or structure on the same lot
and shall not be located within a required buffer yard or drainage and/or
utility easement.
      b.   Such structures may encroach into the required side or rear yard
setbacks when located in the rear yard of the lot, except in the case of a side
yard of a corner lot abutting a public street.
      c.   When encroachment into required side or rear yard setbacks is
allowed, such detached accessory buildings shall be set back at least 5 feet
from all adjoining lots.
   (5)   Detached accessory buildings exceeding 200 square feet in floor area.
      a.   All detached accessory buildings in excess of 200 square feet shall
be set back at least 10 feet from any other building or structure on the same
lot, and shall not be located within a required buffer yard or drainage and/or
utility easement.
      b.   Such structures may encroach into the required side or rear yard
setbacks when located in the rear yard of a lot, except in the case of a side
yard of a corner lot abutting a public street.
      c.   When encroachment into required side or rear yard setbacks is
allowed, such detached accessory buildings shall be set back at least 10 feet
from all adjoining lots.
   (6)   Attached private garages. A private garage attached to the principal
building shall not exceed 1,000 square feet as measured by interior dimensions
and shall be subject to all building and setback requirements of the principal
structure, except as provided for herein.
   (7)   Animal enclosures.
      a.   Notwithstanding Subdivision 5(7)c. of this Subsection, domestic
animal enclosures shall not be placed in the front yard or in the side yards
abutting a street, shall not be placed closer than 10 feet to any property
line, and shall not be placed closer than 25 feet to any dwelling unit other
than on the owner’s property.
      b.   No encroachment shall be permitted in existing or required buffer
yard or drainage and/or utility easements.
      c.   Screening and/or a hard surface will be required if problems occur
with appearance, noise, odor, and sanitation as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
      d.   No such enclosure shall exceed 200 square feet, unless approved
through an administrative permit.
   (8)   Temporary shelters. Unless mounted on a trailer or equipped with
wheels, temporary shelters, ice fishing houses or other such structures used or
designed to be used as temporary shelters shall be considered accessory
buildings and shall be subject to the setback, square footage and other
regulations of this Code.
 
RO, Historic Village Residential District
Setbacks and Encroachment
   Front, side or rear to a street30 feet*
   Side yard                      5 feet
   Rear yard                      5 feet
   Height                         16 feet**
   Structure sidewall             8 feet
Size Limit
   Parcels 12,000 sq. ft. and larg1,000 sq. ft.***
   Parcels under 12,000 sq. ft.   800 sq. ft.***
* Accessory structure cannot be placed in front yard
** Cannot exceed the height of the principal structure
*** Size limit includes all attached and detached garages and accessory
structures
 
   (9)   Special provisions.
      a.   There shall be no more than 2 detached accessory structures on any
lot and the total area of all detached accessory buildings and attached garages
shall not exceed the footprint of the principal dwelling.
      b.   The exterior materials for residential accessory buildings must be
comparable to the exterior materials of the principal dwelling. Accessory
buildings shall have eaves and overhangs with a roof pitch matching that of the
principal structure. A minimum of a 4:12 roof pitch shall be required.
      c.   No accessory structures may be located in front of the dwelling.
Subd. 6   Industrial Districts
   (1)   Conditional use permit required. No building permit shall be issued
for the construction of more than 1 detached accessory building on a single
parcel in addition to 1 private garage (attached or detached), except by
conditional use permit.
   (2)   Site plan approval.
      a.   Building permit required. Detached accessory buildings greater than
200 square feet in floor area shall require a building permit. The Building
Official shall review the site plan and construction drawings to determine
compliance with the Building Code and other applicable ordinances, laws, and
regulations.
   (3)   Setbacks and encroachment.
 
I-1, Light Industrial District
I-2, Heavy Industrial District
B-P, Business Park District
Front, side or rear to a street 40 feet, 60 feet next to residential*
Side yard                       10 feet, 20 feet next to residential
Rear yard                       20 feet, 20 feet next to residential
Maximum floor area ratio        .50 FAR
* Cannot be placed in front yard
** Cannot exceed the height of the principal structure
 
(Ord. 2010-03, passed 7-13-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-06, passed 4-26-2011; Am. Ord.
2012-01, passed 1-10-2012; Am. Ord. 2015-07, passed 6-24-2015; Am. Ord. 2018-
15, passed 5-23-2018)
1001.40   MODEL HOMES.
Subd. 1   Purpose.
   The purpose of this section is to provide for the erection of model homes,
which may include temporary real estate offices, in new subdivisions without
adversely affecting the character of surrounding residential neighborhoods or
creating a general nuisance. As model homes represent a unique temporary
commercial use, special consideration must be given to the peculiar problems
associated with them and special standards must be applied to ensure reasonable
compatibility with their environment.
Subd. 2   Qualification.
   To qualify for a building permit for a model home, which may include a
temporary real estate office, the following shall be required:
   (1)   Upon receipt of final plat approval and recording, 1 building permit
per subdivision may be granted. No final certificate of occupancy shall be
issued until the infrastructure improvements including the first lift of
asphalt have been completed and approved by the City.
   (2)   Upon completion of infrastructure improvements including the first
lift of asphalt within the respective final plat subdivision, additional
building permits may be issued for model homes and/or temporary real estate
offices, provided that the number of model homes and/or temporary real estate
offices shall not exceed 5% of the lots within the final plat.
Subd. 3   Procedure.
   The erection of a model home(s) within all Residential Districts, which may
include a temporary real estate office(s), shall require a building permit, as
may be issued by the Zoning Administrator.
Subd. 4   Special Requirements
   (1)   Model homes and model homes with temporary real estate offices shall
be allowed in all Residential Zoning Districts in which they are located and
shall be utilized solely for selling purposes of lots and/or homes within the
subdivision in which it is located.
   (2)   Temporary off street parking facilities equal to 3 paved spaces per
model home dwelling unit or a model home with a temporary real estate office
shall be provided. The head-in parking area on the driveway for the model home
may be used to satisfy the off street parking requirement provided that the
stalls are not in a tandem arrangement and no portion of the stall encroaches
into the public right-of-way. The overall design, drainage, and surfacing of
the temporary off street parking facility shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Zoning Administrator.
   (3)   Access from a temporary parking facility shall be directed away from
developed and occupied residential neighborhoods to the greatest extent
possible, as determined by the City.
   (4)   No model home or model home with a temporary real estate office shall
incorporate outside lighting which creates a nuisance to, among other things,
other properties and/or public right-of-ways due to glare or intensity.
   (5)   All signage shall comply with the sign regulations as contained in
City Code Subsection
1001.20, and its amendments, for the zoning district in which the model home
and/or temporary real estate office is located.
   (6)   No residential certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a model
home or model home with a temporary real estate office until such time as the
structure has been fully converted to a residence in compliance with the
adopted Building Code. Additionally, such conversion shall include, but not be
limited to, parking lot restoration and the removal of signage and lighting.
Any application for a certificate of occupancy shall be subject to the review
and approval of the City.
   (7)   The restoration of all temporary parking areas with appropriate
landscaping, as determined by the City, shall be completed by the end of the
following growing season.
Subd. 5   Restricted Use.
   Model homes and model homes with temporary real estate offices shall be used
solely for the display and sale of home fixtures and products, and real estate
for the subdivision in which they are located unless approved by the Zoning
Administrator through an administrative permit.
(Ord. 2010-17, passed 7-27-2010)
1001.41   TEMPORARY STRUCTURES.
Subd. 1   Purpose.
   The purpose of this section is to provide for the erection of temporary
structures (not including model homes/temporary real estate offices or
temporary classroom structures for use by a public or private institution)
needed for emergency purposes or for temporary use during the construction of a
permanent structure.
Subd. 2   Procedure.
   The erection of a temporary structure shall require an administrative
permit, as may be issued by the Zoning Administrator, except as otherwise
provided by City Code. Failure to meet the requirements of this section shall
be grounds for revocation of any issued permit.
Subd. 3   Special Requirements
   (1)   Temporary structures governed by this section shall be allowed in all
zoning districts.
   (2)   No administrative permit shall be issued for a temporary structure
unless: a site plan meeting or exceeding the requirements of City Code has been
submitted for the review and approval of the Zoning Administrator, if required
by the Zoning Administrator, or unless a building permit has been issued for a
new structure, addition or remodeling of an existing structure on the property.
   (3)   The administrative permit shall terminate 9 months from its date of
issuance, or within 30 days after a certificate of occupancy has been issued by
the Building Official for the permanent structure, whichever occurs first,
unless a different time schedule is approved as part of the permit. The permit
may be extended for an additional 90 days by and at the discretion of the
Zoning Administrator.
   (4)   Temporary structures may be placed in a required building setback
area, provided that no such structure may be placed within 30 feet of a public
right-of-way or obstruct visibility, as determined by the City, at any public
right-of-way intersection or driveway access.
   (5)   All applicable requirements of the State Building Code shall be met to
the satisfaction of the City.
   (6)   Provisions for water and sewer servicing the temporary structures
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Building Official. Any such
requirements shall be met to the satisfaction of the Building Official.
   (7)   A plan for security measures of the temporary structure, including but
not limited to lighting, shall be submitted subject to the review and approval
of the Zoning Administrator and shall be implemented as required by the Zoning
Administrator.
   (8)   Parking shall be in compliance with the requirements of City Code.
   (9)   Signage shall be in compliance with the requirements of City Code
Subsection
1001.20, and its amendments.
(Ord. 2010-17, passed 7-27-2010)
1001.42   ANIMALS.
Subd. 1   Keeping of Animals other than Dogs and Cats.
         (1)   Generally.
            a.   Small animals, as defined in § 94.01 of the Dayton City Code,
are permitted in all residential zones. Any owner of residentially zoned
property where five (5) dogs over six (6) months of age are kept on the
premises and such use is incidental to the occupancy of the premises for
residential purposes shall be required to apply for a Private Kennel license.
            b.   The keeping or maintaining of any wild and exotic animals is
prohibited in all areas of the City.
            c.   Only animals or animal types specified or named in this
section and not predominately found only in the wild may be used for security
purposes.
            d.   The keeping and/or maintaining of animals in the B-1, B-2, B-
P, I-1 and I-2 districts shall be limited to security animals.
            e.   The keeping and/or maintaining of honeybees is prohibited in
areas within the City zoned R-O and R-MH unless a Conditional Use Permit is
obtained.
            f.   Keeping of a rooster(s) is prohibited in any residential zoned
parcel and in any A-1, A-2 or SA zoned parcel less than 5 acres.
            g.   The keeping and/or maintaining of large animals and farm
animals in the R-MH, GMU-1, GMU-2, and GMU-3 districts is prohibited.
            h.   The maintaining of a commercial dog kennel or cat shelter is
prohibited in all areas of the City except areas zoned A-1, B-3, and B-4.
            i.   All land zoned A-1, A-2, S-A, and R-E which is in land 20
acres or less may be required to provide a wetland delineation to ensure land
is suitable for animals.
            j.   A property owner may apply for an Interim Use Permit to allow
more animals than permitted by this section.
         (2)   Agriculture and Large Lot Residential (A-1, A-2, S-A, R-E).
            a.   Lots less than 25,000 sq. ft. are permitted 1.0 animal unit.
 
Permitted Animal Types for Lots less than 25,000
sq. ft. in Agriculture and Large Lot Residential  Assigned Animal Unit Values
(A-1, A-2, S-A, R-E)
Poultry/fowl/bird families (of a size larger than 3 head = 1.0 unit
the ordinary pigeon) except emu and ostrich
Poultry/fowl/bird families (of a size of the      6 head = 1.0 unit
ordinary pigeon or smaller)
Small animals                                     6 head = 1.0 unit
 
            b.   Lots greater than 25,001 sq. ft. but less than 90,000 sq. ft.
are permitted 1.0 animal unit.
 
Permitted Animal Types for Lots greater than 25,001
sq. ft. but less than 90,000 sq. ft. in Agriculture Assigned Animal Unit Values
and Large Lot Residential (A-1, A-2, S-A, R-E)
Poultry/fowl/bird families (of a size larger than   12 head = 1.0 unit
the ordinary pigeon) except emu and ostrich
Poultry/fowl/bird families (of a size of the        25 head = 1.0 unit
ordinary pigeon or smaller)
Small animals                                       25 head = 1.0 unit
 
            c.   Lots greater than 90,001 sq. ft. are permitted animal units as
follows:
               i.   Lots greater than 90,001 sq. ft. but less than 5.0 acres
are permitted 4.0 animal units.
               ii.   Lots greater than 5.01 acres but less than 8.0 acres are
permitted 6.0 animal units.
               iii.   Lots greater than 8.01 acres but less than 12.0 acres are
permitted 9.0 animal units.
               iv.   Lots greater than 12.01 acres but less than 16.0 acres are
permitted 12.0 animal units.
               v.   Lots greater than 16.01 acres but less than 20.0 acres are
permitted 16.0 animal units.
               vi.   Lots greater than 20.01 acres of land shall have their
animal units determined by the following formula:
                  Maximum animal unit value = Number of Acres (according to
Hennepin County records) x 1.0
                  When added together the sum of the individual animal unit
values as shown on the schedule shall not exceed the maximum animal value as
determined by the formula.
 
Permitted Animal Types for Lots Greater than 90,001
sq. ft. in Agriculture and Large Lot Residential    Assigned Animal Unit Values
(A-1, A-2, S-A, R-E)
Horse/mule families                                 1 head = 1.0 unit
Cattle family                                       1 head = 1.0 unit
Hog family, including nondomestic potbellied pigs   1 head = 1.0 unit
Sheep/goat families                                 2 head = 1.0 unit
Poultry/fowl/bird families (of a size larger than   25 head = 1.0 unit
the ordinary pigeon) except emu and ostrich
Poultry/fowl/bird families (of a size of the        50 head = 1.0 unit
ordinary pigeon or smaller)
Small animals                                       25 head = 1.0 unit
 
         (3)   Residential (R-O, R-1, R-2).
            a.   R-1 and R-O zoned lots less than 50,000 sq. ft. are permitted
1.0 animal unit.
 
Permitted Animal Types in R-1 and R-O Zoned Lots  Assigned Animal Unit Values
less than 50,000 sq. ft.
Poultry/fowl/bird families (of a size larger than 3 head = 1.0 unit
the ordinary pigeon) except emu and ostrich
Poultry/fowl/bird families (of a size of the      6 head = 1.0 unit
ordinary pigeon or smaller)
Small animals                                     6 head = 1.0 unit
 
            b.   R-1 zoned lots greater than 50,000 sq. ft. and R-2 zoned lots
are permitted 1.0 animal unit.
 
Permitted Animal Types in R-1 Zoned Lots greater  Assigned Animal Unit Values
than 50,000 sq. ft. and R-2 Zoned Lots
Poultry/fowl/bird families (of a size larger than 25 head = 1.0 unit
the ordinary pigeon) except emu and ostrich
Poultry/fowl/bird families (of a size of the      50 head = 1.0 unit
ordinary pigeon or smaller)
Small animals                                     25 head = 1.0 unit
 
            c.   R-E zoned district are permitted 4.0 animal units.
 
Permitted Animal Types in R-E Zoned District      Assigned Animal Unit Values
Horse/mule families                               1 head = 1.0 unit
Cattle family                                     1 head = 1.0 unit
Hog family, including nondomestic potbellied pigs 1 head = 1.0 unit
Sheep/goat families                               2 head = 1.0 unit
Poultry/fowl/bird families (of a size larger than 25 head = 1.0 unit
the ordinary pigeon) except emu and ostrich
Poultry/fowl/bird families (of a size of the      50 head = 1.0 unit
ordinary pigeon or smaller)
Small animals                                     25 head = 1.0 unit
 
Subd. 2   Standards for Keeping and Maintaining Animals.
         (1)   Statutes adopted by reference. Minn. Stat. §§ 343.20-343.36
relating to animal cruelty to animals are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated in and made a part of this section as though fully set forth in
this subdivision.
         (2)   Federal regulations adopted by reference. The Code of Federal
Regulations, 9 CFR § 1, relating to humane handling, care, treatment and
transportation of animals is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in
and made part of this section as though fully set forth in this subdivision.
         (3)   Animal restraint. In all situations in the A-l, A-2, S-A, and R-
E zoning districts where animals of the hoofed variety or the fowl family are
permitted to roam and/or graze about the property, a suitable fencing system
shall be in place so as to restrain the animals roaming and/or grazing to the
property of the person keeping or maintaining the animals.
            a.   The fence shall be of sufficient type so as to effectively
control the animals therein and to prevent an animal from crossing the
boundaries established by the fence.
            b.   In addition, neither such fence nor any animal shelter or
stabling facility shall be any closer than fifty (50) feet from any structure
which is used for residential purposes and is not the residential structure of
the animal owner or keeper.
         (4)   Animal stabling. All areas where animals are to be kept, stabled
or maintained shall be of adequate space to maintain such animals in reasonably
healthy condition and comfort, and the space shall be in compliance with the
requirements of this code. In no instance shall any one horse, colt or pony be
kept in an area that is less than one undivided acre.
         (5)   Pollution of public water. The keeping, storing, stabling or
maintenance of any animal in any district shall not contribute to the pollution
of any public body of water.
         (6)   Sanitary conditions.
            a.   Any person who owns, keeps, harbors, or has charge or control
of any animal shall immediately collect and remove any and all feces deposited
by the animal on public property or on private property not occupied by or
under control of that person.
            b.   While a person is with an animal on property not occupied by
or under the control of that person, such person shall have in his immediate
physical possession a means to collect and sanitarily dispose of all animals
fecal matter deposited on public property or the private property of another.
            c.   Any person who owns, keeps, harbors, or has charge or control
of any animal on or upon premises or land occupied by, or under the control of,
that person shall frequently collect and remove any accumulation of fecal
matter that is unhealthy or offensive.
            d.   The premises on which any animal is kept or maintained shall
be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, including removal of all fecal
matter and bedding material, and shall not be a harbor for rodents, flies, or
insects.
Subd. 3   Dead Animals.
         Disposal of dead animals is regulated as follows:
         (1)   The term "body" does not include the ashes of a cremated animal.
         (2)   The body of any animal that dies in the City shall, within
twenty-four (24) hours of death, be cremated, removed from the City, or buried
in accordance with the terms of this section.
         (3)   Burial of an animal shall be at a minimum depth of at least
three (3) feet and in a manner designed so as to prevent exposure of the
carcass by erosion, the digging by other animals, or any other reasonably
foreseeable act or occurrence. No animal shall be buried in an area deemed by
the City to pose a threat to the public's health, safety or welfare, such as
low swampy areas, areas which may be subject to flooding, areas in close
proximity to any water table, or under any other conditions, soil or otherwise,
which could create a potential threat to the public's health, safety or
welfare, unless proof acceptable to the City is provided showing that any such
condition present or likely to be present will not pose such a threat or will
be neutralized so as to substantially eliminate such a threat.
         (4)   No person shall retain custody of or deposit a dead animal or
conduct any other activity in violations of provisions of this section.
Subd. 4   Cat and Dog License and Kennels.
         (1)   License. No person shall own, harbor, or keep a dog or cat over
six (6) months of age within the City unless a current license for such dog or
cat has been obtained. The license shall be issued for a two-year period and
shall expire on December 31 of the last year of the license issued.
         (2)   Animals owned by nonresidents. Dogs and cats over six (6) months
of age owned or kept by nonresidents of the City are not permitted to remain in
the City longer than fourteen (14) days without complying with the terms of
this section.
         (3)   Application; fee; receipt. Each person owning, keeping, or
harboring a dog or cat is required to pay a license fee to the city
administrator or his designee as imposed by this section. The license fee for
any dog or cat shall be established by the City Council by resolution. Each
application for such license shall include a statement, signed by the person
applying tor the license, which certifies that the dog or cat has been
inoculated for rabies not more than twenty-four (24) months preceding the date
of application. Upon receipt of the license fee and the signed application, the
city administrator or his designee shall execute the receipt in triplicate, the
original of which shall be given to the person who pays the fee. The duplicate
shall be given to the Police Department and the third copy shall be retained in
the records of the city administrator or his designee. This receipt shall
describe the dog or cat as to color, breed, age, sex, and weight. Any owner
shall produce for inspection the license receipt upon the request of the animal
control officer or a police officer.
         (4)   Unlawful use of a receipt, tag, or inoculation certificate. It
shall be unlawful for any person to use a dog or cat license receipt, license
tag, or rabies inoculation certificate issued to another person.
         (5)   Tags. The city administrator or his designee shall procure a
sufficient number of metallic tags for delivery of one tag to the person paying
the license fee. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the dog or cat
for which the tag was obtained to permanently attach the tag to the collar of
the dog or cat in such a manner that the tag may be readily seen. The tag is
not transferable to any other dog or cat or to a new owner of the dog or cat.
If a tag is lost or stolen, the owner may obtain a new tag by surrendering the
license receipt for the first tag and by paying an additional fee as duly
established by the City Council by resolution.
         (6)   Kennels.
            a.   Required. No person shall own, harbor, or keep upon his
premises five (5) dogs or cats over the age of six (6) months unless in a
commercial or private kennel duly permitted under this section.
            b.   Issuance. No person shall operate a commercial or private
kennel in the City without first obtaining a permit. Application for such
permit shall be made to the city administrator or his designee and shall be
accompanied by a permit fee established by the City Council by resolution. Such
a permit shall be issued upon a showing of compliance with all laws and
ordinances.
            c.   Term; fee. Commercial and private kennel permits shall be
issued on an annual basis, expiring on December 31 following the first
effective day of the kennel permit. The commercial kennel permit shall be as
established by the City Council by resolution.
            d.   Maintenance of premises; inspections; revocations of permit.
Commercial and private kennels shall be kept in a clean and healthful condition
at all times and shall be open for inspection by duly authorized City
authorities at any reasonable time. A commercial or private kennel permit may
be revoked by the City Council after notice and a reasonable opportunity to be
heard by reason of a violation of this section or any health or nuisance order,
law, or regulation.
         (7)   Standards for Kennels.
            a.   Private and commercial kennel facilities shall be structurally
sound and maintained in good condition. Indoor housing facilities should be
adequately ventilated and have ample light and heat, either natural or
artificial.
            b.   Animals kept outside shall be provided with access to shelter
to protect them from the sun, rain, and snow, together with adequate bedding
when temperature falls below fifty (50) degrees Fahrenheit.
            c.   If animals are confined by chains, such chains shall be so
attached that they cannot become entangled with the chains of other animals or
objects. Chains shall be at least three (3) times the length of the animal as
measured from the top of its nose to the base of its tail.
            d.   Enclosures shall be of sufficient size to allow each animal to
turn around fully and stand, sit, and lie in a comfortable normal position. The
floors of the enclosure shall be constructed so as to prevent injury to the
animal's legs and feet.
            e.   The temperature for indoor housing facilities shall not be
allowed to fall below fifty (50) degrees Fahrenheit for animals not accustomed
to lower temperatures.
            f.   Disposal facilities shall be provided to minimize vermin,
infestation, odors and disease hazards.
            g.   Adequate storage and refrigeration shall be provided to
protect food supplies against contamination and deterioration.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 5-10-2011; Am. Ord. 2012-03, passed 1-10-2012; Am. Ord.
2014-11, passed 7-8-2014; Am. Ord. 2017-15, passed 9-25-2017)
1001.43   ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS.
Subd. 1   Scope.
   This division applies to alternative energy systems in all zoning districts.
Subd. 2   Purpose and intent.
   The purpose and intent of this section is to establish standards and
procedures by which the installation and operation of wind and solar energy
system shall be governed within the City. The City finds that it is in the
public interest to encourage alternative energy systems that have a positive
impact on energy production and conservation while not having an adverse impact
on the community.
Subd. 3   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         Accessory
         A system designed as a secondary use to existing buildings or
facilities, wherein the power generated is used primarily for on-site
consumption.
         Building-integrated solar energy system
         A solar energy system that is an integral part of a principal or
accessory building, rather than a separate mechanical device, replacing or
substituting for an architectural or structural component of the building
including, but not limited to, photovoltaic or hot water solar systems
contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights and awnings.
         Flush-mounted solar energy system
         A roof-mounted system mounted directly abutting the roof. The pitch of
the solar collector may exceed the pitch of the roof up to 5% but shall not be
higher than 10 inches above the roof.
         Passive solar energy system
         A system that captures solar light or heat without transforming it to
another form of energy or transferring the energy via a heat exchanger.
         Solar energy system
         A device or structural design feature, a substantial purpose of which
is to provide daylight for interior lighting or provide for the collection,
storage and distribution of solar energy for space heating or cooling,
electricity generation or water heating.
         Total height
         The highest point above natural grade reached by a rotor tip or any
other part of a wind turbine.
Subd. 4   Solar Energy Standards.
      Solar energy collection equipment.
         (1)   Zoning districts.
            a.   Ground-mounted solar energy systems are allowed in accordance
with the standards in this section as a permitted accessory use in the AG, R-2,
and R-E residential districts on lots 2 acres or greater and in the 1-1,1-2 and
BP zoning districts.
            b.   Roof-mounted solar energy systems are allowed in accordance
with the standards in this section are allowed as a permitted accessory use in
all zoning districts.
         (2)   Exemption. Passive or building-integrated solar energy systems
are exempt from the requirements of this section and shall be regulated as any
other building element.
         (3)   Standards.
            a.   Location. In agricultural and residential zoning districts
(lot area 2 acres or greater), ground-mounted solar energy systems are limited
to the rear yard. In the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts, ground- mounted solar
energy systems may be permitted in the side yard meeting accessory structure
requirements in Section
1001.35.
            b.   Height. Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall comply with
the maximum height requirements in the applicable zoning district. Ground-
mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed 20 feet in height.
            c.   Setbacks. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall comply
with all accessory structure setbacks in the applicable zoning district. Roof-
mounted systems shall comply with all building setbacks in the applicable
zoning district and shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter of the
building on which the system is mounted.
            d.   Roof mounting. Roof-mounted solar collectors shall be flush
mounted on pitched roofs unless the roof pitch is determined to be inadequate
for optimum performance of the solar energy system in which case the pitch of
the solar collector may exceed the pitch of the roof up to a maximum of 3 feet
above the roof.
            e.   Easements. Solar energy systems shall not encroach on public
drainage, utility roadway or trail easements.
            f.   Screening. Solar energy systems shall be screened from view to
the extent possible without impacting their function.
            g.   Maximum area. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be
limited to a maximum area consistent with the accessory structure limitations
in Section
1001.35.
            h.   Aesthetics. All solar energy systems shall be designed to
blend into the architecture of the building to the extent possible without
negatively impacting the performance of the system and to minimize glare
towards vehicular traffic and adjacent properties.
            i.   Glare. The panels of ground mounted solar energy systems shall
be placed and arranged such that reflected solar radiation or glare shall not
be directed onto adjacent buildings, properties or roadways. Prior to issuance
of a permit for a ground-mounted solar system in a agricultural or residential
district or on a property abutting a agricultural or residential district, the
permit applicant must provide an analysis demonstrating that the ground-mounted
system will not impact aesthetics of adjacent residential properties due to
glare.
            j.   Feeder lines. The electrical collection system shall be placed
underground within the interior of each parcel. The collection system may be
placed overhead near substations or points on interconnection to the electric
grid.
            k.   Structures shall not be located such that solar power access
blocks a neighboring property.
            l.   Abandonment. If a solar energy system remains nonfunctional or
inoperative for a continuous period of 1 year, the system shall be deemed to be
abandoned and shall constitute a public nuisance. The owner shall remove the
abandoned system at their expense after a demolition permit has been obtained.
Removal includes the entire structure including transmission equipment.
         (4)   Permits. A building permit shall be obtained for any solar
energy system prior to installation.
            a.   Plan application. Plan applications for solar energy systems
shall be accompanied by to-scale horizontal and vertical (elevation) drawings.
The drawings must show the location of the system on the building or on the
property for a ground-mount system, including all property lines.
            b.   Pitched roof mount solar energy systems. For all roof-mounted
systems other than a flat roof the elevation must show the highest finished
slope of the solar collector and the slope of the finished roof surface on
which it is mounted.
            c.   Flat roof-mounted solar energy system. For flat roof
applications a drawing shall be submitted showing the distance to the roof edge
and any parapets on the building and shall identify the height of the building
on the street frontage side,
               the shortest distance of the system from the street edge of the
building, and the highest finished height of the solar collector above the
finished surface of the roof.
            d.   Plan approvals. Applications that meet the design requirements
of this section shall be granted administrative approval by the City Planner.
            e.   Compliance with Building Code. All active solar energy systems
shall meet approval of the Building Code, consistent with the state of
Minnesota Building Code and solar thermal system shall comply with HVAC-related
requirements of the Energy Code.
            f.   Compliance with State Electric Code. All photovoltaic systems
shall comply with the Minnesota State Electric Code.
(Ord. 2016-09, passed 3-8-2016)
SECTION 1002: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
1002.01   Purpose
1002.02   Definitions
1002.03   Premature Subdivision
1002.04   Application of Chapter
   Subd. 1   Administrative Subdivision
   Subd. 2   Council Action
   Subd. 3   Preliminary Concept Plan
1002.05   Preliminary Plat Procedures
   Subd. 1   Filing
1002.06   Data Required for Preliminary Plats
   Subd. 1   Identification and Description Data
   Subd. 2   Existing Conditions Data
   Subd. 3   Proposed Development Design Features Data
   Subd. 4   Additional Requirements
1002.07   Design Standards for Preliminary Plats
   Subd. 1   General Requirements
   Subd. 2   Streets and Alleys
   Subd. 3   Blocks
   Subd. 4   Lots
   Subd. 5   Easements
1002.08   Final Plat Procedures
   Subd. 1   Procedure
   Subd. 2   City Council Consideration
   Subd. 3   Vested Rights
   Subd. 4   Signing of Plat
   Subd. 5   Recording of Plat
   Subd. 6   Proof of Recording
   Subd. 7   Data Required for Final Plats
   Subd. 8   Certifications Required on Final Plats
   Subd. 9   Supplementary Documents and Information
   Subd. 10   Dedication of Lands for Public Purposes
   Subd. 11   Stormwater Management/Low Impact Development
1002.09   Basic Improvements Required
   Subd. 1   Requirements
   Subd. 2   Improvements
   Subd. 3   Developer’s Agreement
   Subd. 4   Inspection by City Engineer and City Planner
   Subd. 5   Escrow of Required Deposits
   Subd. 6   Release and Expiration of Financial Guarantees
   Subd. 7   Warranty/Maintenance Guarantee
1002.10   Registered Land Surveys and Conveyance by Metes and Bounds
   Subd. 1   Registered Land Survey
   Subd. 2   Conveyance by Metes and Bounds
   Subd. 3   Waiver
   Subd. 4   Building Permits
   Subd. 5   Sea Level Elevations Required
1002.11   Variances
   Subd. 1   General Conditions
   Subd. 2   Application Required
1002.12   Building Permits
1002.13   Violations
   Subd. 1   Sale of Lots from Unrecorded Plats
   Subd. 2   Building on Future Lot Lines
   Subd. 3   Misrepresentations as to Construction, Supervision or Inspection
of Improvements
1002.14   Growth Management
1002.15   Conservation Subdivision
   Subd. 1   Purpose
   Subd. 2   Application
   Subd. 3   Planned Unit Development Designation
   Subd. 4   Data Required for Preliminary Plats
1002.01   PURPOSE.
   (1)   In order to safeguard the best interests of the City of Dayton and to
assist the subdividers in harmonizing their interests with those of the City at
large, this section is adopted.
   (2)   Because each new subdivision becomes a permanent unit in the basic
structure of the expanding community, and to which the community will be forced
to adhere, and because piece meal planning of subdivision will bring on
undesirable, disconnection patchwork of patterns and poor circulation of
traffic unless its design and arrangement is correlated to a Comprehensive Plan
of the City aimed at a unified scheme of community interests, all subdivisions
of land hereafter submitted for approval to the City shall, in all respects,
fully comply with the regulations set forth in this section.
   (3)   It is the purpose of this section to make certain regulations and
requirements for the platting of land within the City of Dayton pursuant to the
authority contained in M.S. §§ 429, 462, 471 and 505, as may be amended from
time to time, which regulations the City Council deems necessary for health,
safety and the general welfare.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 9-28-2010)
1002.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this section, certain words and terms are defined as
follows:
Alley
   A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting
property.
Applicant
   The owner of land proposed to be subdivided, or that person’s
representative.
Block
   An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, or
by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision, or a
combination of the above with a river or lake.
Boulevard
   The portion of the street right-of-way between the curb and the property
line.
Building
   Any structure used or intended for support or sheltering any use or
occupancy.
Comprehensive Plan
   The group of maps, charts and ordinances that make up the comprehensive,
long-range plan of the City.
Council
   The City Council of the City of Dayton.
Cul-de-sac
      A local street with only 1 outlet and having an appropriate terminal for
the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
Deflection Angle
   The angle between a line and the prolongation of the preceding line.
Design Standards
   The specifications to which landowners or subdividers must comply for the
preparation of plats, both preliminary and final, indicating among other things
the optimum, minimum or maximum dimensions of such items as right-of-way,
blocks, easements and lots.
Easement
   A grant by a property owner for the use of land for the purpose of utilities
and facilities, including, but not limited to, electric lines, telephone lines,
storm sewer or storm drainage ways, watermain and gas lines, open space and
conservation.
Easement, Slope
   A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land for the purpose
of constructing a slope or grade transition from the existing property grades
to the new street grade.
Final Plat
   A drawing or map of a subdivision, meeting all the requirements of the City
and in the form as required by the county for purposes of recording.
Flag Lot
   A lot without the required full lot width on a public roadway and with
access to the public roadway provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a
narrow strip or private easement; or, any lot, shaped like a flag, where the
bulk or flag area of the lot has a width dimension greater than the frontage on
a public roadway, regardless of frontage on the public roadway.
Improvement
   Any object, structure, work of art, utility, grading or building
constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such
betterment.
Improvement, Public
   Any improvement or facility for which a governmental body, including but not
limited to, the City or a school district, may ultimately assume the
responsibility or maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement
for which such responsibility already exists.
Lot
   A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision, separated from other parcels
or portions by a description.
Lot, Corner
   A lot situated at the junction of an abutting on 2 or more intersecting
streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a single street,
the interior angle of which is 135 degrees or less.
Lot, Through
   A lot fronting on 2 parallel streets.
Outlot
   A remnant parcel of land created during the platting process that is
intended as open space or other use, or for future development or platting.
Owner
   Any person having a sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under
these regulations.
Parks and Playgrounds
   Public lands and local open spaces in the City of Dayton dedicated for or
reserved for recreation and conservation purposes.
Pedestrian Way
   A public or private right-of-way across a block or within a block to provide
access, to be used by pedestrians, and which may be used for the installation
of utility lines.
Percentage of Grade on Street Center Line
   The distance vertically (up or down) from the horizontal in feet and tenths
of a foot for each 100 feet of horizontal distance.
Planning Commission
   The Planning Commission of the City of Dayton.
Preliminary Plat
   A tentative drawing or map of a proposed subdivision meeting requirements
herein enumerated.
Protective Covenants
   Contracts or conditions, other than those imposed by public regulation,
relating to the manner in which land may be used, with the view to protecting
and preserving the physical, social and economic integrity of any given area.
Street
   A public right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians and vehicles
to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare,
parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or however otherwise
designated.
Street, Community Collector
   A street that connects communities within and between subregions; provides
mobility between communities; and provides access to other streets, as found on
the Comprehensive Plan.
Street, Local
   A street that connects blocks within neighborhoods, provides mobility within
neighborhoods, and provides access to neighborhood collector streets and other
local streets, as found on the Comprehensive Plan.
Street, Minor Arterial
   A street that connects adjacent subregions and activity centers within
subregions; provides mobility within and between 2 subregions; and provides
access to interstate freeways, major arterial streets, other minor arterial
streets, and collector streets, as found on the Comprehensive Plan.
Street, Minor or Marginal
   A street that is used primarily for access to abutting properties.
Street, Neighborhood Collector
   A street that connects neighborhoods within and between subregions; provides
mobility between neighborhoods; provides access to minor arterials, other
community collector streets, other neighborhood collector streets and local
streets, as found on the Comprehensive Plan.
Street Width
   The shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the street right-of-
way.
Subdivision
   The division of a parcel of land into 2 or more lots or parcels by any means
including platting, registered land surveys and conveyance by metes and bounds.
The term includes re-subdivision and when appropriate to the context, shall
relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
Tangent
   A straight line which is perpendicular to the radius of a curve at a point
on the curve.
Vertical Curve
   The surface curvature on a street center line located between lines of
different percentage of grade.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 9-28-2010)
1002.03   PREMATURE SUBDIVISION.
   (1)   Any proposed subdivision requiring Council approval pursuant to this
chapter and deemed premature for development shall not be approved by the City
Council. A subdivision shall be deemed premature if, in the Council’s opinion,
any of the following conditions exist:
      a.   Lack of adequate drainage.
         1.   A proposed subdivision shall be deemed to lack adequate drainage
to serve the subdivision when:
            (a)   Surface or subsurface water retention and runoff is such that
it constitutes a hazard to the stability of proposed structures;
            (b)   The proposed subdivision will cause pollution of water
sources or surrounding damage from erosion and siltation on downhill or
downstream land; or
            (c)   The proposed site grading and development will cause harmful
and irreparable damage from erosion and siltation on downhill or downstream
land.
         2.   In making these determinations, the Planning Commission and City
Council shall consider such factors as the average rainfall for the area, the
relation of the land to floodplains, the nature of soils and subsoils and the
slope of the land and their ability to adequately support surface water runoff
and structures, the presence of streams, and compliance with or ability to
comply with Section
1001.
      b.   Lack of adequate water supply. A proposed subdivision shall be
deemed to lack adequate water supply when public water is not available to
serve the proposed subdivision.
      c.   Lack of adequate streets.
         1.   A proposed subdivision shall be deemed to lack adequate streets
to serve the subdivision when:
            (a)   Streets which serve the proposed subdivision are of such a
width, grade, stability, vertical and horizontal alignment, site distance or
surface condition that the traffic volume generated by the proposed subdivision
would create a nuisance (including, but not limited to, maintenance concerns),
or a hazard to public safety and general welfare, or would seriously aggravate
an existing hazardous or nuisance condition, and when, with due regard to the
advice of County Bureau of Public Services, Department of Public Works, the
streets are inadequate for the intended use; or
            (b)   The traffic volume generated by the proposed subdivision
would create congestion or unsafe conditions on. streets existing or proposed
at the time of the application.
         2.   The prematurity of a subdivision as set forth above may be cured
if the developer chooses to make a voluntary payment of the Transportation Fee,
as adopted from time to time by resolution of the City Council, upon such terms
and conditions as are agreed upon in a Developers Agreement.
      d.   Lack of adequate waste disposal systems. A proposed subdivision
shall be deemed to lack adequate waste disposal systems if:
         1.   Sanitary sewer is neither available nor proposed; or
         2.   Available or proposed sanitary sewer is inadequate to support the
subdivision if developed to its maximum permissible density after reasonable
sewer capacity is reserved for schools, planned public facilities, and
commercial and industrial development projected for the next 5 years.
      e.   Inconsistency with Comprehensive Plan. A proposed subdivision may be
deemed premature if it is inconsistent with the purposes, objectives, and
recommendations of the duly adopted Comprehensive Plan of the City, as may be
amended. Application for rezoning may be made at the time of subdivision
application, but the latter will not be deemed accepted or acceptable until and
unless any necessary rezoning is approved by the Council.
      f.   Lack of public improvements. A proposed subdivision may be deemed
premature if public improvements or facilities reasonably necessitated by the
subdivision, and which must be provided at public expense, cannot be reasonably
provided for within 24 months from the date the application for preliminary
plat approval is filed and complete.
      g.   Inconsistency with environmental requirements. A proposed
subdivision may be deemed premature if it is inconsistent with the rules and
policies of the state environmental quality board, as may be amended, and could
adversely impact critical environmental areas or potentially disrupt or
destroy, in violation of federal and state historical preservation laws,
historic areas which are designated or officially recognized by the City
Council.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 9-28-2010)
1002.04   APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   No land shall be subdivided without complying with the provisions of this
section.
Subd. 1   Administrative Subdivision.
   A lot may be subdivided by administrative approval upon the conditions set
forth in this Subdivision.
   (1)   Purpose. The administrative subdivision process provided for in this
Subdivision 1 shall be for minor subdivisions authorized by M.S. §§ 462.358 and
505.03, as may be amended from time to time, and any amendments thereto.
   (2)   Qualification. To qualify for an administrative subdivision under this
Subdivision 1, the lot is question must involve property which has been
previously platted, or the total property area involved is 20 acres or greater
and meets the requirements of conveyance by metes and bounds. In these cases,
the Zoning Administrator or designated representative may authorize approval of
the administrative subdivision that meet the requirements of this Subdivision 1
and under the following conditions:
      a.   To create 1 new lot from an existing single lot thereby creating no
more than 1 new lot.
      b.   To divide a portion of 2 abutting existing lots where the division
is to permit the creation of 1 new lot.
      c.   To divide a portion of a lot where the division is to permit the
adding of a parcel of land to an abutting lot so that no additional lots are
created.
      d.   To combine 2 existing platted lots.
      e.   No new road, utilities or other services shall be extended to
accommodate creation of new lot.
   (3)   Special conditions in the A-1 Zone.  Notwithstanding the requirements
of Subdivision 1(5) and Subdivision 1(2), all lots that are zoned A-1, not in
the Critical Area as identified on the City Zoning Map and not served by public
sewer and water may be subdivided to allow a portion of the lot to be combined
with an adjacent and bordering lot, subject to the following conditions:
      a.   May only involve 2 existing legal lots.
      b.   May only be for the purpose of a minor boundary adjustment between
the 2 lots, which determination of minor shall be made by the City
Administrator subject to  City Code Section 1002, Subdivision 1(6)e.  Shall not
be for the creation of a new lot.
      c.   The setback requirements and all other requirements of, among other
things, the A-1 Zone shall continue to apply to and govern the lots,  The City
Administrator shall deny an application if the boundary adjustment causes any
structure to be in violation of City Code Section 1001.
      d.   This boundary adjustment may only be utilized by legal lots in
compliance with Section 1001.  If a lot is legal non-conforming before the
boundary adjustment the lot shall continue to maintain its legal non-conforming
status unless the minimum requirements of the zoning district are met.  Any lot
that was conforming before the boundary adjustment and does not meet the
minimum requirements after the boundary adjustment shall have a legal non-
conforming status.
      e.   Except for as provided above, the boundary adjustment shall conform
to all design standards as specified in City Code Sections 1001 and 1002.
      f.   Prior to the City processing or approving any application, the
applicant shall provide certification to the City that there are no delinquent
property taxes, or City utility fees due for the lots to which the application
relates.  Applications shall not be processed until outstanding amounts are
paid in full.  Property taxed which are being paid under the provisions of a
stipulation, order, or confession of judgement, or which are being appealed as
provided by law, are not considered delinquent for purposes of this section
provided all required payments that are due under the terms of the stipulation,
order, confession of judgement, or appeal have been paid.
      g.   In addition to the requirement of City Code Section
1002.02, Subd. 1(5), the applicant shall file with the City a certificate of
survey prepared by a registered land surveyor.  The survey shall show, among
other things, the lots before and after the proposed boundary adjustments with
dimension and legal descriptions.
   (4)   Design standards and requirements. All administrative subdivisions
must meet the following design standards and requirements:
      a.   The administrative subdivision shall conform to all design standards
as specified in City Code Sections 1001 and 1002.
      b.   The administrative subdivision will not cause any structure on the
land to be in violation of the City Code Section 1001.
      c.   Any proposed deviation from City Code Sections 1001 and 1002 shall
require the processing of a variance, subject to the review and approval of the
City Council.
      d.   In the event a new lot is created, a park dedication fee determined
by the City shall be paid prior to release of any documentation indicating
administrative subdivision approval.
      e.   Any drainage, utility, trail, right-of-way or access easements and/
or deeds required by the City must be granted, in a form approved by or drafted
by the City Attorney, prior to release of any documentation indicating
administrative subdivision approval.
   (5)   Content and data requirements. All applications for administrative
subdivision shall include the following:
      a.   Complete application form.
      b.   Application fee.
      c.   Acreage calculations for the existing parcel(s) and proposed new
parcels.
      d.   Five copies of a certificate of survey prepared by a registered land
surveyor. The survey shall show the legal description and all existing
improvements, easements and rights-of-way for the entire parcel, and the legal
description of the resulting new parcels.
      e.   An abstract of title or registered property abstract that has been
updated within 30 days of the application documenting ownership of the property
as determined by the City Attorney. The applicant shall comply with all
requirements of the City Attorney regarding title and ownership of the property
in question.
      f.   The data and supportive information detailing the proposed
administrative subdivision shall be the same as required for a preliminary plat
as described in Subsection 1002.05. Exceptions, as stipulated in writing, may
be granted by the Zoning Administrator.
      g.   Any other information required by the Zoning Administrator.
   (6)   Procedure. Upon receipt of a complete application, an application for
administrative subdivision shall be subject to the following procedures:
      a.   Review and comment. The Zoning Administrator shall request review
and comment by the City’s planning, engineering, and legal staff, as
appropriate, and shall forward copies of the application to agencies and
utility companies responsible for review of the application.
      b.   Notice. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Zoning
Administrator shall mail written notice to the owners of land within 500 feet
of the parcel being divided and the notice shall state that written comments
shall be delivered to the Zoning Administrator within 10 days of the notice
being mailed.
      c.   State and county review. Administrative subdivision of land abutting
any existing state or county highway shall be subject to review of the
Minnesota Department of Transportation and/or the Hennepin County
Transportation Department. A copy of the proposed administrative subdivision
shall be filed with the Minnesota Department of Transportation and/or the
Hennepin County Transportation Department for review and comment 30 days prior
to formal action to approve the application. Final action on an administrative
subdivision shall not be taken until the minimum 30-day review period has
elapsed.
      d.   Decision. The Zoning Administrator shall either approve or deny the
requested administrative subdivision within 120 days of receipt of a complete
application, unless the applicant agrees to an extension of the review period.
         1.   In the event an application for administrative subdivision meets
the requirements of this Subdivision and all other provisions of Sections 1001
and 1002, the Zoning Administrator shall approve the administrative
subdivision. The Zoning Administrator may place reasonable conditions on the
approval.
         2.   In the event the application fails to meet the requirements of
this Subdivision and all other provisions of Sections 1001 and 1002, the Zoning
Administrator may approve the application conditionally to ensure the
administrative subdivision is compliant with the regulations of Sections 1001
and 1002, as may be amended, and other applicable requirements, which
conditions must be met prior to release of any documentation indicating
administrative subdivision approval.
         3.   The Zoning Administrator shall prepare findings and deny a
subdivision if the administrative subdivision is premature under Section
1002.03, or fails to comply with regulations of Sections 1001 or 1002, as may
be amended, or other applicable requirements.
         4.   At the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, the application
may be forwarded to the City Council for its approval or denial. Upon either
denial or approval by the City Council, the Zoning Administrator shall mail or
otherwise deliver notice to the applicant. In the event of such City Council
action there shall no right of appeal to the City Council under Subsection
1002.04, Subd. 1(5)e.
      e.   Decision appeal. The following appeal procedures shall be available
in the event an application for administrative subdivision is denied:
         1.   The applicant may appeal an administrative subdivision denial by
filing with the City Clerk a written request for a hearing within 10 days after
receipt of notification of the denial. The request shall specify the decision
being appealed, the dated the notification was received, and the provision
under which the appeal is authorized.
         2.   The timely request shall thereupon be scheduled on the agenda of
the next regular City Council meeting, unless the party appealing request a
hearing at the regular Council meeting to be held on a later date not more than
30 days from the filing of the appeal request.
         3.   The City shall provide written notice of the time and place of
the hearing to the requesting party.
         4.   The City Council shall hear relevant testimony and receive
relevant evidence offered by the person appealing and that which is offered by
the Zoning Administrator. As a trier of fact the City Council shall make the
determination of the relevancy of testimony and evidence.
         5.   After considering all such evidence and testimony submitted, the
City Council may order on the record such action as it, in its sole discretion,
deems appropriate.
   (7)   Recording. If the administrative subdivision is approved by the City,
the applicant shall record the deed, and the accompanying survey and easements
or other applicable documents, in the Office of the County Recorder and/or
Registrar of Titles within 60 days after the date of approval, otherwise the
approval of the administrative subdivision shall be considered void with no
further action required by the City. Prior to recording, the applicant shall
submit all deeds and easement documents conveying and granting to the City any
required easements and/or right-of-way, subject to the review and approval of
the City. The deeds and easements shall be conveyed to the City free and clear
of all encumbrances and the fee owner of the subdivided property shall warrant
and guarantee that it is the fee owner of the property in question and that it
has the right and authority to convey and execute the documents free and clear
of all encumbrances.
      a.   When the land for which the administrative subdivision abuts a state
or county highway, a certificate or other evidence showing submission of the
administrative subdivision to the Minnesota Department of Transportation and/or
the Hennepin County Transportation Department shall be filed with Hennepin
County Recorder of Deeds, with the administrative subdivision.
Subd. 2   Council Action.
   If the proposed subdivision is not authorized under Subdivision 1 of this
Subsection, the subdivider may proceed to obtain approval by the Council as
hereinafter provided.
Subd. 3   Preliminary Concept Plan
   (1)   Preliminary concept plan overview.
      a.   While not mandatory, it is suggested that subdividers prepare a
concept plan depicting the subdivision proposal for informal review prior to
filing a formal application.
      b.   On the basis of the concept plan, the City shall informally advise
the subdivider as promptly as possible of the extent to which the proposed
subdivision generally conforms to the design standards of this Subsection and
to other sections of this Code, and shall discuss possible modifications
necessary to secure approval of the plan.
      c.   Any recommendation is non-binding, on the part of both the requestor
and the City. Any recommendation shall not be deemed an approval or denial and
shall in no way bind the City to subsequent action.
      d.   If a preliminary review is desired, the request process shall be
followed as outlined in this Subsection.
      e.   This is a concept plan preliminary review, not a preliminary plat.
   (2)   Preliminary concept plan procedure.
      a.   Pre-submission meeting. A potential applicant may meet with City
staff to discuss a proposed development and investigate the City requirements
for pursuing a development submission.
   (3)   Filing.
      a.   A preliminary concept plan application shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator on an official application form. The application shall be
accompanied by the escrow fee as set forth in the City Code.
      b.   The concept site plan shall include 10 large scale copies and 1
reduced scale (11 inches x 17 inches) copy of detailed written materials, plans
and specifications.
      c.   Additional large scale copies shall be provided in the amount listed
below when the following criteria applies:
         1.   Project is adjacent to a county road or county state aid highway;
1 extra copy.
         2.   Project is adjacent to a state highway or interstate highway; 2
extra copies.
         3.   Project lies within a Shoreland or Mississippi River Corridor
District; 1 extra copy.
   (4)   Preliminary concept site plan.
      a.   One or more subdivision sketch plans meeting the intent of this
Subsection and including at least the following information shall be submitted,
although it can be in sketch format:
         1.   Open space areas indicating which areas are protected and defined
by the purpose of the open space and intended ownership;
         2.   Boundaries of areas to be developed and proposed general street
and lot layout;
         3.   Proposed land uses in relationship to the Comprehensive Plan and
the number and type of housing units and/or approximate size and location of
commercial and industrial buildings as may be applicable;
         4.   Areas proposed for storm water management;
         5.   Street system that interconnects to neighborhoods and is
consistent with the Dayton transportation plan;
         6.   Availability and timing of public utilities and the location of
all utility trunks intended to serve the site;
         7.   In subdivisions not proposed to be immediately connected to sewer
and water, locations of sewage treatment systems must be highlighted;
         8.   Intended staging schedule;
         9.   The plans shall be drawn at a scale of 1 inch to 100 feet;
         10.   Total area of wetlands and uplands on site;
         11.   Current and proposed land use and zoning;
         12.   Evaluation by the developer specifying its reasons that the
subdivision would not be determined to be premature pursuant to the criteria
outlined in the Comprehensive Plan and Subdivision Section; and
         13.   Additional information as required by the Planning Department or
other City staff.
      b.   All sketch plans shall have the following information on the plans:
         1.   Name and address of developer/owner;
         2.   Date of plan preparation and dates of revisions;
         3.   North arrow indication;
         4.   Legal description;
         5.   Property location map illustrating the site location relative to
adjoining properties and streets; and
         6.   Scaled drawing (engineering scale only) illustrating property
boundaries.
   (5)   Additional required submittals. The requestor shall submit the
following minimum materials or exhibits, unless specifically waived by City
staff:
      a.   Names and addresses on mailing labels of all the owners for parcels
under consideration and of all owners within a minimum of 500 feet. The 500
feet radius should be increased in areas where there are fewer than 25 property
owners within the 500 feet perimeter of the parcels included in the concept
plan so that notices are sent to a minimum of 25 property owners.
      b.   A written statement of consent of all owners of property within the
proposed subdivision property boundaries or signatures of all property owners
on the City preliminary review form.
      c.   All applications for development proposals requiring a public
hearing must be advertised to allow informed participation by all interested
parties and to comply with applicable state statutes. The applicant shall be
required to post a sign on the subject property prior to all public hearings in
accordance with the following provisions:
         1.   Location and time period for posting signs. The required posting
period shall be no less than 15 consecutive days, but no more than 30 days,
prior to the public hearing or site plan review public meeting. The sign shall
be posted at a prominent location on the property, near the sidewalk or public
right-of-way, so that it is visible to passing pedestrians and motorists.
Properties with more than 1 street frontage shall be required to post 1 sign
visible from each street frontage.
         2.   Applicant’s responsibility for posting signs. The applicant shall
obtain the required sign from the City of Dayton. It is the applicant’s
responsibility to erect the sign on the property and maintain it during the
required period.
         3.   Failure to post. Failure to post for the required time shall
constitute grounds for suspension or discontinuance of the approval process.
   (6)   Costs.
      a.   Review fees, in the amount determined by the City Council and
modified from time to time.
      b.   Escrow funds.
         1.   Escrow funds in the amount determined by the City of Dayton fee
schedule in effect at the time of the request submittal are required to be
submitted cover the costs of staff and consultant review time and costs
associated with the public hearing to reimburse the City for costs incurred.
         2.   The City may request additional escrow funds be submitted if the
applicant is requesting additional review than is typically associated with
concept review. The expenses may include, but are not limited to, personnel
costs, fees for consultants, legal assistance and other professionals, along
with other overhead costs.
   (7)   Procedure for City processing of applications.
      a.   The Planning Department shall submit copies of the concept plan and
associated information to other staff, commissions, consultants or agencies as
appropriate.
      b.   The Planning Department shall forward the concept plan submission to
the City’s advisory boards and/or the City Council for their consideration at
regularly scheduled meetings or work sessions to solicit informal review and
comment on the project’s acceptability in relation to the City’s Comprehensive
Plan and development regulations. The meetings should be attended by the
applicant.
      c.   Planning staff shall submit a written review along with the
requestor’s plans to the Planning Commission and/or City Council prior to their
meeting to consider the proposal. The review shall contain the following.
         1.   Relationship of proposal to the surrounding neighborhood.
         2.   Compliance with City Code and ordinances and the Comprehensive
Plan.
         3.   A staff report including, but not limited to, the following:
requirements of the Code; compliance with the Comprehensive Plan, required
actions; questions from staff regarding the compliance/issues left to be dealt
with; and a recommendation. Staff reports will be limited in nature, as this is
not intended to be a full review.
         4.   All preliminary concept review is based on early versions of
plans and further review would be done if and when a preliminary plat
application is submitted. As plans are not extensively reviewed as part of the
concept review, if and when a preliminary plat application is submitted, it may
be determined that additional review processes or code requirements will apply.
      d.   City staff shall review the concept plan and shall determine if the
project crosses any mandatory thresholds for an Environmental Assessment
Worksheet (EAW), Environmental Impact Statement (EIS), or Alternative Urban
Area-Wide Review (AUAR) pursuant to Minnesota Rules.
   (8)   Planning Commission consideration.
      a.   The Planning Commission shall make its recommendations on the
preliminary concept plan to the City Council within 30 days of the
informational meeting, failure to do so will not prevent City Council review.
   (9)   City Council consideration.
      a.   The City Council will review the preliminary concept plan and make a
recommendation.
      b.   The recommendation of the preliminary concept plan shall be limited
to the general acceptability of the land uses proposed and their
interrelationship.
      c.   The recommendation shall in no way bind the Council to subsequent
action.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-25-2011)
1002.05   PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURES.
Subd. 1   Filing
   (1)   Required submittals.
      a.   An application for preliminary plat review, application fee and
preliminary plat with required content and submittals as specified in this
Section
1002 shall be delivered to the Zoning Administrator. The required filing fees,
sureties, escrows and deposits are as established by the City Council as set
forth in Section
1002, and any necessary applications for variances from or amendment of the
provisions of this Code shall be submitted with the required fees, sureties,
escrows and deposits.
      b.   The application and required submittals shall be delivered at least
28 days prior to the regular Planning Commission meeting at which it will be
scheduled.
      c.   The application shall be considered as being officially delivered
when all the application information requirements are complied with and all
applicable fees are paid.
   (2)   Public hearing.
      a.   Upon delivery of the application, the Zoning Administrator shall set
a public hearing date before the Planning Commission in accordance with
Subdivision 1(2) of this Subsection, and distribute the preliminary plat and
submittals to appropriate staff and referral agencies. The Planning Commission
shall conduct the hearing, and report its findings and make recommendations to
the City Council.
      b.   Notice of the hearing shall consist of a property identification
number and street address or common description, a description of the request,
and a map detailing the property location, and shall be published in the
official newspaper at least 10 days prior to the hearing.
      c.   Written notification of the hearing shall be mailed at least 10 days
prior to the hearing date to all owners of land within 500 feet of the boundary
of the property in question.
      d.   Technical assistance reports. After the public hearing has been set,
staff shall coordinate an analysis of the application, prepare technical
reports where appropriate, and provide general assistance in preparing a
recommendation on the action to the City Council.
      e.   Review by other agencies or jurisdictions. The Zoning Administrator
shall refer copies of the preliminary plat to the Park Commission, county,
state or other public jurisdictions for their review and comment, where
appropriate.
      f.   Planning Commission action. The Planning Commission shall consider a
preliminary plat application as follows:
         1.   The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plat and
conduct the official public hearing.
         2.   The subdivider or representatives thereof may appear before the
Planning Commission to present information and answer questions concerning the
proposal.
         3.   The Planning Commission and staff shall have the authority to
request additional information from the subdivider concerning the proposal, as
deemed necessary to formulate a recommendation on the proposal.
         4.   The Planning Commission shall recommend approval of the
preliminary plat if it in all ways conforms to the City’s Comprehensive Plan,
Zoning Ordinance, this chapter and all chapters of the City Code. The
Commission shall recommended denial of the preliminary plat if it makes any of
the following findings:
            (a)   That the proposed subdivision is in conflict with the City’s
Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, Capital Improvements Program, or other
policy or regulation.
            (b)   That the proposed subdivision is in conflict with the purpose
and intent of this chapter.
            (c)   That the physical characteristics of the site, including but
not limited to topography, vegetation, susceptibility to erosion, and
siltation, susceptibility to flooding, water storage, and retention, are such
that the site is not suitable for the type of development or use contemplated.
            (d)   That the site is not physically suitable for the intensity or
type of development or use contemplated.
            (e)   That the design of the subdivision or the proposed
improvements are likely to cause substantial and irreversible environmental
damage.
            (f)   That the design of the subdivision or the type of
improvements will be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public.
            (g)   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvement
will conflict with easements on record or with easements established by
judgment of a court.
            (h)   That the subdivision is premature as determined by the
standards of Subsection
1002.03 of this section.
      g.   City Council action. The City Council shall consider preliminary
plat application, as follows:
         1.   If all requirements of this chapter and as additionally imposed
by the Planning Commission are complied with, the Council shall act upon the
preliminary plat and may impose conditions and restrictions which are deemed
necessary within 120 days following delivery of an application and written
acknowledgment by the City that the application is in compliance with this
Code, unless an extension of the review period has been agreed to by the
applicant. If the Council fails to approve or disapprove the preliminary plat
within such period, the preliminary plat shall be deemed approved and upon
demand the City shall execute a certificate to that effect.
         2.   If the preliminary plat is approved by the City Council or by act
of law, the subdivider must submit the final plat within 1 year after such
approval or, subject to the provisions of M.S. § 462.358, subd. 3c, as may be
amended from time to time, and subject to the following, approval of the
preliminary plat shall be void:
            (a)   At any time within 30 days before such deadline, the
subdivider may file with the Zoning Administrator a written request that the
deadline be extended 1 year beyond the deadline date of the preliminary plat
approval.
            (b)   The Zoning Administrator shall place the subdivided request
on the agenda of a regularly scheduled Council meeting to be held within 30
days of such filing if in his or her opinion no change has occurred in any land
use restriction or the Comprehensive Plan, or any other official control
affecting the use, development density, lot size, lot layout, or dedication or
platting required or permitted by the approved preliminary plat. If good cause
is shown, the Council may grant the extension. The request may be approved by
the Council as an item on its consent agenda.
            (c)   Only 1 such extension request may be made.
            (d)   Failure to file an extension request in a timely fashion, or
the change of any restriction or control referred to in this section will
require the submission of a new application for subdivision approval.
         3.   If the preliminary plat is denied by the City Council, the
reasons for such action shall be recorded in the proceedings of the Council and
transmitted to the applicant.
            (a)   Revisions to an approved preliminary plat may be necessary as
a result of public improvement feasibility studies or other new information
that renders any aspect of the approved plan questionable.
            (b)   Any revision which, in the determination of the Zoning
Administrator or Planning Commission, results in a significant change to the
approved preliminary plat shall be subject to a public hearing as prescribed in
this section.
            (c)   The City Council may also require such revisions in the
preliminary plat as it deems necessary for the health, safety, general welfare
or convenience of the City.
            (d)   A preliminary plat shall be denied if the applicant has
failed to determine if a mound management plan is necessary.
         4.   Written notification of the City Council action shall be sent to
the applicant within 1 week of such action.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 9-28-2010)
1002.06   DATA REQUIRED FOR PRELIMINARY PLATS.
Subd. 1   Identification and Description Data
   (1)   Required submittals. Fifteen full size sets of all preliminary plat
drawings (24 inches by 36 inches) assembled sets of the drawings that are
collated, stapled and rolled along with any necessary supplementary
information. One set of 8 1/2-inch by 11-inch paper copy of all maps thereof,
and a list of property owners located within 500 feet of the land proposed to
be subdivided shall be submitted. The list shall be obtained from and certified
by the county. The preliminary plat shall contain the following information:
      a.   Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate the
name of any plat already recorded in the county;
      b.   Location by section, township and range, or by other legal
description;
      c.   Names and addresses of all owners and subdividers having control of
the lands included in the preliminary plat, the designer of the plat and the
surveyor;
      d.   Graphic scale, of not less than 1 inch to 100 feet;
      e.   North point; and
      f.   Date of preparation.
Subd. 2   Existing Conditions Data.
   The following data regarding existing conditions shall be provided:
   (1)   Boundary line survey, including measured distances and angles, which
shall close by latitude and departure with an error of closure not exceeding 1
foot in 7,500 feet;
   (2)   Total acreage in the preliminary plat and each proposed lot or outlot
computed to 1/10 of an acre;
   (3)   Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other
underground facilities within the tract and to a distance of 200 feet beyond
the tract. Such data as grades, invert elevations, and locations of catch
basins, manholes and hydrants shall also be shown;
   (4)   If the proposed subdivision is a rearrangement or a replat of any
former plat, the lot and block arrangement of the original plat along with its
original names shall be indicated by dotted or dashed lines. Also, any revised
or vacated roadways of the original plat shall be so indicated;
   (5)   Location and size of existing paved streets, railroads, sewers,
watermains, gravel pits, culverts or other underground facilities within the
tract and to a distance of 100 feet beyond the tract. Also such data as grades,
invert elevations and location of catch basins, manholes and hydrants;
   (6)   Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided land, within 200 feet,
identified by name and ownership, including all contiguous land owned or
controlled by the applicant. Where the applicant owns property adjacent to that
which is being proposed for the subdivision, the applicant shall submit a
sketch plan of the remainder of the property as to show the possible
relationships between the proposed subdivision and future adjacent subdivision;
   (7)   Complete topographic map with contour intervals not greater than 2
feet, water courses, marshes, rock outcrops and other significant features; all
superimposed on the preliminary plat. United States Geodetic Survey datum shall
be used for all topographic mapping. Where available, contour maps shall be
purchased from the City at a cost established by the City Council;
   (8)   Location, dimensions, and other identifying characteristics of any and
all historical, archeological, cultural and human burial sites located within
and to a distance of 200 feet beyond the applicant’s tract, including, but not
limited to, Native American burial sites that may be identified; and
   (9)   The entire area of an existing lot shall be shown on the preliminary
plat either as lots, outlots, or publicly dedicated property except where the
residue exceeds 20 acres.
Subd. 3   Proposed Development Design Features Data.
   The following data regarding proposed development design features of the
preliminary plat shall be provided:
   (1)   Layout of proposed streets, showing right-of-way widths, centerline
gradients, typical cross sections, and proposed names of streets in conformance
with all applicable City ordinances and policies shall be shown. All street
names shall conform to the street name system established by the City.
   (2)   Locations and right-of-way widths of alleys, pedestrian ways and
utility easements.
   (3)   Plans of written statements regarding the width of all types of
pavement; location, size and type of sanitary or other sewerage disposal
facilities; watermains and hydrant and other utilities; storm water drainage
facilities and other proposed improvements such as walks, plantings, park
facilities and grading of lots and blocks.
   (4)   A plan for soil erosion and sediment control both during construction
and after development has been completed shall be included. The plan shall
include gradients of waterways, design of velocity and erosion control
measures, landscaping of the erosion and sediment control system and
stabilization of disturbed areas, and the plan shall be in conformance with
Subsection
1001.33.
   (5)   Proposed center line grades of all new streets and alleys, if any, and
a complete set of profiles showing both existing and proposed grade lines.
   (6)   Layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of lots and the number or
letter of each block.
   (7)   Minimum building setback lines as required in Section
1001 shall be shown.
   (8)   When lots are located on a curve, the width of the lot at the building
setback line shall be shown.
   (9)   Water mains shall be provided to serve the subdivision by extension of
an existing community system wherever feasible. Service connections shall be
stubbed into the property line and all necessary fire hydrants shall also be
provided. Extensions of the public water supply system shall be designed so as
to provide public water in accordance with the standards of the City as
contained in the Dayton Water Supply and Distribution Report, as amended.
   (10)   Sanitary sewer mains and service connections shall be installed in
accordance with the City’s comprehensive sewer plan, as amended.
   (11)   Where structures are to be placed on large or deep lots which are
subject to potential replat, the applicant should consider the placement of
structures so that lots could be further subdivided. A sketch plan that
illustrates a way in which the lots could possibly be resubdivided may be
submitted for review and non-binding comment by the City.
   (12)   Tree preservation plan for the proposed plat, including:
      a.   Plan showing all existing trees to be removed, disturbed and
preserved. Such plan shall also include proposed locations and details of tree
protection fencing to be installed for all trees to be preserved within 15 feet
of the disturbance zone.
      b.   Grading contours, existing and proposed.
      c.   Location and dimension of proposed building pads and construction
zone proposed for each lot within the proposed plat.
      d.   A tabular listing of the caliper inches of each existing significant
tree, and the total caliper inches thereof, together with a tabular listing of
the caliper inches of significant trees to be preserved and to be removed, and
the total caliper inches thereof.
      e.   A reforestation plan and/or the dollar amount of restitution
required if the tree removal exceeds the established threshold, pursuant to
this chapter.
   (13)   A general landscaping plan showing plantings, berms, fences, walls,
sidewalks and trails and nay subdivision signage.
   (14)   Location, size and proposed improvements for: proposed parks,
playgrounds, churches or school sites or other special uses of land to be
considered for dedication to public use, or to be reserved by deed to covenant
for the use of all property owners in the subdivision and any conditions of
such dedication or reservation.
   (15)   A vicinity sketch, at a legible scale, to show the relation of the
plat to its surroundings and surrounding zoning districts.
   (16)   Minimum front and side street building setback lines as required in
the Zoning Section of the Dayton City Code.
Subd. 4   Additional Requirements
   (1)   Surveys, plans and supporting data as set forth in this Subsection
shall be prepared in accordance with rules and regulations established by the
City Engineer, approved by the City Council and on file in the office of the
City Clerk.
   (2)   Supplementary information. When deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator, any or all of the following supplementary information
requirements shall be submitted:
      a.   Proposed covenants.
      b.   An accurate soil survey of the subdivision prepared by a qualified
person.
      c.   A tree survey prepared by a qualified person identifying tree
coverage in the proposed subdivision in terms of type, weakness, maturity,
potential hazard, infestation, vigor, density, and spacing.
   (3)   Such other information as may be requested by the Zoning
Administrator, City Engineer, Planning Commission, or City Council.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 9-28-2010)
1002.07   DESIGN STANDARDS FOR PRELIMINARY PLATS.
Subd. 1   General Requirements
   (1)   The Planning Commission in its review of a preliminary plat will take
into consideration the requirements of the community and the best use of the
land being subdivided. Particular attention will be given to the arrangement,
location and widths of streets, the general drainage situation, lot sizes and
arrangement, as well as Comprehensive Plan requirements, such as parks, school
sites, boulevards and highways, but not limited to these.
   (2)   The preliminary plat must cover all of the owner’s contiguous land,
but the final plat may cover only a portion of the preliminary plat, provided
it is in conformance with an approved preliminary plat and other requirements
herein.
   (3)   Where the parcel is subdivided into larger tracts than for building
lots, the parcels shall be divided so as to allow for the opening of major
streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent minor streets, and the developer
is required to prepare and file a sketch plan with the City showing and
reserving future street and utility easements.
   (4)   Subdivision showing unplatted strips or private easements controlling
access to public ways shall not receive approval.
Subd. 2   Streets and Alleys
   (1)   The arrangement of thoroughfares and collector streets shall conform
as nearly as possible to the City of Dayton Comprehensive Plan.
      a.   Thoroughfare and collector streets shall connect with streets
already dedicated to adjoining or adjacent subdivisions, or provide for future
connections to adjoining unsubdivided tracts.
      b.   The arrangement of thoroughfares and collector streets shall be
considered in relation to the reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographic
conditions, to run-off of storm water, to public convenience and safety, and in
appropriate relation to the proposed use of the area to be served.
   (2)   Local streets.
      a.   Local streets should be so planned as to discourage their use by
non-local traffic. Permanent dead end streets are prohibited, but cul-de-sacs
will be permitted where topography, design and other conditions justify their
use.
      b.   Cul-de-sacs shall normally not be longer than 500 feet, measured
along the center line from the intersection of origin to the end of the right-
of-way. Each cul-de-sac shall have a terminus of nearly circular shape with a
minimum right-of-way diameter of 100 feet and a minimum outside roadway
diameter of 80 feet. The property line at the intersection of the turn-around
and the straight portion of the street shall be rounded as a radius of not less
than 20 feet. The City strongly encourages installation of association
maintained landscaped cul-de-sacs.
   (3)   Width of right-of way.
      a.   For all public ways hereafter dedicated and accepted, the minimum
right-of-way widths for streets shall be as shown in the City Comprehensive
Plan, and where not shown therein, the minimum right-of-way width for streets,
alleys, or pedestrian ways included in any subdivision shall not be less than
the minimum dimensions for each classification as follows:
 
Minor arterial           100 to 150 feet
Community collector      80 to 100 feet
Neighborhood collector   60 to 80 feet
Local street             50 to 60 feet
Minor or marginal street 50 feet
Pedestrian way           10 to 20 feet
 
      b.   Where existing or anticipated traffic on thoroughfares warrants
greater widths of right-of-way, these shall be required. Exceptions to these
requirements may be made by approval of the City Council.
   (4)   Street grades.
      a.   The grades in all streets, thoroughfares, collector streets and
minor streets in any subdivision shall not be greater than the maximum grades
for each classification as follows:
 
Minor arterial         5%
Community collector    6%
Neighborhood collector 6%
Local street           7%
 
      b.   In addition, there shall be a minimum grade on all streets and
thoroughfares of not less than 4/10 of 1%, and wherever possible grades within
30 feet of minor street intersections with thoroughfares and collector streets
shall not exceed 3%.
   (5)   Horizontal curves. Where horizontal street lines within a block
deflect from each other at any 1 point more than 10 degrees, there shall be a
connecting curve with a radius adequate to insure a sight distance of not less
than 200 feet for minor and collector streets, and of the greater radii as the
City shall determine for thoroughfare and other special cases. A tangent of at
least 100 feet shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and
collector streets and 50 feet on other streets.
   (6)   Different connection street gradients shall be connected with vertical
parabolic curves. Minimum length, in feet, of these curves for thoroughfare
streets shall be 15 times the algebraic difference in the percent of grade of
the 2 adjacent slopes. For minor and collector streets, the minimum length
shall be 7-1/2 times the algebraic difference in the percent of the 2 adjacent
slopes.
   (7)   All proposed streets shall be offered for dedication as public
streets.
   (8)   Street intersections. Under normal conditions, streets shall be laid
out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, except where
topography or other conditions justify variations. The minimum angle of
intersection of streets shall be 80 degrees. Street intersection jogs with an
offset of less than 125 feet shall be avoided.
   (9)   Subdivisions abutting major rights-of-way. Wherever the proposed
subdivision contains or is adjacent to the right-of-way of a thoroughfare or
limited access highway, provision shall be made for a frontage road
approximately parallel and adjacent to the boundary of the right-of-way, or for
a street at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of land between the
street and the right-of-way of the thoroughfare or limited access highway. The
distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance
required for approach connections to future grade separations, grade crossings
or for lot depths.
   (10)   Half streets. Dedication of half streets will not be approved, except
where it is essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision and in
conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, where it is found
that it will be practical to require the dedication of the other 1/2 when the
adjoining property is subdivided, or where it becomes necessary to acquire the
remaining 1/2 by condemnation so it may be improved in the public interest.
   (11)   When a tract is subdivided into larger than building lots or parcels,
as set forth in the City Zoning Section, the lots or parcels shall be so
arranged as to permit the logical location and openings of future streets and
appropriate re-subdivisions, with provision for adequate utility connections
for the re-subdivisions.
   (12)   Compliance with City transportation plan. For all public ways
hereafter dedicated and/or accepted, the minimum right-of-way, curve radius,
curb radius, surfaced width and design standards for streets, alleys and
pedestrian ways included in any subdivision shall be in accordance with the
City’s transportation plan, as amended, and subject to the approval of the City
Engineer.
   (13)   Alleys. Alleys shall be allowed by special permit only and when
allowed, shall be at least 20 feet wide in residential areas and at least 25
feet wide in commercial/industrial areas. The City may require alleys in
commercial areas where adequate off-street loading space is not available.
Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where
necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular
movement. Dead end alleys shall be prohibited.
Subd. 3   Blocks
   (1)   Block length.
      a.   In general, intersecting streets, determining block lengths, shall
be provided at intervals as to serve cross-traffic adequately and to meet
existing streets.
      b.   Where no existing plats control, the blocks in residential
subdivisions shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length, except where topography or
other conditions justify a departure from this maximum.
      c.   In blocks longer than 900 feet, pedestrian ways and/or easements
through the block may be required.
      d.   The width and location of the pedestrian ways shall be subject to
the approval of the City.
      e.   Blocks for business or industrial use should normally not exceed 900
feet in length.
   (2)   Block width.
      a.   The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to allow 2 tiers
of lots of appropriate depth.
      b.   Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be of the width
as to be considered most suitable for their respective use, including adequate
space for off-street parking and deliveries.
Subd. 4   Lots
   (1)   The minimum lot area, width and depth shall not be less than that
established by the City’s regulations.
   (2)   Corner lots for residential use shall have appropriate width to permit
building setbacks form both streets as defined in the City of Dayton Zoning
Section.
   (3)   Side lot lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to
street lines or radial to curved street lines.
   (4)   Every lot must have frontage on a public street.
   (5)   Double frontage lots shall be avoided except where lots back on a
thoroughfare or other arterial street, or where topographic or other conditions
render subdividing otherwise unreasonable. The double frontage lots shall have
an additional depth of at least 20 feet in order to allow space for screen
planting along the back lot line.
   (6)   All lots shall have at least the minimum required width at the minimum
required front setback line as provided by Zoning Section and shall have a
minimum of 50 feet of frontage directly abutting a public street to which the
lot has direct access. In no instance shall a private easement satisfy the
above requirement.
   (7)   All lots must have a minimum of 30 feet in width at the rear lot line.
   (8)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to the
right-of-way line and extend between the front and rear lot lines in straight
lines. Flag lots as defined in Subsection
1002.02 are prohibited.
   (9)   Lots abutting on a water course, drainage way, channel, stream or pond
shall have an additional depth or width, as required, to assure house sites
that are not subject to flooding.
   (10)   Lot remnants which are below the minimum lot size must be added to
adjacent or surrounding lots rather than be allowed to remain as an unusable
outlot or parcel unless the owner can show acceptable plans for the future use
of the remnants.
   (11)   Lots intended for commercial, industrial or any use other than
single-family residence must be designed as such, and the lot must be of
adequate size to allow off-street parking, loading areas and such other
facilities as are required to satisfy the requirements of the Dayton City
Zoning Section.
Subd. 5   Easements
   (1)   Width and location. An easement for utilities at least 6 feet wide,
shall be provided along each side of a side line of lots and along any other
lot line as may be deemed necessary to form a continuous right-of-way at least
12 feet in width. Utility easements shall connect with easements established in
adjoining properties. If necessary for the extension of water or sewer lines or
similar utilities, easements for greater width may be required along lot lines
or across lots.
   (2)   Additional easements for pole guys should be provided at the outside
of turns. Where possible, lot lines shall be arranged to bisect the exterior
angle so that pole guys will fall along side lot lines.
   (3)   Easements along water courses and drainage channels. Where a
subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel, or stream, a
storm water easement, drainage right-of-way or park dedication, whichever the
City may deem the most adequate, conforming substantially with the lines of the
water courses, shall be provided, together with further width or construction,
or both, as will be adequate for the storm water drainage of the area. The
width of the easements shall be determined by the City Engineer.
   (4)   Drainage easements. Drainage easements corresponding with lot lines
shall be provided where necessary for surface drainage purposes. The easements
for drainage purposes shall be not less than 5 feet in width on each lot where
pipe and utilities will not be located and 10 feet on each lot where pipe and
utilities are or will be installed.
   (5)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a ponding area, water course,
drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement
or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of the water
course and incorporating elevations as required by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 9-28-2010)
1002.08   FINAL PLAT PROCEDURES.
Subd. 1   Procedure
   (1)   The final plat prepared for recording purposes shall be prepared in
accordance with provisions of Minnesota State Statutes and applicable county
regulations.
   (2)   A final plat application shall be in substantial compliance with the
approved preliminary plat, including any required modifications thereto.
   (3)   A final plat application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator
on an official application form. The application shall be accompanied by the
fee as required by the City. The application shall also be accompanied by
detailed written and graphic materials, the number and size as prescribed by
the Zoning Administrator that describes the final plat. The application and
required submittals shall be delivered at least 28 days prior to the regular
City Council meeting at which it will be scheduled. The application shall be
considered as being officially submitted and complete when the subdivider has
complied with all the specified submittal requirements and all applicable fees,
as described in this section.
   (4)   Upon receiving a complete application, as determined by staff review,
the Zoning Administrator shall refer copies of the final plat to the City staff
and other applicant public agencies as needed in order to receive written
comments. The Zoning Administrator shall instruct the appropriate staff person
to 1) coordinate an analysis of the application, 2) prepare technical reports
and coordinate preparation of the development contract, and 3) assist in
preparing a recommendation to the City Council.
Subd. 2   City Council Consideration
   (1)   Approval by City Council.
      a.   The final plat shall be submitted to the City Council for
consideration.
      b.   The final plat shall conform to the approved preliminary plat except
for any adjustments deemed to be minor by the Zoning Administrator. The City
Council may also require revisions in the final plat as it deems necessary for
the health, safety and general welfare or convenience of the City. If any
revision results in a significant change to the approved preliminary plat, the
revisions shall be subject to a public hearing as prescribed in Section
1002.
      c.   If accepted, the final plat shall be approved by resolution, which
resolution shall provide for the acceptance of all agreements for basic
improvements, public dedication and other requirements as indicated by the City
Council.
      d.   If disapproved, the grounds for any refusal to approve a plat shall
be set forth in the proceedings of the Council and reported to the applicant. A
final plat shall be disapproved if a mound management plan has not been
approved by the City.
      e.   If the Council fails to approve the final plat within 60 days of the
date the applicant has complied with all conditions and requirements of
applicable regulations and all conditions and requirements upon which
preliminary approval was expressly conditioned, either through performance or
the execution of appropriate agreements assuring performance, the final plat
shall be deemed approved, and upon demand the City shall execute a certificate
to that effect.
      f.   Written notification of the City Council action shall be sent to the
applicant within 1 week of such action.
Subd. 3   Vested Rights.
   No vested rights in terms of conveying lots shall accrue to any plat by
reason of preliminary or final approval until the actual signing of the plat by
City Officials after all requirements are met and the plat has been recorded
with Hennepin County.
Subd. 4   Signing of Plat.
   The final plat shall not be released by the City Clerk for recording with
Hennepin County until the following have been recorded on the plat:
   (1)   The signatures of the Mayor, or in his or her absence, the Acting
Mayor, attesting to the date upon which the City Council approved the final
plat; and
   (2)   The signature of the City Clerk and seal of the City attesting to the
above-referenced actions by the City and valid signatures.
Subd. 5   Recording of Plat
   (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to file the plat with
Hennepin County within 60 days after the plat has been released for recording
by the City unless a time extension has been granted by the City Council. No
changes, erasures, modifications or revision shall be made in any final plat
after approval has been given by the City Council and endorsed in writing on
the plat.
   (2)   Failure to record the plat within the 60 day period shall render all
approvals by the City null and void until a new application has been processed
and approved by the City or until the City Council has granted an extension of
time in which the final plat shall be recorded.
Subd. 6   Proof of Recording.
   The City shall not take any action related to the plat such as issuing
building permits or awarding public street contracts on the platted property
until the time as the City Clerk has been satisfied that the plat has been
recorded with Hennepin County.
Subd. 7   Data Required for Final Plats.
   The final plat shall contain the following:
   (1)   The applicant shall submit 15 copies of the final plat on paper not
exceeding 24 inches by 36 inches and 1 set at 8 1/2 inch by 11-17 inch reduced,
together with necessary supplementary information.
   (2)   All information, except topographical data and sewer locations,
required by the County Surveyor, Registrar of Titles and Register of Deeds.
   (3)   The dimensions, size and scale of the final plat shall be as required
in the County of Hennepin and/or the County of Wright for approval by the
County Board in filing with the Register of Deeds or the Registrar of Titles.
   (4)   Municipal, township, county or section lines accurately tied to the
lines of the subdivision by distance and angles.
   (5)   The name of the plat.
   (6)   Location by section, township, range, county and state, and including
descriptive boundaries of the subdivision, based on an accurate traverse,
giving angular and linear dimensions which must mathematically close. The
allowable error of closure on any portion of a final plat shall be 1 foot in
7,500 feet.
   (7)   The names of adjoining subdivisions and layouts of their streets.
   (8)   Monuments and markers.
      a.   The location of monuments shall be shown and described on the final
plat.
      b.   Locations of the monuments shall be shown in reference to existing
official monuments of the nearest established street lines, including true
angles and distances to the reference points or monuments.
      c.   Permanent markers shall be placed at each corner of each lot, points
of curvature and points of tangency on street lines, and at each angle point on
the boundary of the subdivision.
      d.   A permanent marker shall be deemed to be a steel rod or pipe, 3/
4 inch or larger in diameter extending at least 2 feet below the finished
grade.
      e.   In situations where conditions prohibit the placing of markers in
the locations prescribed above, offset markers will be permitted.
      f.   The exact location of all markers shall be shown on the final plat,
together with accurate interior angles, bearings and distances.
      g.   Permanent monuments shall be placed at all quarter section points
within the subdivision or on its perimeter.
   (9)   Location of lots, streets, public highways, alleys, parks, easements
and other features with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, with
the length of radii and/or arcs of al curves, and with all other information
necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground. Dimensions shall be shown from
all angle points and points of curves to lot lines.
   (10)   Boundary lines and description of boundary lines of any areas other
than streets and alleys which are to be dedicated or reserved for public use.
   (11)   Lots shall be numbered clearly. If blocks are to be numbered or
lettered, these shall be shown clearly in the center of the block.
   (12)   Name and address of developer and surveyor making the plat.
   (13)   Scale of plat (the scale to be shown geographically and in feet per
inch) date and north point.
   (14)   Attorney’s approval of title, setting forth required signators on
plat.
   (15)   A statement dedicating all easements.
   (16)   A statement dedicating all streets, alleys and other public areas not
previously dedicated.
   (17)   A statement establishing building setback lines as follows: building
set back lines are hereby established as shown on the accompanying plat, and no
building or portion thereof.
   (18)   Setback lines must comply with the Zoning Section provisions and
industry standards in accordance with the engineer/planner.
Subd. 8   Certifications Required on Final Plats
   (1)   Notarized certification by owner(s), or by any mortgage holder of
record, of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets and other
public areas.
   (2)   Notarized certification by a registered land surveyor to the effect
that the plat represents a survey made by him or her and that monuments and
markers shown therein exist as located and that all dimensional and geodetic
details are correct.
   (3)   Certification showing that all taxes and special assessments due on
the property have been paid in full.
   (4)   Space for certificates of approval to be filled in by the signatures
of the Chairman of the Planning Commission, the Mayor, and City Engineer as
follows:
   The form of approval of the City Council is as follows:
   This plat of              was approved and accepted by the City Council of
Dayton, Minnesota, at a regular meeting thereof held the          day of      
   ,20        . If applicable, the written comments and recommendations of the
Commissioner of Transportation and the County Highway Engineer have been
received by the City or the prescribed 30-day period has elapsed without
receipt of such comments and recommendations, as provided by Minn. Stats. §
505.03, subd. 2.
   CITY COUNCIL OF DAYTON, MINNESOTA (seal)
   By              Mayor; and              City Clerk
   (5)   Private restrictions and trusteeships and their period of existence.
Should restrictions and trusteeships be of the length as to make the lettering
of same on plat impracticable, and thus necessitate the preparation of a
separate instrument, reference to the instrument shall be made on the plat and
the book and page number referring to the instrument shall be added to the plat
after the restrictions or trusteeship have been recorded.
   (6)   The form for approval of county authorities as required.
Subd. 9   Supplementary Documents and Information
   (1)   A complete set of subdivision development plans shall be filed with
the City and shall conform to City requirements.
   (2)   A complete set of “as built” construction drawings for any
improvements constructed in the subdivision shall be furnished as soon as the
construction is complete and approved by the City.
   (3)   A computer file of any and all drawings and dimensions shown on the
plat.
   (4)   An Urban Runoff Mitigation Plan pursuant to this Code, shall be
submitted for all subdivisions where land disturbance is greater than 1 acre.
Subd. 10   Dedication of Lands for Public Purposes
   (1)   Dedication of land or contribution in cash for public purposes. For
every plat or subdivision the owner(s) or developer shall be required to
dedicate to the public, as directed by the City, streets, easements for sewers,
electric, gas, water facilities, stormwater drainage, holding ponds and similar
utilities and improvements, which may include, but is not limited to, sites for
City wells and water towers.
   (2)   Parks, trails and open space dedication of land or cash contribution
requirements. The owners or developers of lands for residential, commercial or
industrial uses, or a planned development which includes residential,
commercial and industrial uses or any combination thereof, shall be required,
as a prerequisite to approval of a plat, subdivision or development of any
lands, to convey to the City, or dedicate to the public use, a reasonable
portion of the area being platted, subdivided or developed, or, in lieu
thereof, the owners or developers shall, at the option of the City, pay the
City, for use in the acquisition and improvement of parks, trails, playgrounds,
public open space development of existing park and playground sites, public
open space and debt retirement as provided in this Subdivision 10.
   (3)   Land dedication requirements.
      a.   Land dedicated under this Subdivision 10 shall conform to the City’s
Comprehensive Plan.
      b.   When a proposed park (community, natural resources, neighborhood),
open space, playground, recreational area, school site or other public ground
has been indicated in the City’s official map or Comprehensive Plan and is
located in whole or in part within the proposed plat, it shall be designated as
such on the plat and shall be dedicated to the appropriate governmental unit
and a deed, acceptable to the appropriate governmental unit, shall be provided
thereto.
      c.   Land area conveyed or dedicated to the City shall not be used in
calculating density requirements and shall be in addition to and not in lieu of
open space requirements for Planned Unit Developments.
      d.   Land to be dedicated shall be adequate, as determined by the City,
for its intended use and shall be at a location convenient to the people to be
served. Factors used in evaluating the adequacy of proposed park and recreation
areas shall include, but is not limited to, size, shape, topography, geology,
hydrology, tree cover, access and location.
      e.   The City, upon consideration of the particular type of development,
may require larger or lesser parcels of land to be dedicated if the City
determines that present or future residents would require greater or lesser
land for park and/or open space purposes.
      f.   The amount of land required to be dedicated by a developer for parks
or open space shall be based upon the net area (gross area minus wetland and
floodplain) of the land to be subdivided which could be developed for
residential, commercial, industrial or other non-residential purposes, shall be
determined at the time of preliminary plat approval, and shall be calculated as
follows:
         1.   Residential development.
 
Dwelling Units/Acre Land To Be Dedicated For Parks, Trails and Open Space
0 - 2.5             11%
2.6 - 5.0           12%
5.1 - 7.5           13%
7.6 - 10.0          14%
10.1 - 12.5         15%
12.6 - 16.0         16%
For each additional 2.5 units over 16/acre, add 0.25%.
 
         2.   Industrial development. In industrial developments, 5% of the net
area (gross area minus wetland and floodplain) included in the land to be
subdivided shall be dedicated for parks, trails and open space.
         3.   Commercial development. The park and open space dedication
requirement of the land to be subdivided for a commercial, light industrial
and/or non-residential subdivision or development shall be 5% of the net area
(gross area minus wetland and floodplain) included in the land to be
subdivided.
         4.   Mobile home park development. The park and open space dedication
requirement for a mobile home park shall be based on the same requirements of
this section and shall be determined prior to the developer receiving approval
of the site plan for such development.
      g.   For residential subdivisions on which a dwelling unit currently
exists, the required dedication shall not apply to the resulting lot containing
the existing home. For commercial and industrial subdivisions on which there is
an existing permitted or conditionally permitted use, the required dedication
shall not apply to the resulting lot containing the existing use.
      h.   Any land which is further subdivided shall be subject to the park
dedication requirements in effect at the time of such additional subdivision.
Credit shall be given for any dedications previously imposed upon that land if
the subdivider can prove that dedications were previously made. In no event
shall the City be liable for any repayment because of a subsequent reduction in
the required park dedication.
      i.   Planned developments with mixed land uses shall make cash and/or
land contributions in accordance with this section based upon the percentage of
land devoted to the various uses.
      j.   Wetlands, ponding areas and drainage ways accepted by the City shall
not be considered in the park land and/or cash contribution to the City.
   (4)   Cash requirements in lieu of land dedication.
      a.   The City shall have the option to require cash contributions in lieu
of accepting dedication of land or the City Council may require payment of cash
in lieu of land dedication based on a pro rata share of the land dedication
that otherwise would be required. Contributions of cash in lieu of land shall
be placed in a special reserve park fund. The park dedication fee amounts shall
be set by City Council resolution.
      b.   Park dedication fees shall be paid prior to City Council
consideration of the final plat.
   (5)   Trail development.
      a.   When the City’s trail master plan identifies a trail or trails to be
constructed along major roadways in the land to be subdivided, the developer
shall be required to pay for the construction of the trail improvements, or
submit a cash payment at the time of final plat. The construction specification
of trails shall be determined by the City Engineer and Public Works Director.
      b.   All developments are required, as determined by the City Council, to
have sidewalks and/or trails within and around the development to connect to
the major trail corridors shown on the City’s master trail plan.
   (6)   Fund administration. All cash contributions received under this
Subdivision in lieu of land dedications shall be deposited into a separate City
fund to be used in the acquisition and improvement of parks, trails,
playgrounds, public open space development of existing park and playground
sites, public open space and debt retirement.
   (7)   Additional requirements. Prior to the dedication of the required
property, the developer shall provide the City with evidence of title in a form
acceptable to the City Attorney, including, but not limited to, a title
commitment insuring the City’s interest in the land to be dedicated. In the
event the City is provided with a title commitment the City must be provided
with a title policy consistent with the title commitment and requirements of
the City Attorney in an amount required by the City and no certificate of
occupancies shall be issued for the development until the City is provided with
the title policy. As a condition of final plat approval and in any dedication
of required land, the developer/owner(s) must have good and marketable title to
the land, free and clear of all encumbrances, including, but not limited to,
any mortgages, liens and assessments and developer/owner(s) shall execute an
affidavit stating the property is free and clear of all encumbrances.
   (8)   Requirements during site development. In the event that as part of the
approved development the land to be dedicated is to be graded by the developer,
the developer shall submit a tree preservation and replacement plan, subject to
the review and approval of the City. In cases where a significant tree or
trees, as determined by the City, are lost during the grading process on the
land that is to be dedicated, the plan shall provide for the 2 for 1
replacement with the replacement trees being at least 2 inches in caliper.
   (9)   Procedural requirements. Prior to the approval by the City Council of
any plat, subdivision or development, any proposed conveyance or dedication of
lands for public purposes shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and/or
Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission, and the Commission(s) shall make
recommendations to the City Council with respect thereto. The Commission’s
review shall consider the proposal for conveyance or dedication as it relates
to open space requirements of the City and in reference to any comprehensive
City plan relating to park and open space lands.
Subd. 11   Stormwater Management/Low Impact Development
   (1)   At the time of submittal of an application for preliminary plat, an
applicant shall submit a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan to the City
Engineer. SWPPPs shall comply with the following:
      a.   Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's General Permit to Discharge
Stormwater Associated with Construction Activity No. MN-R10000.
         1.   Part III - Stormwater Discharge Design Requirements.
         2.   Part IV - Construction Activity Requirements.
      b.   General Permit to Discharge Stormwater Associated with Small
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems No. MNR040000.
         1.   MCM 4 - Construction Site Stormwater Runoff Control.
         2.   MCM 5 - Post Construction Stormwater Management.
      Applicants are encouraged to contact the City and the Elm Creek Watershed
Management Commission early in the development process to ensure that the
submittals are consistent with all requirements. Where regulations are in
conflict, the most restrictive requirement shall apply.
   (2)   General standards.
      a.   The overall design of the site shall support the function and
performance of the practice, by minimizing or disconnecting impervious cover,
implementing source controls, and utilizing better site design practices that
reduce the quantity and adverse quality effects of runoff generated by the
site.
      b.   Structural stormwater best management practices (BMPs) that are
directly connected to the City's storm sewer system, the maintenance agreement
shall:
         1.   Allow the City to inspect BMPs it does not own or operate,
perform necessary maintenance, and assess costs for the BMPs when the City
determines that the owner and/or operator of the BMP has not conducted
maintenance.
         2.   Include conditions designed to preserve the City's right to
ensure maintenance responsibility for BMPs it does not own or operate, when
those responsibilities are legally transferred to another party.
         3.   Include conditions that are designed to protect/preserve BMPs and
site features implemented to comply with the City's General Permit to Discharge
Stormwater Associated with Small MS4s. If site configurations or BMPs change,
causing decreased structural stormwater BMP effectiveness, new or improved BMPs
must be implemented to ensure the conditions for post-construction stormwater
management continue to be met.
      c.   All computations within the SWPPP shall calculate runoff from
hydraulically connected impervious and pervious surfaces separately. Composite
runoff curve numbers shall not be used to calculate runoff from areas
containing both pervious and hydraulically connected impervious surfaces.
Impervious surfaces may be considered hydraulically disconnected when the
impervious runoff is distributed over an area at least as large as the
impervious surface. In these cases, a composite curve number may be used.
Runoff captured within infiltration best management practices may be subtracted
from site runoff volume calculations up to the storage volume of the
infiltration practice. The runoff characteristics for specific vegetated, green
roof systems are to be determined in consultation with the City Engineer.
      d.   The City Engineer shall present his or her review of the plan and
recommendations to the Planning Commission and City Council. Reasons for
approval or disapproved shall be provided in writing to the Planning
Commission, City Council and developer. Any plan disapproved by the City
Engineer must be revised by the developer and resubmitted for approval.
      e.   If a variance is granted the applicant will be required to transfer
the savings in cost, as determined by the City Engineer and approved by the
City Council, to a public stormwater project that complies with permit
regulations.
      f.   No building permit or other planning approval shall be issued until
an SWPPP has been approved by the City Staff.
   (3)   Enforcement.
      a.   The City may issue a stop work order halting all development work
and building construction for noncompliance with the erosion control plan.
      b.   The City may draw down the posted financial guarantee and perform
any work necessary to achieve compliance with the erosion control plan. The
City will attempt to give the applicant notice of such action.
      c.   The applicant shall pay to the City an administration fee of $500
for each violation of the erosion control plan. If the applicant does not
promptly pay the fee, the City may draw upon the posted financial guarantee to
pay it.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 9-28-2010; Am. Ord. 2015-11, passed 8-26-2015; Am. Ord.
2016-05, passed 1-27-2016)
1002.09   BASIC IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
Subd. 1   Requirements
   (1)   The following improvements shall be required of all new subdivisions
within the City. In the event the City and developer or owner agrees that the
City shall make 1 or more of the improvements, it is hereby declared to be the
policy of the City to proceed as soon as feasible, after approval of the final
plat and completion by the developer or owner of the improvements specified in
the developers agreement, if any, with the installation of any of the following
public improvements within the subdivision:
      a.   Sanitary sewage disposal;
      b.   Street grading and paving;
      c.   Urban concrete curb and gutter;
      d.   Boulevard sodding;
      e.   Drainage;
      f.   Water; and
      g.   Landscaping.
   (2)   The installation of the above improvements subject to the provisions
of Subdivision 2 below shall be under the control and supervision of the City
Engineer who, in an effort to prevent and control erosion, shall specify the
manner in which the installations shall be made.
   (3)   No final plat shall be approved by the City Council unless the owner
or subdivider shall have placed the installed survey monuments of a permanent
character at all points as shown on the final plat as required by the City
Engineer and the County Surveyor. All United States, state, county or other
official bench marks, monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the
property shall be preserved in precise position.
Subd. 2   Improvements.
   No final plat shall be approved by the Council unless the owner or
subdivider shall have either entered into a developers agreement, pursuant to
this Subsection, or complied with the following requirements:
   (1)   Sanitary sewer.
      a.   Sanitary sewer mains and service connections stubbed into the
property lines, shall be installed to serve all lots in the subdivision, when
the location of the plat is within an area of the City which is either being
assessed for sanitary sewer service, or within which contracts for service have
been awarded.
      b.   The Council, in its discretion, may waive the application of this
portion of the Code upon a showing that to require the installation of the
sanitary sewer mains within the subdivision would not be feasible with regard
to the extension of existing trunk and interceptor mains to service the
subdivision or that the particular locations or unusual circumstances of the
proposed plat would cause undue hardship to either the owner or subdivider or
the City.
      c.   Private septic systems shall be installed to service all lots under
the circumstances.
   (2)   Streets.
      a.   The owner and subdivider shall, at his or her expense, provide and
install streets that are graded and paved in accordance with specifications
provided by the City Engineer.
      b.   Provided, however, that when sanitary sewer mains are not to be
installed within the subdivision, the Council, in its discretion, may waive the
requirement that the streets be paved. In the event the waiver is granted, the
owner or subdivider shall deposit with the City a sum of money equivalent to
the Engineer’s estimated cost of the paving.
   (3)   Urban curb and gutter. The owner and subdivider shall, at his or her
own expense, provide and install surmountable concrete curb and gutter in those
subdivisions where sanitary sewer and paved streets are required.
   (4)   Boulevard sodding. The owner and subdivider shall, at his or her own
expense sod all boulevard strips in those subdivisions where concrete curb and
gutter is required.
   (5)   Storm sewers and storm water holding areas.
      a.   A system of drainage that will adequately take care of the water
run-off within the subdivision shall be provided.
      b.   In the event it is feasible to connect to existing storm sewer
systems, storm sewer mains within the subdivision shall be installed.
   (6)   Water.
      a.   Water mains and service connections stubbed into the property line
shall be installed to serve all lots in the subdivision when the location of
the plat is within an area of the City which is either being assessed for water
service or within which contracts for the service have been awarded.
      b.   The Council, in its discretion, may waive the application of this
portion of the section upon a showing that to require the installation of water
mains within the subdivision would not be feasible with regard to the extension
of existing trunk mains to service the subdivision or that the particular
locations or unusual circumstances of the proposed plat would cause undue
hardship to either the owner or subdivider or the City.
      c.   Private water wells shall be installed to service all lots under the
circumstances.
   (7)   Landscaping. All areas of disturbed soil shall be seeded and mulched
by disc anchoring, and shall be determined established through the first
growing season by the City.
Subd. 3   Developer’s Agreement
   (1)   In order to effectuate the items above, the owner and subdivider shall
enter into a contract with the City, in the form as required by the City,
providing for the installation of the required improvements.
   (2)   The contract shall provide, among other things, for performance by the
contractor and security for that performance to the City in the form of a
letter of credit, or cash in lieu thereof, in the amount as the City Engineer
shall deem to be adequate to insure the satisfactory completion of the
improvements.
   (3)   Surety to guarantee payment of special assessments. The applicant
shall cause to be deposited with the City Treasurer a surety acceptable to the
City in the amount of 60% of the City Engineer’s estimated cost of the public
improvements for residential developments or 40% of the estimated cost of the
public improvements for commercial and/or industrial developments to guarantee
payment of special assessments for the public improvements. The surety shall
guarantee payment by the applicant to the City of all expenses incurred by the
City, which expenses shall include, but not be limited to, expenses for
engineering, fiscal, legal, construction, and administration services.
   (4)   Surety to guarantee installation of improvements. The applicant shall
also deposit with the City Treasurer a surety acceptable to the City in the
amount of 110% of the City Engineer’s estimated cost of the improvements
submitted in the form of a cash escrow or letter of credit. The surety shall
guarantee:
      a.   The making and installing within the time required by the City of
all of the improvements required by the developer's agreement.
      b.   Satisfactory completion of the work and payment therefor, which work
was undertaken by the applicant in accordance with the developer’s agreement.
      c.   Completion of required lot improvements, including, but not limited
to, boulevard sod, boulevard trees, monumentation, grading/erosion control, and
street cleaning.
   (5)   Acceptable types of sureties.
      a.   Acceptable sureties shall include cash, a savings bond or savings
certificate, a letter of credit, and a performance or indemnity bond.
      b.   A savings certificate or savings bond shall be payable to the City
and the applicant and shall be endorsed by the applicant.
      c.   A letter of credit shall be in a form satisfactory to the City.
   (6)   A condition of plat approval and lot subdivisions is existing special
assessments shall be paid in full. However, if approved by the City Council
existing special assessments which have been levied against the property
described are to be divided and allocated to the respective lots in the
proposed plat, the City Engineer shall estimate the clerical cost of preparing
a revised assessment roll, filing the assessment roll with the County Auditor,
and making such division and allocation, and upon approval by the Council of
such estimated cost the cost shall be paid to the Treasurer by the applicant.
   (7)   Document number of recorded plat to be furnished to City Engineer. The
applicant shall, immediately upon recording, furnish the City Engineer with the
document number of the plat as assigned by the County Recorder.
Subd. 4   Inspection by City Engineer and City Planner
   (1)   The planning, designing and installation shall be subject to review
and inspection by the City Engineer and Planner.
   (2)   In the event, the estimated cost of the improvements including the
charges of the City Engineer for supervision and inspection, shall be included
in the developer’s agreement with the City and the appropriate security in the
form of cash or bond shall be deposited with the City.
Subd. 5   Escrow of Required Deposits
   (1)   All sums deposited with the City or cash obtained by exercise of the
letter of credit shall be kept in separate funds which funds shall be
encumbered and earmarked for the later construction of the particular
improvements within the particular subdivision; provided, however, that the
deposits for concrete curb and gutter and boulevard sodding may be merged into
a single fund.
   (2)   The funds may be invested by the City and interest earned on the
investment shall accrue and be added to the appropriate fund.
Subd. 6   Release and Expiration of Financial Guarantees
   (1)   The financial guarantee shall be held by the City until, upon written
notice by the subdivider and certification from a professional engineer that
part or all of the required improvements have been completed and upon
verification of such by the City staff, a portion or all of the financial
guarantee is released by the City Engineer. No financial guarantee shall be
released in full until the City has received 1) certified, reproducible record
plans of all required improvements installed by the subdivider and 2) a title
insurance policy approved by the City Attorney indicated that the improvements
are free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances.
   (2)   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to insure that a
submitted financial guarantee shall continue in full force and effect until the
City Engineer has approved and accepted all of the required improvements, and
thereby is authorized to release the guarantee or reduce the amount of the
guarantee as provided above.
   (3)   When any instrument submitted as a financial guarantee contains
provision for an expiration date, after which the instrument may not be drawn
upon, not withstanding the status of the Development Contract or of the
requirement improvements, the expiration shall be (fill in date) or the closest
business day in the case of weekends and legal holidays. Further, the financial
guarantee shall be deemed automatically extended without changes for 6 months
from the expiration date unless 60 days prior to the expirations date, the
financial institution notifies the City in writing by certified mail that it
does not elect to renew the financial guarantee for an additional period. If
the instrument is not to be renewed and has not been released by the City
Engineer, another acceptable financial guarantee in the appropriate amount
shall be submitted at least 60 days prior to the expiration. The term of any
extension shall be approved by the City Engineer and subject to the
requirements of this section. Upon receipt of an acceptable substitute
financial guarantee, the City Engineer may release the original guarantee.
Subd. 7   Warranty/Maintenance Guarantee
   (1)   The subdivider shall submit a letter of credit for 110% of the amount
of the original cost of the improvements. This letter of credit will be
released over a period of time as approved by the City Engineer.
   (2)   The required warranty period for materials, and workmanship from the
utility contractor installing public sewer and water mains shall be 2 years
from the date of final written City acceptance of the work.
   (3)   The required warranty period for all work relating to street
construction, including concrete curb and gutter, sidewalks and trails,
materials and equipment shall be subject to 1 year from the date of final
written acceptance.
   (4)   The required warranty period for sod, trees, and landscaping is 1
growing season following installation.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 9-28-2010)
 1002.10     REGISTERED LAND SURVEYS AND CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS.
Subd. 1   Registered Land Survey
   (1)   All registered land surveys in the City shall be presented to the
Planning Commission in the form of a preliminary plat in accordance with the
standards set forth in this Subsection for preliminary plats and the Planning
Commission shall first review the arrangement, sizes and relationship of
proposed tracts in the registered land surveys, and that tracts to be used as
easements or roads should be so designated.
   (2)   Unless the Planning Commission’s recommendation for approval and City
Council approval in accordance with the standards set forth in this Subsection
have been obtained, building permits will be withheld for buildings on tracts
which have been so subdivided by registered land surveys, and the City may
refuse to take over tracts as streets or roads and to improve, repair or
maintain any tracts unless so approved.
Subd. 2   Conveyance by Metes and Bounds.
   No conveyance of land in which the land conveyed is described by metes and
bounds shall be made or recorded if the parcels described in the conveyance are
less than 20 acres in area and 500 feet in width, or if the conveyance results
in a division into 2 or more lots or parcels and any of which are less than 20
acres in area and 500 feet in width, unless the parcel is a separate parcel of
record as of September 1, 1980, or unless an agreement to convey the smaller
parcel has been entered into prior to the time and the instruments showing the
agreement to convey is recorded in the office of the Registrar of Deeds or
County Recorder within 1 year thereafter and the parcel is in compliance with
all ordinances and regulations in effect as of the date of the conveyance.
Subd. 3   Waiver
   (1)   In any case in which the applicant maintains compliance with the
foregoing provision will involve an unnecessary hardship and does not interfere
with the purposes of this Subsection or any other regulations or policies of
the City, the conveyance shall be presented to the Planning Commission in the
form of a preliminary plat in conformance with the standards set forth for
preliminary plats, and the Planning Commission shall first make a
recommendation regarding the arrangement, sizes and relationship of proposed
tracts, and tracts to be used as easements or roads shall be so designated.
   (2)   If the Council finds that an unnecessary hardship exists and it will
not interfere with the City policies, it may by resolution waive compliance
with this Subsection upon the conditions as the Council deems appropriate and
allow recording of the conveyance by a metes and bounds description.
   (3)   Applicants for waiver shall provide information as requested by the
City, including, but not limited to appropriate certifications of title, along
with requested fees and escrow deposits.
Subd. 4   Building Permits.
   Unless City Council approval has been obtained in accordance with the
standards set forth in this Subsection, building permits will be withheld for
buildings on tracts which have been subdivided and conveyed by this method and
the City may refuse to take over tracts as streets or roads or to improve
repair or maintain any tracts.
Subd. 5   Sea Level Elevations Required.
   All surveys submitted in connection with applications for waivers of the
provisions for division or consolidations of lots or tracts as provided shall
show sea level elevations at 50 foot intervals.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 9-28-2010)
1002.11   VARIANCES.
Subd. 1   General Conditions
   (1)   Except for the provisions of Subsection
1001.29, where special variance provisions are provided, the Planning
Commission may recommend to the Council a variance from the provisions of this
Subsection when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict
compliance.
   (2)   In recommending any variance, the Commission shall prescribe only
conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest.
   (3)   In making its findings, as required below, the Commission shall take
into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of
land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed
subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic
conditions in the vicinity.
   (4)   No variance shall be granted unless the following 2 findings are made:
      a.   That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the
property that the strict application of the provisions of this Subsection would
deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the land; and
      b.   That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which the
property is situated.
Subd. 2   Application Required
   (1)   Applications for any variance shall be submitted in writing by the
subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for consideration by
the Planning Commission, stating fully and clearly all facts relied upon by the
petitioner and shall be supplemented with maps, plans or other additional data
which may aid the Commission in the analysis of the proposed project.
   (2)   The plans for development shall include covenants, restrictions or
other legal provisions necessary to guarantee the full achievement of the plan.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 9-28-2010)
1002.12   BUILDING PERMITS.
   No building permits shall be issued by the City with respect to the land or
to any lot, until provisions of this Subsection of the City Code, M.S. §
462.358, as may be amended from time to time, and other applicable statutes and
ordinances have been met; the plat or subdivision shall have been recorded in
the office of the Register of Deeds of the County; and all pending assessments
(100% of principal balance, plus accrued interest) have been paid to the City
of Dayton.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 9-28-2010)
1002.13   VIOLATIONS.
Subd. 1   Sale of Lots from Unrecorded Plats
   (1)   It shall be unlawful to sell, trade or otherwise convey or offer to
sell, trade or otherwise convey any lot or parcel of land as part of, or in
conformity with any plan, plat or replat of any subdivision or portion of the
City unless the plan, plat or replat has first been recorded in the Office of
the Register of Deeds of the County.
   (2)   A person conveying a new parcel of land which, or the plat for which,
has not previously been recorded, and which is part of or would constitute a
subdivision, shall attach to the instrument of conveyance either:
      a.   A recordable certification from the City Clerk that:
         1.   The subdivision regulations do not apply;
         2.   That the subdivision has been approved by the City Council; or
         3.   That the restrictions on the division of taxes and filing and
recording have been waived by resolution of the Council in this case because
compliance will create an unnecessary hardship and failure to comply will not
interfere with the purpose of the regulations.
      b.   A statement which names and identifies the location of the Dayton
City offices and advises the grantee that Dayton Comprehensive Plan,
subdivision regulations and zoning may restrict the use or restrict or prohibit
the development of the parcel or construction on it, and that the division of
taxes and the filing of recording of the conveyance may be prohibited without
prior recordable certification of approval, non-applicability, or waiver from
the City.
Subd. 2   Building on Future Lot Lines.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to build any
structure on any future roadway or lot line as shown on any sketch plan
submitted in connection with a subdivision, pursuant to Subsection
1002.05 of this Code.
Subd. 3   Misrepresentations as to Construction, Supervision or Inspection of
Improvements.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning an addition
or subdivision of land with the City to represent that any improvement upon any
of the streets, alleys or avenues of the addition or subdivision, or any sewer
in the addition or subdivision, has been constructed according to the plans and
specifications approved by the City Council, or has been supervised or
inspected by the City, when the improvements have not been so constructed,
supervised or inspected.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 9-28-2010)
1002.14   GROWTH MANAGEMENT.
   (1)   Applicability. This chapter applies to all guided property on the 2030
Future Land Use Plan that is not currently within the Metropolitan Urban
Service Area (MUSA).
   (2)   Legislative findings and purpose.
      a.   The City Council finds and declares the following:
         1.   A measure of sustained, balanced growth is desirable and
necessary for the continued viability of the community.
         2.   A staging plan has been prepared defining development staging
areas sized to accommodate forecasted growth in its 2030 Comprehensive Plan
update.
         3.   A reasonable amount of staging flexibility is desirable since
certain areas of the City may develop at different rates than forecasted.
         4.   The health, safety and general welfare of the City’s citizens is
dependent on the continued availability of essential public facilities and
services for forecasted growth.
         5.   The City’s quality of life is dependent on its ability to provide
essential services at anticipated quality and quantity levels.
         6.   Essential resources, facilities and services include the
following:
            (a)   Municipal water system.
            (b)   Municipal wastewater treatment.
            (c)   Law enforcement.
            (d)   Fire protection facilities, equipment and services.
            (e)   State and local roads.
            (f)   Drainage systems.
            (g)   Staff and administrative capacity to conduct permitted and
construction supervision processes.
            (h)   Community facilities including parks, recreation and senior
services.
            (i)   Other resources, facilities or services as determined by the
City.
      b.   General provisions.
         1.   The City will monitor the land within its urban service area and
report on an annual basis to the Planning Commission and City Council the
estimated amount of vacant land available within each land use category and the
amount of developed but vacant residential lots. This reporting will be used by
the City Council in reviewing the status of available land when considering
opening a new staging area.
         2.   The City Council, based on recommendation from the Planning
Commission, shall determine by resolution when a staging area is to be added to
the urban service area and therefore opened to development.
         3.   The City Council’s decision to extend urban services to or within
a staging area is discretionary in nature giving the City the ability to open
or not open a staging area, based on the following criteria:
            (a)   Whether the urban service area expansion is in the spirit and
intent of the Comprehensive Plan. Expansion of an urban service area may vary
from the priority order as indicated on the Staging Plan of the 2030
Comprehensive Plan, if the City Council determines that to vary the order
better represents the spirit and intent of the Comprehensive Plan.
      Any urban service area expansions that are proposed for approval prior to
the projected date in the Staging Plan of the Comprehensive Plan will require a
Comprehensive Plan amendment as required by the Metropolitan Council.
            (b)   Whether there is an adequate supply of vacant land or vacant
developed lots for each land use category already in an available urban service
area before opening a new staging area. Stage areas/years in different growth
areas (southeast, northeast and northwest) will be considered independently of
one another to prevent the same staging years in 1 portion of the City
affecting the opening of the same staging year in another part of the City. For
the purposes of this section, a vacant land supply consisting of 50% of the
current staging year that is vacant at the time of review will generally be
considered adequate for each land use category, unless otherwise determined by
the City Council.
            (c)   Essential resources, facilities and services are available to
support development in the new urban service area.
            (d)   Essential resources, facilities and services will be
considered available if they are not currently available but will be provided
as part of the urban service area expansion. The City Council may require
appropriate analysis to determine if adequate resources, facilities and
services will be available in a proposed urban service area expansion
including, but not limited to, infrastructure studies, services studies and
funding analysis.
            (e)   The level of funding of commitment, participation from
private parties for any necessary infrastructure and service expansions.
            (f)   The level of commitment, including regulatory approvals and/
or funding from other levels of government that are necessary or desirable for
urban service area expansion.
            (g)   The impacts of the proposed urban service area expansion on
the City budget and ability to provide services.
            (h)   The impact of the proposed urban service area expansion on
the health, safety and general welfare of the City’s existing citizens.
            (i)   Environmental impacts of the proposed urban service area
expansion.
         4.   Residential building permit allocation. There shall be no annual
limits on total number of residential building permits for new unit
construction issued unless the total number of residential building permits
hits 200 units within a year. At that time, the following 2 years shall be
limited to a maximum 200 residential building permits per year subject to the
following criteria:
            (a)   Total permits refers only to the issuance of building permits
for construction of actual housing units but does not limit the number of units
approved through a final plat. There shall be no limits on the amount of actual
platted lots approved within a calendar year.
            (b)   Single family residential units shall count as 1 unit.
Attached multifamily, including townhomes, shall count as 0.5 for each unit.
Rental apartments are excluded from the total.
            (c)   No single development project shall be awarded an entire
year’s total number of residential building permits, unless otherwise approved
by the City Council. This requirement is intended to:
               i.   Avoid or minimize potential monopoly price effects;
               ii.   Promote timely development; One project often will not be
able to build all available lots in 1 year;
               iii.   Promote housing diversity;
               iv.   Avoid inefficient concentration of infrastructure
expansion that could impede financial return on investments elsewhere in the
City;
               v.   Distribute impacts of development.
            (d)   At any time the City Council has discretion to consider
increasing the limit of residential building permits using the criteria in
section (2)b.3. above.
            (e)   This residential building permit allocation shall take effect
January 1, 2011 and expire on December 31, 2016.
            (f)   City staff is required to present to the City Council the
number and location of permits once 75% of the annual permit allowance are
issued.
         5.   Parcels located on the fringe of a staging year will be
considered on a case by case basis.
(Ord. 2010-24, passed 12-14-2010)
1002.15   CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION.
Subd. 1   Purpose
   (1)   The City finds that the Greenway Overlay Corridor (as identified on
the Comprehensive Plan) serves to protect important natural resource areas,
provides a critical habitat corridor, and also provides recreational
opportunities. Therefore it is in the public interest to provide and encourage
measures of protection to those properties that touch any portion of the
Greenway Overlay Corridor while also providing opportunities for equitable
economic return in consideration of protection and preservation of the Greenway
Overlay Corridor. Design standards have been established to support natural
resource conservation goals while accommodating new growth and development. The
purposes of these standards are:
      a.   To allow for flexibility in lot design which directs buildings, site
disturbance and activities to the most suitable locations with respect to the
natural conditions of a tract.
      b.   To protect unique natural features of the Greenway Corridor.
      c.   To minimize visual impact upon the scenic character of the City by
fitting new construction harmoniously into the natural landscape.
      d.   To provide an opportunity for creative, varied, environmentally
sensitive, and economical development, permitting a range of lot areas,
building densities and housing sizes and to promote continued diversity of age
and income in the community.
Subd. 2   Application.
   In addition to the preliminary and final platting requirements of Section
1002, all subdivisions that occur or are proposed to occur on any parcel that
touches the Greenway Overlay Corridor identified on the official Future Land
Use Map and shown below shall be subject to the additional requirements of this
Subsection.
Subd. 3   Planned Unit Development Designation.
   To provide for development flexibility to protect and preserve Greenway
Overlay Corridor areas while also supporting equitable economic return, a
Planned Unit Development (PUD) designation shall be required in areas adjacent
to or within the Greenway Overlay Corridor. The PUD shall be reviewed at the
same time as the preliminary plat.
   (1)   Hierarchy of protection standards and development standards. In
developing and/or reviewing the PUD for a property that touches the Greenway
Overlay Corridor, City staff and the applicant shall take into account the
following hierarchy of protection standards and development guidelines.
      a.   Hierarchy of protection standards. The hierarchy of protection areas
in Subdivision 3(1)a.1. through 3. below are based on the conceptual greenway
inclusion criteria identified in the Dayton Natural Resource Inventory and the
Dayton Park, Trail, and Open Space Plan. The priority areas for protection are
listed in descending order from the highest to the lowest level of protection.
         1.   Most important areas for protection. Areas defined as most
important for protection include high and moderate quality natural areas
defined by the City of Dayton Natural Resource Inventory; and other unique or
ecologically significant areas, such as natural communities mapped by the
Minnesota County Biological Survey, DNR PWI water features, and rare species
habitat areas. These areas are the highest protection priority. Development
should be located outside of these areas, with an adequate buffer to avoid
adverse construction and development impacts. The goal is to protect these
areas and avoid any deterioration.
         2.   More important areas for protection. Areas defined as more
important for protection include riparian areas such as water bodies and
wetland complexes. The goal is to conserve the quality of these areas while
allowing minor encroachment or disturbance.
         3.   Important areas for protection. Areas defined as important for
protection include semi-natural areas immediately adjacent to natural areas and
natural corridors that serve as important links between natural areas or public
open spaces. The goal is that design placement and construction techniques used
in these areas will enhance the general ambiance and character function and
value of the natural resource area.
      b.   Development guidelines. The following guidelines are based on the
hierarchy of protection in Subdivision 3(1)a. above and shall be used in the
site planning and PUD process to determine permitted site design and
development activities.
         1.   Maximize the protection of the function and value of the Greenway
Overlay Corridor.
         2.   Provide for an opportunity for equitable economic return for the
development.
         3.   Maintain viable riparian and wildlife corridors, rare species,
and connections between Greenway Overlay Corridor areas. Avoid direct or
indirect impacts to the corridor area that may destroy or diminish the
resource.
            (a)   Keep undeveloped Greenway Overlay Corridor areas large enough
to maximize sustainability and minimize fragmentation.
            (b)   Maintain a buffer adequate to the health and viability of the
Greenway Overlay Corridor.
            (c)   Minimize adverse construction impacts on the Greenway Overlay
Corridor. Rectify impact by repair, replacement or restore affected greenway
area.
            (d)   Cluster homes to protect larger areas of open space and avoid
fragmented habitat areas.
            (e)   Consideration should be given in the layout of the
subdivision to provide each dwelling unit with access and or views onto the
preserved natural area(s).
            (f)   Residential design standards for the applicable zoning
district shall apply.
      c.   Incentives. To provide for an opportunity for equitable economic
return in consideration of protection and preservation of the Greenway Overlay
Corridor, incentives may be offered as part of the PUD process including, but
not limited to (but subject to applicable local, state, and federal laws) the
following:
         1.   Deviations from subdivision and zoning regulations, such as
narrower public right-of-way, reduced sidewalk requirements, reduced street
widths, reduced setback requirements.
         2.   Acceptance of donation of Greenway Overlay Corridor upland areas
and/or buffer areas to fulfill portion of required park dedication acreage
established in Section
1002.
         3.   Allowance of increased density and smaller lot sizes.
         4.   Cluster of development outside the Greenway Overlay Corridor.
         5.   Variance from lot coverage regulations.
         6.   Expedited application review.
         7.   Land acquisitions of the Greenway Overlay Corridor.
         8.   Variance from landscape requirements.
         9.   Other options that meet the intent of this Subsection.
Subd. 4   Data Required for Preliminary Plats.
   In addition to the data required for preliminary plats under Section
1002, preliminary plats subject to this Subsection shall also provide the
following information.
   (1)   Resource inventory. Any development proposed under this Subsection
shall also include a resource inventory. The resource inventory shall be
prepared by qualified professionals on behalf of the applicant. If the
applicant is unable or unwilling to prepare the inventory it will be prepared
by the City or its designees and the applicant will be charged an appropriate
fee as established by the City Council. The resource inventory shall identify
all natural resources located on the site, and shall designate natural resource
areas on the site according to the hierarchy of protection standards in
Subdivision 3(1)a.
   (2)   Natural resource narrative. Any development proposed under this
Subsection shall also include narrative describing how the proposed plat
addresses the hierarchy of protection standards and development guidelines in
Subdivision 3(1)a and b.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 9-28-2010)
 
DAYTON, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2019 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CITY OFFICIALS
Mayor Tim McNeil
Council Members:
Jon Mellberg
Bob O'Brien
Dennis Fisher
Julie Gustafson
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE 2015-12
CITY OF DAYTON
HENNEPIN AND WRIGHT COUNTIES, MINNESOTA
   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF DAYTON,
MINNESOTA.
AMENDING, RESTATING, REVISING, UPDATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH THE SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES.
   WHEREAS Minnesota Statutes Sections 415.02 and 415.021 authorize the city to
cause its ordinances to be remodified and printed in a book,
NOW THEREFORE the City Council of the City of Dayton, Minnesota, ordains:
SECTION 1. General Ordinances of the City as amended, restated, revised,
updated, codified and complied in book form, including penalties for the
violations of various provisions thereof, are hereby adopted and shall
constitute, the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Dayton." This Code of
Ordinances also adopts by reference certain statues and administrative rules of
the State of Minnesota as named in the Code of Ordinances.
SECTION 2. The Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following titles:
   I.   General Provisions
   III.   Administration
   V.   Public Works
   VII.   Traffic Code
   IX.   General Regulations
   XI.   Business Regulations
   XIII.   General Offenses
   XV.   Land Usage
SECTION 3. All prior ordinances, pertaining to the subjects treated in the Code
of Ordinances, shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this ordinance, except as they are included and re-ordained in whole or in part
in the Code of Ordinances; provided, this repeals shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall this repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain person,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
this repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code of Ordinances.
All fees established in prior ordinances codified in this Code shall remain in
effect unless amended in this code or until an ordinance adopting a fee
schedule is adopted or amended.
SECTION 4. This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances shall be a sufficient
publication of any ordinance including in it and not previously published in
the City's official newspaper. The Clerk of the City shall cause a substantial
quantity of the Code of Ordinances to be printed for general distribution to
the public at actual cost and shall furnish a copy of the Code of Ordinances to
the County Law Library or its designated depository. The official copy of this
Code of Ordinances shall be marked and be kept in the office of the City Clerk.
SECTION 5. The Code of Ordinances is declared to be prima facie evidence of the
law of the City and shall be received in evidence as provided by Minnesota
Statutes by the Courts of the State of Minnesota.
SECTION 6. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect
from and after its passage and publication as required by law.
   Adopted by the City Council of the City of Dayton this 28th day of October
2015.
                                       Tim McNeil /s/
                                       Mayor
ATTEST:
Amy Stanius       
Deputy City Clerk
Published in the Champlin Dayton Press on: November 5, 2015
Motion made by Councilmember Salonek and second by Councilmember O'Brien.
Motion carried unanimously.
TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Official time
   
10.11   Reasonable time
   
10.12   Ordinances repealed
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.18   Copies of code
   
10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules and supplements by reference
   
10.20   Enforcement
   
10.21   Hearings
 
   
10.98   Administrative enforcement of City Code
   
10.99   General penalty and enforcement
§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Dayton City Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified
ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to the
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code”. Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01”. Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
of the city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is
plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of
the same ordinance.
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, whenever the context requires.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (4)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CITY. The City of Dayton, Minnesota.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified by
amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
      COUNTY. The Counties of Hennepin and Wright, Minnesota.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath and, in those cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge
taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as
applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Minnesota.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.10  OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within the city for the transaction of all city
business.
§ 10.11  REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12  ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
§ 10.15  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.18  COPIES OF CODE.
   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk
for public inspection. The Clerk shall provide a copy for sale for a reasonable
charge.
§ 10.19  ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES AND SUPPLEMENTS BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   It is the intention of the City Council that all future amendments to
any state or federal rules and statutes adopted by reference in this code or
referenced in this code are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if
they had been in existence at the time this code was adopted, unless there is
clear intention expressed in the code to the contrary.
   (B)   It is the intention of the City Council that all future supplements
are hereby adopted as if they had been in existence at the time this code was
enacted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the contrary.
§ 10.20  ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any licensed peace officer of the city’s Police Department, the County
Sheriff or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to enforce any provision
of this code.
   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time to
time, the City Clerk shall have the authority to administer and enforce this
code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain individuals
designated within the code or by the Clerk or City Council shall have the
authority to administer and enforce the provisions specified. All and any
person or persons designated may issue a citation in lieu of arrest or
continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.
   (C)   The City Clerk and any city official or employee designated by this
code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under this code may, with the
permission of a licensee of a business or owner of any property or resident of
a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect or otherwise
enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.
   (D)   (1)   If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of a
premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the City
Clerk, peace officer or any employee or official charged with the duty of
enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable cause
exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of competent
jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before conducting the
inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant shall be only to
determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these
provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made as a result of the
warrant.
      (2)   No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable cause to issue
the warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause
does not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular
property.
   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property
within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance to
the property by the City Clerk or any other authorized city officer or employee
only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce
these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit the inspection of or entrance
to the property shall be grounds for termination of any and all permits,
licenses or city service to the property. Mailed notice shall be given to the
licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property, stating
the grounds for the termination, and the licensee, owner, resident or other
person in control of the property shall be given an opportunity to appear
before the City Clerk to object to the termination before it occurs, subject to
appeal of the Clerk’s decision to the City Council at a regularly scheduled or
special meeting.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of
the city to enter private property in urgent emergency situations where there
is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
§ 10.21  HEARINGS.
   (A)   General. Unless otherwise provided in this code, or by law, every
public hearing required by law, ordinance or resolution to be held on any
legislative or administrative matter shall be conducted in accordance with this
section.
   (B)   Notice. Every hearing shall be preceded by ten days’ mailed notice to
all persons entitled thereto by law, ordinance or regulation unless only
published notice is required. The notice shall state the time, place and
purpose of the hearing. Failure to give the notice or defects in it shall not
invalidate the proceedings if a good faith effort has been made to comply with
this division (B).
   (C)   Conduct of hearing. At the hearing, each party in interest shall have
an opportunity to be heard and to present such evidence as is relevant to the
proceeding. The Council may adopt rules governing the conduct of hearings,
records to be made and such other matters as it deems necessary.
   (D)   Record. Upon the disposition of any matter after hearing, the Council
shall have prepared a written summary of its findings and decisions and enter
the summary in the official Council minutes.
(1978 Code, § 100.05)
§ 10.98  ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT OF CITY CODE.
   (A)   Findings and purpose.  The purpose of this chapter of the city code is
to establish a procedure for administrative enforcement of violations of the
city code. The City Council finds that criminal or civil legal action is not an
appropriate remedy for certain violations of city code. The City Council
establishes this administrative enforcement process as an informal, cost-
effective and more efficient alternative to traditional criminal charges for
violations of certain city code provisions.
   (B)   General provisions.
      (1)   A violation of any provision of the city code, other than a traffic
offense, is an administrative offense subject to a citation and civil penalties
pursuant to this chapter.
      (2)   Each day a violation exists constitutes a separate offense.
      (3)   Each adrninistrative offense, may be subject to a civil penalty not
to exceed $1,000. The City Council shall adopt a schedule of civil penalties
for offenses subject to administrative enforcement.
      (4)   Civil penalties may be doubled for repeat violations that occur
within a 12-month period.
      (5)   The City Administrator is authorized to promulgate rules and forms
to facilitate the execution of this chapter.
      (6)   In its sole discretion, the city may elect to pursue criminal
charges, a civil action, or other remedies allowed by law for conduct covered
by this chapter.
   (C)   Administrative citation.
      (1)   Individuals authorized to enforce the City Code. The following
individuals may issue administrative citations on behalf of the city:
         (a)   Any Officer of the Dayton Police Department;
         (b)   Fire Chief;
         (c)   Fire Marshal;
         (d)   Public Works Supervisor;
         (e)   City Administrator;
         (f)   Any other employee or agent of the city designated in writing by
the City Administrator.
      (2)   Notice of violation. Upon determining that a violation of city code
has occurred, any individual authorized under this chapter may give notice of
the violation to the violator. Such notice shall be in writing and include the
nature, date, and time of the violation, the name and title of the official
issuing the notice, and the amount of the scheduled penalty. In the case of a
vehicular violation, notice may be attached to the vehicle.
   (D)   Payment or hearing request required. 
      (1)   For violations other than violations of the city's Zoning and
Subdivision Codes, within seven days of issuance of the written notice of
violation, the person issued such notice must either pay the civil penalty or
request an administrative hearing in writing. The civil penalty may be paid in
person or by mail. Payment is deemed an admission of the violation.
      (2)   For violations of the city's Zoning and Subdivision Codes, the
property owner shall have 30 days from the issuance of the written notice of
violation to request an administrative hearing in writing, modify the property
to adhere to zoning requirements, or provide the City Administrator with
satisfactory written evidence of efforts toward compliance. By way of example,
but without limitation, satisfactory written evidence may include a contract
with an individual or entity to perform the necessary work to bring the
property into compliance with zoning requirements within a limited period of
time. During the 30 days from the issuance of the written notice, the property
owner will not incur a civil penalty. If the property owner does not request a
hearing, bring the property into compliance, or provide the City Administrator
with satisfactory written evidence of efforts toward compliance within 30 days
of issuance of the written notice, the property owner will incur a civil
penalty on the 31st day after issuance of the written notice, and each day the
violation continues, as provided in the city's schedule of civil penalties.
Civil penalties will continue to accrue until the property owner notifies the
City Administrator that the property has been brought into compliance and the
City Administrator or designee has verified the property is compliant.
   (E)   Administrative hearing.
      (1)   Any person contesting an administrative citation pursuant to this
chapter may request a hearing. The request must be in writing and include the
violator's name and contact information, citation number, date of offense, and
a brief description of the reason(s) for requesting a hearing. Any request for
hearing other than a hearing on a zoning or subdivision code violation must be
addressed to the Chief of Police and received at the Police Department within
seven days of issuance of the citation. A request for a hearing on a zoning or
subdivision code violation must be addressed to the City Administrator and
received at City Hall within 30 days of the issuance of the notice of
violation.
      (2)   The city will determine the hearing date. The hearing should be
conducted within 60 days from the date the request is received.
      (3)   A hearing officer shall conduct an informal hearing to determine,
by a preponderance of the evidence, whether a violation has occurred. The
hearing officer shall have authority to sustain or dismiss the violation and,
if sustained, reduce or waive the civil penalty.
      (4)   The civil penalty must be paid within seven days of the hearing
officer decision.
   (F)   Hearing Officer.  The hearing shall be before any member of City
Council acting as the Hearing Officer, or an individual designated by the City
Council to act as Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer is authorized to hear
and decide any controversy relating to administrative offenses covered by this
chapter.
   (G)   Payment of civil penalty.
      (1)   Except for violations of the Zoning and Subdivision Codes, the
civil penalty must be paid within seven days of issuance of an administrative
citation, or seven days of the Hearing Officer's decision. A ten-percent (10%)
late fee will be added beginning on the eighth day, and for each day thereafter
until the penalty is paid in full. The City Administrator may agree to a one-
time extension to pay, up to an additional 14 days.
      (2)   The city will periodically send invoices regarding outstanding
civil penalties and late fees. Where a violation affects property within the
city, no permits or land use approvals will be granted for the property at
issue until all civil penalties are paid.
      (3)   If an individual fails to timely pay the civil penalty or request a
hearing, the city may request a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor charge to be
filed in accordance with applicable statutes, or the city may use traditional
debt collection methods or any other method prescribed by law, including
assessing the unpaid fines against property owned by the violator, to collect
the fine amount and any associated fees.
      (4)   If the penalty is paid or if an individual is found not to have
committed the administrative offense by the hearing officer, no such charge may
be brought by the city for the same violation.
      (5)   During the time any civil penalty remains unpaid, no city approval
will be granted for a license, permit, or other city approval sought by the
violator or for property under the violator's ownership or control.
   (H)   Disposition of penalties.  All civil penalties and late fees shall be
paid to the city and deposited into the general fund.
   (I)   Schedule of civil penalties.
 
Offense Description                   Ord. No./Section      Initial Penalty
Code violations not otherwise                               $100
specified
Abandoned, wrecked or inoperative
vehicles
   Abandoned motor vehicle         M.S. § 168B.03       $75
   Public nuisance                 Ord. 2007-02, M.S. §
                                      609.74
   Storing junked motor vehicle    § 130.05
Animals
   Dog at large
   Dog license required
   Dog vaccination required        See zoning            $50
   Kennel licensing requirements   regulations
   Keeping of farm animals
   Keeping of non-traditional farm
animals
Driving through private property      Ord. 2007-02          $100
Excessive fire alarms (3 or more in a Ord. 2007-02          $150
12-month period)
Littering                             Ord. 2007-02          $100
Obstruction of roads, sidewalks and   Ord. 2007-02          $100
the like
Off-road vehicle violations;          M.S. § 84.87         $100
operation
Open burning
   Ban or air quality alert        § 92.07
   Permit holder responsibility    § 92.08              $100
   Permit required                 § 92.04
   Prohibited materials            M.S. § 88.171
Noise
   Animals                         Ord. 2007-02
   Construction                    Ord. 2007-02
   Loud noise prohibited           Ord. 2007-02, M.S. § $100
                                      609.74
   Loudspeakers                    Ord. 2007-02
   Motor vehicles                  Ord. 2007-02
   Radios and the like             Ord. 2007-02
Park violations; hours of operation   §                    $100
                                      91.01
Parking violations                    §                    $25
                                      70.05
Public nuisances
   Generally                       Ord. 2007-02          $100
   Weeds                           Ord. 2007-02
Sign violations
   General provisions
   Off-premise signs               See zoning
   Permit required                 regulations           $100
   Prohibited signs
   Sign standards
   Temporary signs
Snowmobile violations
   Equipment                       §
                                      71.16
   Hours of operation              §
                                      71.17                 $100
   Operation                       §
                                      71.15
   Prevention and permission       §
                                      71.15
                                                            $500 on the 31st
                                                            day after notice of
Zoning and subdivision violations                           a violation; $100
                                                            per day for each
                                                            day after 31st day
 
(Ord. 2009-15, passed 8-11-2009; Ord. 2017-02, passed 1-10-2017)
§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota Statutes
or Rules specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code, including Minnesota Statutes or Rules specifically adopted by reference,
which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be guilty
of a petty misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense
which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than
$300.
   (C)   In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs
of prosecution may be added.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to
the penalty imposed for a violation.
   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or in §
10.98, if any person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of
this code, the Council or any city official designated by it, may institute
appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   PRECINCT BOUNDARIES
      
31.   MAYOR AND COUNCIL
      
32.   ORGANIZATIONS AND OFFICIALS
      
33.   PERSONNEL
      
34.   ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
      
35.   FINANCE, FUNDS AND FEES
CHAPTER 30:  PRECINCT BOUNDARIES
Section
   
30.01   Precinct boundaries
§ 30.01  PRECINCT BOUNDARIES.
   The current city precinct boundaries are hereby set forth and described
herein to wit, including the properties in Hennepin and Wright Counties:
   (A)   Precinct No. 1. From the intersection of North Diamond Lake Road (C.R.
144) and the western border of the city, then south along the western border to
the southern city border, then east along the southern border to the
intersection of Fernbrook Lane (C.R. 121), then north on Fernbrook Lane to
125th Avenue, then west along 125th Avenue to Zanzibar Lane, then north along
Zanzibar Lane to North Diamond Lake Road (C.R. 144), then west along North
Diamond Lake Road to the point of beginning;
   (B)   Precinct No. 2.
      (1)   Hennepin County description: from the intersection of North Diamond
Lake Road (C.R. 144) and Dayton River Road (C.R. 12), northwest along Dayton
River Road to the creek south of Cloquet Island, then straight north across the
northern tip of Cloquet Island to the northern city border, then northwest
along the northern border to the western border of the city, then south along
the western border to the western border of the city, then south along the
western border to the intersection of the western border and North Diamond Lake
Road, then east along North Diamond Lake Road to the point of beginning; and
      (2)   Wright County description: includes the properties within the city
and located within Wright County from a point on the west side of the Crow
River, along County Street to Richardson Avenue the south to south edge of Crow
River.
   (C)   Precinct No. 3. From a line drawn from the northern border of the
city, through the northern tip of Cloquet Island straight south to the creek
south of Cloquet Island, then south to Dayton River Road (C.R. 12), then
southeast along Dayton River Road to the intersection of North Diamond Lake
Road (C.R. 144), then west along North Diamond Lake Road to Zanzibar Lane, then
south along Zanzibar Lane to 125th Avenue, then east along 125th Avenue to
Fernbrook Lane (C.R. 121), then south along Fernbrook Lane to the eastern
border of the city, then north along the eastern border to the northern border,
then northwest along the northern border of the city to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 2012-04, passed 3-13-2012)
CHAPTER 31:  MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Section
   
31.01   Meetings
   
31.02   Presiding officer
   
31.03   Minutes
   
31.04   Order of business
   
31.05   Quorum and voting
   
31.06   Ordinances, resolutions, motions, petitions and communications
   
31.07   Committees
   
31.08   Suspension or amendment of rules
   
31.09   Salary and expense reimbursement
   
31.10   Vacancy
§ 31.01  MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the
second Tuesday of each calendar month at 7:00 p.m. Any regular meeting falling
upon a holiday shall be held on the next following business day at the same
time and place. A second monthly meeting shall be held on the fourth Tuesday of
each calendar month at 7:00 p.m. All meetings of the City Council shall adjourn
at 11:00 p.m., unless a majority of the quorum present agree to continue past
that time. This second monthly meeting may be held on a day other than Tuesday,
or cancelled at the option of the Council. The determination of any date
changes or cancellation with regard to the second monthly meeting shall be made
at the regular monthly meeting or by notice as provided in division (B) below.
All meetings including special meetings shall be held in the City Hall unless
another public location is designated by the Council.
   (B)   Special meetings. Special meetings of the Council will be called by
the Mayor or by any two members of the Council by writing filed with the Clerk.
At least one day before the meeting, the Clerk shall notify each member of the
time, place and purpose of the meeting by causing written notice thereof to be
delivered to him or her personally or by leaving a copy at the home of some
person of suitable age and discretion. Special meetings may be held without
prior written notice when all Council members are present at the meeting or
consent thereto in writing. Such consent shall be filed with the Clerk prior to
the beginning of the meeting. Any special meeting attended by all the Council
members shall be a valid meeting for the transaction of any business that may
come before the meeting. All special meetings must be preceded by a notice of
such meeting being posted at City Hall and two other public places.
   (C)   First meeting. At the first regular Council meeting in January of each
year, the Council shall:
      (1)   Designate the depositories of city funds;
      (2)   Designate the official newspaper;
      (3)   Choose an acting Mayor from the Council members who shall perform
the duties of the Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor from the
city or, in case of a vacancy in the Office of the Mayor, until a successor has
been appointed and qualifies; and
      (4)   Appoint such officers and employees and such members of boards,
commissions and committees as may be necessary.
   (D)   Open to public. All Council meetings, including special and adjourned
meetings, shall be open to the public in accordance with the State Open Meeting
Law, M.S. §§ 13D.01 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time.
(1978 Code, § 201.01)  (Ord. 95-4, passed 12-18-1995)
§ 31.02  PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   The Mayor. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council. In
the absence of the Mayor, the acting Mayor shall preside. In the absence of
both, the Clerk shall call the meeting to order and shall preside until the
Council members present at the meeting choose one of their number to act
temporarily as presiding officer.
   (B)   Duties. The presiding officer shall preserve order, enforce the rules
of procedure herein prescribed and determine, without debate, subject to the
final decision of the Council on appeal, all questions of procedure and order.
Except as otherwise provided by statute or by these rules, the proceedings of
the Council shall be conducted in accordance with Robert’s Rules of Order
Revised.
   (C)   Appeals from Chair. Any member may appeal to the Council from a ruling
of the presiding officer. If the appeal is seconded, the member may speak once
solely on the question involved, and the presiding officer may explain his or
her ruling, but no other Council member shall participate in the discussion.
The appeal shall be sustained if it is approved by the majority of the members
present exclusive of the presiding officer.
   (D)   Participation. The Mayor or such other members of the Council as may
be presiding may move, second and debate from the Chair. The presiding officer
shall not be deprived of any of the privileges of a Council member by reason of
his or her acting as the presiding officer.
(1978 Code, § 201.02)
§ 31.03  MINUTES.
   (A)   Clerk to keep. Minutes of each Council meeting shall be kept by the
Clerk, Deputy Clerk or other designated person. Ordinances, resolutions and
claims need not be recorded in full in the minutes if they appear in other
permanent records of the Clerk and can be accurately identified from the
description given in the minutes.
   (B)   Approval. The minutes of each meeting shall be reduced to typewritten
form and shall be signed by the Clerk; copies thereof shall be delivered to
each Council member. At the next regular Council meeting following such
delivery, approval of the minutes shall be considered by the Council. The
minutes need not be read aloud, but the presiding officer shall call for any
additions or corrections. If there is no objection to the proposed addition or
correction, it may be made without a vote of Council. If there is an objection,
the Council shall vote upon the addition or correction. If there are no
additions or corrections, the minutes shall stand approved.
(1978 Code, § 201.03)
§ 31.04  ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   Order of business. Each meeting of the Council shall convene at the
time and place appointed therefor. Council business shall be conducted in the
following order:
      (1)   Call to order;
      (2)   Approval of minutes;
      (3)   Open forum;
      (4)   Payment of claims;
      (5)   Public hearings;
      (6)   Consent agenda;
      (7)   Petitions, requests and communications;
      (8)   Ordinances and resolutions;
      (9)   Reports of officers, boards and committees;
      (10)   Unfinished business;
      (11)   New business;
      (12)   Miscellaneous; and
      (13)   Adjournment.
   (B)   Variance of order. The order of proceedings may be altered by motion
or consensus of the Council.
   (C)   Agenda. An agenda of business for each regular Council meeting shall
be prepared and filed in the office of the Clerk not later than the Wednesday
next preceding the meeting. The agenda shall be prepared in accordance with the
order of business and copies thereof shall be delivered to each Council member
and to the City Attorney as far in advance of the meeting as time for
preparation will permit. No item of business shall be considered unless it
appears on the agenda for the meeting, but the Council may, by motion, in its
discretion, consider matters not appearing on the agenda.
   (D)   Consent agenda. Any number of items of a routine nature, including,
but not limited to, license renewals, authorizations for purchase and other
matters not requiring Council debate, may be placed on the consent agenda by
the Clerk in the preparation of the agenda. The consent agenda shall have the
description of the item considered, costs, if any, and such other information
as is necessary to enable the Council to render a decision. All, or any, of the
items on the consent agenda may be moved as a whole with one motion. Failure to
adopt or pass an item on the consent agenda will cause it to be placed under
the new business category of the agenda for that meeting and considered at that
time.
   (E)   Open forum. There shall be reserved at the beginning of each Council
meeting a period of 20 minutes, or such shorter period as needed, at
approximately 7:10 p.m., for any person to address the Council on city matters.
Each speaker shall be registered and be limited to five minutes, or as set by
the Mayor. The Council will not take action on any items initially raised
during the open forum, except in the case of emergency, other than placement on
a later agenda or referral to an appropriate city officer or employee.
(1978 Code, § 201.04)  (Ord. 85-2, passed 2-19-1985)
§ 31.05  QUORUM AND VOTING.
   (A)   Quorum and punishment for non-attendance. At all Council meetings, the
majority of all the Council members elected shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time.
   (B)   Voting. The votes of the members of any question pending before the
Council may be by voice vote, standing vote or in any other manner of voting
which signifies the intention of the members, and the names of those voting for
and against the question shall be recorded in the minutes. If any member, being
present, does not vote, the minutes, as to his or her name, shall be marked
“Present - Not Voting”.
   (C)   Requisite majority. A majority vote of all members of the Council
shall be necessary for approval of any ordinance unless a larger number is
required by statute. Except as otherwise provided by statute, a majority vote
of a quorum shall prevail in all other cases.
(1978 Code, § 201.05)
§ 31.06  ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, MOTIONS, PETITIONS AND COMMUNICATIONS.
   (A)   Presentation. Every ordinance and resolution shall be presented in
writing and shall be read in full before a vote is taken thereon, but reading
in full may be dispensed with by unanimous consent. All motions shall be
recorded in the minutes and stated in full before they are submitted to a vote
by the presiding officer. All petitions addressed to the Council shall be in
writing and shall be read in full upon presentation to the Council, but reading
in full may be dispensed with by unanimous consent. Other communications
addressed to the Council shall be summarized, but, upon the request of any
Council member, shall be read in full. They shall then be recorded in the
minutes by title when designated and filed in their respective categories in
the office of the Clerk.
   (B)   Signing and filing. Every ordinance and resolution passed by the
Council shall be signed by the Mayor, attested by the Clerk and filed by him or
her in the ordinance or resolution book. Proof of publication of every
ordinance shall be attached to and filed with the ordinance.
   (C)   Repealers.
      (1)   Every ordinance which repeals any section or part of this code
shall set forth the section number of the section in part thereof to be
repealed. Every ordinance or resolution repealing a previous ordinance, not
within this code, or resolution or a section or division thereof shall give the
number, if any, and the title of the ordinance or resolution to be repealed in
whole or in part.
      (2)   No ordinance or resolution or subdivision or section thereof shall
be amended by reference to title alone, but such amending ordinance shall set
forth as much of the text as is necessary to set forth for the Council intent
of the amendment.
(1978 Code, § 201.06)  (Ord. 79-2, passed 2-20-1979)
§ 31.07  COMMITTEES.
   (A)   The Council may create such committees, standing or special, as it
deems necessary.
   (B)   Such committees shall consist of as many members and perform such
duties as the Council may require.
(1978 Code, § 201.07)
§ 31.08  SUSPENSION OR AMENDMENT OF RULES.
   These rules, or any of them, may be temporarily suspended by a majority vote
of all of the Council members, and shall not be repealed or amended, except by
a majority vote of the whole Council after notice has been given at some
preceding Council meeting.
(1978 Code, § 201.08)
§ 31.09  SALARY AND EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT.
   (A)   Salary established.
      (1)   The City Council shall be compensated at a rate equal to the median
amount of other cities with populations of 1,000 people both larger and smaller
than the city’s population rounded to the nearest thousand. City Council
stipend amount shall be recalculated and go into effect the January following a
general election. Example, if the city is at 5,300 population, then the City
Council compensation shall be set at the median amount of other cities with
populations from 4,000 - 6,000 people.
      (2)   All salaries shall be payable in two equal semi-annual installments
in June and December.
   (B)   Expense reimbursement. The Mayor and each Council member shall be
reimbursed at the rate established from time to time for city staff members.
(1978 Code, § 201.09)  (Ord. 86-8A, passed 9-15-1986; Ord. 91-10, passed 7-1-
1991; Ord. 2008-15, passed 8-12-2008; Ord. 2013-04, passed 3-26-2013; Ord.
2014-15, passed 10-14-2014)
§ 31.10  VACANCY.
   (A)   Filling vacancy. Vacancies on the City Council must be filled pursuant
to M.S.§ 412.02, Subd. 2a, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Appointment to vacancy. Pursuant to M.S.§ 412.02, Subd. 2a, as it may
be amended from time to time, a person shall be appointed to fill the vacancy
until the special election is held and the winner of the special election is
qualified to take office.
   (C)   Special election timing. If a vacancy occurs and a special election to
fill the unexpired term is required pursuant to M.S.§ 412.02, Subd. 2a, as it
may be amended from time to time, then the special election to fill the vacancy
shall be held no later than 120 days after the date of the vacancy.
(Ord. 2014-13, passed 10-14-2014)
CHAPTER 32:  ORGANIZATIONS AND OFFICIALS
Section
Officials
   
32.01   Finance Director
   
32.02   City Clerk
   
32.03   Administrator
Organizations
   
32.15   Public Safety Commission
   
32.16   Planning Commission
   
32.17   Park Commission
   
32.18   Maintenance Department
   
32.19   Police Department
   
32.20   Fire Department
   
32.21   Civil Defense Agency
   
32.22   Historical Commission
OFFICIALS
§ 32.01  FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Finance Director reports to the City Administrator, shall serve as
the Finance Director and shall fulfill the functions of the position consistent
with state law and the most current Council-approved job description.
(1978 Code, § 212.02)
   (B)   (1)   FLSA status. Exempt.
      (2)   General definition of work. Performs complex professional work
planning, directing, coordinating and supervising the Finance Department,
preparing and monitoring the budget, monitoring regulations and procedures are
followed, maintaining appropriate records and files and related work as
apparent or assigned. Work involves setting policies and goals under the
direction of the City Administrator. Departmental supervision is exercised over
Finance Clerk.
      (3)   Qualification requirements. To perform this job successfully, an
individual must be able to perform each essential function satisfactorily. The
requirements listed below are representative of the knowledge, skill and/or
ability required. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individual
with disabilities to perform the essential functions.
      (4)   Essential functions. Plans and develops accounting procedures;
maintains financial records ensuring conformity with government accounting
principles. Manages and oversees invoice payments, utility billing, escrow
account billings for developers, payroll, fixed assets and funds deposited.
Manages and invests city’s funds according to established investment practices
and policies approved by Council.
Coordinates the preparation and planning of the annual budget for submission to
the City Administrator and Council; assists departments on reviewing and
developing each department’s annual budget. Supervises department employees;
delegates duties and reviews performance ensuring assignments are completed
within time required and meet professional standards. Consults with auditors
and bond consultants coordinating information and financial reporting;
completes as required for the audit and bonding records; oversees the
administration of the city’s debt. Coordinates information preparation for
various bond sales.
      (5)   Knowledge, skills and abilities. Comprehensive knowledge of general
laws and administrative policies governing municipal financial practices and
procedures; comprehensive knowledge of the principles and practices of
accounting and budgeting in government; ability to evaluate financial systems
and efficiently formulate and install accounting methods, procedures, forms and
records; thorough knowledge of municipal government operations and procedures;
general knowledge of standard office software and equipment; ability to prepare
informative financial reports; ability to plan, organize, direct and evaluate
the work of subordinate employees; ability to establish and maintain effective
working relationships with associates, governmental officials and the general
public.
      (6)   Education and experience. Bachelor’s degree in finance, accounting
or business administration and considerable experience in finance
administration or accounting, or equivalent combination of education and
experience.
      (7)   Physical requirements. This work is sedentary and requires little
to no exertion of force; work regularly requires sitting and speaking or
hearing, frequently requires walking, using hands to finger, handle or feel and
repetitive motions and occasionally requires standing, reaching with hands and
arms, pushing or pulling and lifting; work has standard vision requirements;
vocal communication is required for expressing or exchanging ideas by means of
the spoken word and conveying detailed or important instructions to others
accurately, loudly or quickly; hearing is required to perceive information at
normal spoken word levels and to receive detailed information through oral
communications and/or to make fine distinctions in sound; work requires
preparing and analyzing written or computer data, operating machines and
observing general surroundings and activities; work has no exposure to
environmental conditions; work is generally in a moderately noisy location
(e.g., business office, light traffic).
      (8)   Special requirements. Possession of an appropriate driver’s license
valid in the state.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 2-24-2009)
§ 32.02  CITY CLERK.
   (A)   (1)   Purpose and scope. The City Clerk reports to the City
Administrator and shall fulfill the functions of City Clerk as defined by state
law and the most current Council-approved job description for this position.
(1978 Code, § 212.01)
      (2)   Appointment. The City Clerk shall be hired by the Council solely on
the basis of training, experience and qualifications. The City Clerk shall be
appointed for an indefinite period by a majority of the City Council. The
provision of a hearing relative to removal herein does not in any way limit the
ability or authority of the Council to alter the approved job description.
(1978 Code, § 212.04)
   (B)   (1)   FLSA status. Exempt.
      (2)   General definition of work. Performs difficult administrative work
preparing and keeping minutes, maintaining official records of City Council
actions, handling election duties, processing license applications, managing
insurance and related work as apparent or assigned. Work is performed under the
general direction of the City Administrator. Continuous supervision is
exercised over Receptionist/Secretary and Election Judge.
      (3)   Qualification requirements. To perform this job successfully, an
individual must be able to perform each essential function satisfactorily. The
requirements listed below are representative of the knowledge, skill and/or
ability required. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individual
with disabilities to perform the essential functions.
      (4)   Essential functions. Responds to citizens concerns, complaints and
questions. Attends Council meetings and responsible for meeting minutes;
arranges notice of special meetings; handles travel; assists in preparing
meeting agendas and packets. Serves as the key staff person responsible for
records management. Prepares legal notices, ordinances and resolutions;
publishes notices as required. Processes and prepares applications and
communicates with license applicants; reconciles special assessment payments;
prepares reports and manages special assessments. Compiles Truth in Taxation
Notice. Manages city’s insurance records and issues; reports insurance losses
or additions; manages worker’s compensation claims. Manages election process
including processing filings for office and preparing budget; recruits and
trains election judges; supervises election process including testing machines
and calculating ballot tabulations; processes absentee ballot applications.
Compiles and edits the city newsletter and annual report. Participates as a
member in the Dayton Fire Relief Association. Maintains responsibility for the
city Seal; attests to Mayor’s signature on documents. Coordinates license
process and procedures. Prepares payroll in the absence of the Finance Clerk.
Other duties as assigned.
      (5)   Knowledge, skills and abilities. Thorough knowledge of municipal
government operations and procedures; thorough knowledge of municipal record
keeping procedures and requirements; thorough knowledge of payroll systems
administration and the associated methodology, processes and terminology;
general knowledge of accounting theory and principles; general knowledge of
standard office software and equipment; ability to conduct research and develop
concise reports; ability to communicate effectively both orally and in writing;
ability to record and maintain detailed minutes, records and files; ability to
establish and maintain effective working relationships with various
professionals, other employees, department heads, elected officials and the
general public.
      (6)   Education and experience. High school diploma or GED and moderate
experience working in municipal government, or equivalent combination of
education and experience.
      (7)   Physical requirements. This work requires the frequent exertion of
up to ten pounds of force and occasional exertion of up to 25 pounds of force;
work regularly requires sitting, speaking or hearing, using hands to finger,
handle or feel and repetitive motions, frequently requires walking and reaching
with hands and arms and occasionally requires standing and lifting; work has
standard vision requirements; vocal communication is required for expressing or
exchanging ideas by means of the spoken word and conveying detailed or
important instructions to others accurately, loudly or quickly; hearing is
required to perceive information at normal spoken word levels; work requires
preparing and analyzing written or computer data, operating machines and
observing general surroundings and activities; work has no exposure to
environmental conditions; work is generally in a moderately noisy location
(e.g., business office, light traffic).
      (8)   Special requirements. State Municipal Clerk certification. Notary
license. Possession of an appropriate driver’s license valid in the state.
(Ord. 2009-04, passed 2-24-2009)
§ 32.03  ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Administrator is to carry out the policies
established by the Council for the efficient administration of the business of
the city.
(1978 Code, § 213.01)
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities. The Administrator shall have the
following duties and responsibilities:
      (1)   Supervise and provide administrative assistance to all departments,
and coordinate and review activities of all consultants and advisory bodies;
      (2)   Implement city personnel policy, act as personnel officer, review
employee performance and make recommendations to the Council on appointments,
dismissals, promotions and compensation adjustments;
      (3)   Maintain or ensure that all laws, ordinances, resolutions, plans
and programs of the city are followed and make recommendations to the Council
for changes or additions, whenever necessary;
      (4)   Attend all special and regular meetings of the Council and
participate in such meetings, and provide administrative support and
suggestions to the Council as required;
      (5)   Prepare and submit to the Council the proposed annual budget, and
enforce and administer all provisions of the adopted budget;
      (6)   Submit reports to the Council on the city’s financial status,
budgeted operations and administrative activities, on a regular basis;
      (7)   Help the Council identify future needs of the city, make
recommendations on long-range programs and capital improvements; recommend
administrative change that may promote more efficient operation and
administration of the city and improve the welfare of the community;
      (8)   Project needs for funding and investment; meet with auditors and
investment advisors; coordinate public improvements and bond issue activities;
      (9)   Such other duties and responsibilities as may be assigned by the
Council;
(1978 Code, § 213.02)
      (10)   He or she shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by
law or required of him or her by ordinance or resolutions adopted by the City
Council.
   (C)   Appointment.
      (1)   The Administrator shall be chosen by the Council solely on the
basis of training, experience and qualifications.
      (2)   The Administrator shall be appointed for an indefinite period by a
majority of the Council.
      (3)   The provision of a hearing relative to removal herein does not in
any way limit the ability or authority of the City Council to alter the duties
herein or abolish the position of the Administrator.
(Ord. 85-7, passed 9-21-1985)
ORGANIZATIONS
§ 32.15  PUBLIC SAFETY COMMISSION.
   (A)   Establishment of Commission. A Public Safety Commission is hereby
established to advise the Council on police, fire and other public safety
matters.
(1978 Code, § 210.01)
   (B)   Membership. The Commission shall consist of five members. The five
members shall be appointed by the Council.
(1978 Code, § 210.02)
   (C)   Terms. Appointment to the Commission shall be made at the first
regular meeting of the Council in July, or more often if required. Members
shall be appointed for three-year terms beginning July 1 and ending June 30 of
the third year following (and until a successor is appointed and qualified).
(1978 Code, § 210.03)
   (D)   Vacancies. In the case of a vacancy during the term of office of any
member of the Commission, the Council shall appoint a new member to serve the
remainder of the term. A vacancy shall exist if any one of the following occur:
death; disability; residence outside of the city; resignation or removal by a
majority vote of the Council.
(1978 Code, § 210.04)
   (E)   Rules. The Commission may adopt rules and regulations for its own
proceedings and shall meet at regular intervals, the time and place to be
established by rule adopted from time to time. All meetings of the Commission
shall be open to the public.
(1978 Code, § 210.05)
   (F)   Officers. The Council shall elect from among the Commission members a
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and a Secretary.
(1978 Code, § 210.06)
   (G)   Minutes. Minutes of the Commission meetings shall be kept by the
Secretary and copies provided to the Clerk and Council.
(1978 Code, § 210.07)
   (H)   Duties and functions. The duties and functions of the Commission shall
be as follows:
      (1)   To assist the Council in planning and research in the area of
public safety matters, including budget, equipment, manpower, inter-
governmental cooperation and public information programs;
      (2)   To assist in the selection of personnel in public safety
departments;
      (3)   To development and submit to the Council a code of ethics for
public safety officers;
      (4)   To develop a citizen complaint procedure on matters of public
safety;
      (5)   To promote public interest in, and an understanding of, public
safety in the community;
      (6)   To cooperate with all community groups and civic organizations
within the city and furnish them such aid and advise in matters of public
safety as deemed appropriate within the means provided by appropriations made
by the Council;
      (7)   To confer with and advise the Council on all matters concerning
public safety within the city; and
      (8)   To take under advisement, study, hold hearings and make its written
recommendations to the Council on all matters of public safety referred to it
or initiated by majority vote of the Commission.
(1978 Code, § 210.08)
   (I)   Compensation. All members shall be paid a salary, per meeting, payable
in two semi-annual installments on June 30 and December 31 of each year.
Commission members shall be paid only for those meetings attended.
(1978 Code, § 210.09)
(Ord. 2007-12, passed 7-24-2007)
§ 32.16  PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Established and membership. A City Planning Commission is hereby
continued. The Planning Commission shall consist of five floating members who
shall be appointed by the Council for three-year terms. Both the original and
successive appointee shall hold their respective offices until their successors
are appointed and qualified. Vacancies during the term shall be filled in the
same manner as the original appointments are made for the unexpired portion of
the term vacated. Every appointed member shall, before entering upon the
discharge of his or her duties, have taken an oath that he or she will
faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office.
(1978 Code, § 205.01)
   (B)   Salary and expense requirement.
      (1)   Salary. All members shall be paid a salary, per meeting, payable in
two semi-annual installments on June 30 and December 31 of each year.
Commission members shall be paid only for those meetings attended.
      (2)   Expenses. Planning Commission members shall be reimbursed for
mileage at a rate established from time to time for other city staff members
for attendance at meetings and other activities which such Commission members
are designated and authorized to attend by motion of the Planning Commission;
provided, however, that, no Commission member shall be reimbursed for mileage
expense for attendance at regular or special meetings of the Planning
Commission within the city.
(1978 Code, § 205.02)
   (C)   Meetings, officers, procedures. The Commission shall establish regular
meeting dates. Special meetings may be called by any two members of the
Commission upon three days’ written notice to all members. The Commission shall
establish such rules of procedure as may be deemed necessary. The Council shall
select a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Secretary from the Commission
membership who shall serve for terms of one year, beginning July 1 of each
year.
(1978 Code, § 205.03)
   (D)   Removal. Any Commission member may be removed only for cause by a
majority vote of all Council members.
(1978 Code, § 205.04)
   (E)   Duties of the Commission.
      (1)   Records. The Commission shall keep a record of its resolutions,
transactions and findings which record shall be a public record and shall be
filed with the Clerk prior to the Council’s first monthly meeting of each
month. On or before October 1 of each year, the Commission shall submit to the
Council a report of its work during the preceding year. It shall also render
such other regular or special reports, advisory recommendations or make such
investigations as it deems advisable or as may be requested by the Council.
Expenditures of the Commission shall be within amounts appropriated for that
purpose by the Council.
      (2)   Duty to administer. The duties of the Commission shall be to
administer the zoning and subdivision regulations of the city, as the procedure
is outlined and prescribed. The Commission shall be advisory to the Council as
to all matters arising under the above described regulations. The Commission
shall also undertake any other appropriate duties and responsibilities as the
Council may from time to time direct.
(1978 Code, § 205.05)
   (F)   Training. Each member, within 180 days of his or her appointment to
the Planning Commission, and each year thereafter, shall participate in at
least one training session or seminar training in the area of land use planning
approved by the City Council. Failure to either obtain a waiver or to satisfy
the requirements of this section within the time periods allowed shall
constitute cause for removal pursuant to division (D) above.
(1978 Code, § 205.06)
(Ord. 2007-12, passed 7-24-2007)
§ 32.17  PARK COMMISSION.
   (A)   Commission established, membership. There is hereby continued a Park
Commission for the city, pursuant to M.S. § 412.111, as it may be amended from
time to time. Said Commission shall consist of five voting members who shall be
appointed by the Council. All members shall be paid a salary, per meeting,
payable in two semiannual installments on June 30 and December 31 of each year.
Commission members shall be paid only for those meetings attended. Reasonable
expenses shall be allowed. The term of each member shall be three years. Both
the original and successive appointees shall hold their respective offices
until their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies during the term
shall be filled in the same manner as the term vacated. Every appointed member
shall, before entering upon the discharge of duties, take an oath to faithfully
discharge the duties of the office.
(1978 Code, § 206.01)
   (B)   Meetings, procedures, officers. The Commission shall establish regular
dates, but special meetings may be called by any two members of the Commission
upon three days’ written notice to all members. The Commission shall establish
such rules of procedure as may be deemed necessary. Said rules of procedure to
be approved by the Council. The Council shall select a Chairperson, Vice-
Chairperson and Secretary from the Commission membership who shall serve for
terms of one year, beginning July 1 each year.
(1978 Code, § 206.02)
   (C)   Removal. Any Commission member may be removed for cause by a majority
vote of all Council members.
(1978 Code, § 206.03)
   (D)   Finances.  A Park and Recreation Fund shall be established in the city
budget into which all taxes levied and collected for parks and recreation
purposes, all gifts, bequests and endowments of money, donations or grants from
person, firms or corporations, including governmental agencies and all fees and
charges for recreational services or facilities shall be deposited. Said funds
shall be kept separate from all other monies of the city. No disbursements
shall be made from said fund except as approved by the Council.
   (E)   Powers and duties of Commission.
      (1)   Recreation program. The Commission shall advise the City Council in
conducting a public recreation program for the city and its immediate vicinity
and to that end, shall advise in the providing, conducting and supervising of
recreation areas, facilities, services and programs for public recreation in
its broadest sense, including playgrounds, parks, play fields, swimming pools,
beaches, camps, indoor recreation centers and any and all other recreation
facilities and activities either within or without the corporate limits of the
city upon property under the custody and management of the city or on other
public or private property with the consent of the owners of such property.
      (2)   Environmental duties. The Commission shall research and advise the
City Council as to the nature and effect of city actions and decision on the
environment, and on the provision, direction, and supervision of services and
programs for the protection, either within or without the corporate limits of
the city, of the environment. The Commission may advise the city to enter into
agreements of a cooperative nature with other public and private agencies,
organizations or individuals, when in the judgment of the Commission, such
procedure would prove advantageous.
      (3)   Park system. The Commission shall advise the Council as to the
control, development, management, operation and maintenance of a system of
parks and recreation areas now in existence or that may hereafter be acquired
by the city, and may advise the city to enter into agreements of a cooperative
nature with other public and private agencies, organizations or individuals,
when in the judgment of the Commission, such procedure would prove
advantageous.
      (4)   Property acquisition. It shall be the duty of the Commission to
make recommendations to the Council and Planning Commission concerning the
property acquisitions needed or desired to complete a comprehensive parks and
recreation system in the city.
      (5)   Attendance at Council meetings. One member shall attend Council
meetings as requested by the Council.
      (6)   Reports. Annually, the Commission shall, on or before October 1,
render a full report to the Council covering its operations for the preceding
12 months. It shall also render such other regular or special reports, advisory
recommendations or make such investigations as it deems advisable or as may be
requested by the Council.
(Ord. 2007-12, passed 7-24-2007; Ord. 2007-12, passed 7-24-2007)
§ 32.18  MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby established a Maintenance Department in
the city which shall consist of a Public Works Superintendent and such other
employees as may from time to time be authorized by resolution of the Council.
The compensation to be paid to the Public Works Superintendent and other
Maintenance Department employees and the personnel policy regulating their
condition of employment shall be as provided by the code and otherwise fixed by
the Council.
(1978 Code, § 211.01)
   (B)   Duties. The Maintenance Department shall have the responsibility for
maintaining all city property, building and roads. The duties shall include
snow plowing, blading, sanding, mowing of grass and weeds, repairing city
equipment and property, maintaining and cleaning all city buildings,
maintaining and mowing all parks and maintaining all park equipment and such
other duties as are assigned by the Council from time to time.
(1978 Code, § 211.02)
   (C)   Public Works Superintendent.
      (1)   The position of Public Works Superintendent is hereby established
which will have the duties as set forth herein. The Public Works Superintendent
shall be appointed by the Council at a compensation to be established from time
to time.
(1978 Code, § 211.03)
      (2)   The Public Works Superintendent shall be responsible for the proper
completion of the following duties:
         (a)   To develop an operational budget for maintenance within agreed
budgetary controls;
         (b)   To attend Council meetings for both input and direction;
         (c)   To perform all of the duties of the Maintenance Department; and,
when he or she is unable to perform those duties, to assign work
responsibilities to other Maintenance Department employees. If he or she deems
it necessary to utilize persons outside of the Maintenance Department, he or
she shall receive city approval before undertaking the same;
         (d)   To anticipate operating problems and take corrective steps,
minimizing problems which could, otherwise develop;
         (e)   To review all proposed capital expenditures for the city, and to
recommend the best purchases to the Council and, upon approval, direct the
actual purchase, delivery and implementation of the purchase;
         (f)   To plan and oversee the program for snow removal on all city
streets, parks and parking areas;
         (g)   To supervise, train and discipline Maintenance Department
employees as provided by the code;
         (h)   To complete and update semi-annually the property inventory
schedule for both supplies and capital outlay items; and
         (i)   To perform other duties and assume other responsibilities as
apparent or as delegated by the Council.
(1978 Code, § 211.04)
(Ord. 83-4, passed 4-11-1983)
§ 32.19  POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby established a Police Department in the
city which shall consist of such number of police officers, with such ranks and
titles as may from time to time be authorized by resolution of the Council. The
compensation to be paid to such police officer or officers and the personnel
policy regulating their condition of employment shall be as provided by the
code and otherwise fixed by the Council.
(1978 Code, § 202.01)
   (B)   Mayor. It shall be the duty of the police, under the direction of the
Mayor and/or other appointed Council member, to assume proper watches and
places of duty and the time he, she or they shall be on duty and to discharge
the customary duties of a police officer.
   (C)   Office of Chief of Police.
      (1)   The Office of Chief of Police is hereby established. The Chief of
Police shall be appointed by motion of the Council and he or she shall serve at
the Council’s discretion. The Chief of Police shall have precedence over the
police officers and watchpersons and they shall, at all times when on duty, be
subject to his or her command and control. He or she shall report to the
Council at its regular meetings as to the needs of the Department and work
performed by the members of the Department. He or she shall be responsible for
the proper training and discipline of the members of the Police Department and
may suspend any member for refusal or neglect to obey orders, pending final
action by the Council on his or her discharge or retention.
      (2)   The Council may designate one of the members of the Police
Department as acting Chief of Police who shall assume all the authority of the
Chief of Police in the absence or disability of the Chief of Police.
(1978 Code, § 202.03)
   (D)   Duties. It shall be the duty of the police force and of each and every
police officer to serve all warrants and processes delivered to such police
officer for service within the city and to diligently inquire into and, upon
request, report to the Mayor all violations of this code, violations of
criminal laws of the state and breaches of peace, and to make complaint against
any person or persons guilty thereof, and to attend upon all trials of offenses
in regard to which complaint has been made and to use all reasonable efforts to
maintain the peace and protect persons and property within the city.
(1978 Code, § 202.04)
§ 32.20  FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Fire Department established. There is hereby established in the city a
Volunteer Fire Department consisting of a Chief, an Assistant Chief, and a Fire
Marshal.
(1978 Code, § 203.01)
   (B)   Election (appointment). The Chief of the Fire Department, the
Assistant Chief and the Fire Marshal shall be elected annually by the members
of the Department subject to confirmation by the Council. Each shall hold
office for one year and until his or her successor has been duly elected,
except that he or she may be removed by the Council for cause after a public
hearing. Firefighters and probationary firefighters shall be appointed by the
members of the Fire Department, subject to confirmation by the Council.
Firefighters shall continue as members of the Department during good behavior
and may be removed by the Council only for cause after a public hearing.
(1978 Code, § 203.02)
   (C)   Duties of Fire Marshal. The Office of Fire Marshal may be held by the
Chief or by the Assistant Chief, if the Council, by resolution, approves. The
Fire Marshal shall be charged with the enforcement of all ordinances and other
regulations aimed at fire prevention. He or she shall have full authority to
inspect all premises and to cause the removal or abatement of all fire hazards.
(1978 Code, § 203.03)
   (D)   Duties of Chief. The Chief shall have the control of all the
firefighting apparatus and shall be solely responsible for its condition. He or
she shall make a report, semi-annually, to the Council at its meeting in March
and September as to the condition of the equipment and needs of the Fire
Department. He or she may submit additional reports and recommendations at any
meeting of the Council, and he or she shall report each suspension by him or
her of a member of the Fire Department at the first meeting of the Council
following such suspension. He or she shall be responsible for the proper
training and discipline of the members of the Fire Department, and may suspend
any member for refusal or neglect to obey orders pending final action by the
Council on his or her discharge or retention.
(1978 Code, § 203.04)
   (E)   Records. The Chief shall keep in convenient form a complete record of
all fires. Such a record shall include the time of the alarm, location of fire,
cause of fire, (if known), type of building, name of owner and tenant,
department responding to the alarm and such other information as he or she may
deem advisable or as may be required from time to time by the Council or State
Insurance Department.
(1978 Code, § 203.05)
   (F)   Practice, drills. It shall be the duty of the Chief, when the weather
permits, to hold monthly practice drills of at least one hour’s duration for
the Fire Department and to give the firefighters instruction in approved
methods of firefighting and fire prevention.
(1978 Code, § 203.06)
   (G)   Assistant Chief. In the absence or disability of the Chief, the
Assistant Chief shall perform all the functions and exercise all of the
authority of the Chief.
(1978 Code, § 203.07)
   (H)   Firefighters. The Assistant Chief and firefighters shall be able
bodied and not less than 18 years of age. They shall become members of the Fire
Department only after a six-month probationary period. The Council may require
that each candidate, before he or she may become a probationary firefighter or
substitute member, must satisfy certain minimum requirement qualifications
which may be specified by the Council and that he or she must satisfactorily
pass a mental and physical examination.
(1978 Code, § 203.08)
   (I)   Loss of membership. Firefighters absent from three consecutive drills
or calls unless excused by the Chief shall forfeit membership in the
Department.
(1978 Code, § 203.09)
   (J)   Compensation. The members and officers of the Fire Department shall be
compensated by a rate established by resolution of the Council. Such
compensation shall be reviewed by the Council at a meeting in December in odd-
numbered years, or more frequently if desired by the Council.
(1978 Code, § 203.10)
   (K)   Minimum pay. In computing compensation for fires, one hour shall be
considered as the minimum to be paid to any firefighter or officer.
(1978 Code, § 203.11)
   (L)   Relief Association. The members and officers of the Fire Department
may organize themselves into a Firefighters’ Relief Association.
(1978 Code, § 203.12)
   (M)   Interference with Department. It shall be unlawful for a person to
give or make or cause to be given or made an alarm of fire without probable
cause or to neglect or refuse to obey any reasonable order of the Chief,
Assistant Chief, officer in charge or a peace officer at a fire or to interfere
with the Fire Department in the discharge of its duties.
(1978 Code, § 203.13)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.21  CIVIL DEFENSE AGENCY.
   (A)   Act adopted. The Minnesota Emergency Management Act, being M.S. §§
12.01 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time, insofar as it relates to
cities, is adopted by reference as part of this section as fully as is set
forth explicitly herein.
(1978 Code, § 207.01)
   (B)   Civil Defense Agency.
      (1)   Agency and Director. There is hereby created within the city a
Civil Defense Agency, which shall be under the supervision and control of a
Director of Civil Defense, hereinafter called the Director. The Director shall
be appointed by the Mayor for an indefinite term and may be removed by him or
her at any time. He or she shall serve without salary, but shall be paid his or
her necessary expenses. The Director shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration and operation of the Civil Defense Agency, subject
to the direction and control of the Mayor.
      (2)   Organization and functions. The Civil Defense Agency shall be
organized into such divisions and bureaus, consistent with state and local
defense plans, as the Director deems necessary to provide for the efficient
performance of local civil defense functions during a civil defense emergency.
The agency shall perform civil defense functions with the city and, in
addition, shall conduct such functions outside the city as may be required
pursuant to M.S. Ch. 12, as it may be amended from time to time, or this
section.
(1978 Code, § 207.02)
   (C)   Powers and duties of Director.
      (1)   Intergovernmental arrangements. With the consent of the Mayor, the
Director shall represent the city on any regional or state organization for
civil defense. He or she shall develop proposed mutual aid agreements with
other political subdivisions within or outside the state for reciprocal civil
defense aid and assistance in a civil defense emergency too great to be dealt
with unassisted and he or she shall present such agreements to the Council for
its action. Such agreements shall be consistent with the civil defense plan and
during a civil defense emergency, the civil defense agency and civil defense
forces shall render assistance in accordance with the provisions of such
agreements.
      (2)   Civil Defense Plan. The Director shall prepare a comprehensive
general plan for the civil defense of the city and shall present such plan to
the Council for its approval. When the Council has approved the plan by
resolution, all civil defense forces of the city shall perform the duties and
functions assigned by the plan.
      (3)   Reports. The Director shall prepare and present to the Council
periodically a report of activities and recommendations.
(1978 Code, § 207.03)
§ 32.22  HISTORICAL COMMISSION.
   (A)   Membership and terms.
      (1)   The Historical Commission shall consist of five voting members, all
of whom are appointed by a majority vote of the City Council.
      (2)   The terms of each member of the Historical Commission shall be
three years staggered and overlapping as established beginning July 1, of the
first year and shall expire on the last day of June of the last year of the
respective term.
      (3)   Persons appointed to the Historical Commission shall be at the
discretion of the City Council.
      (4)   The City Council shall also appoint one of its members as a non-
voting ex-officio member of the Historical Commission who shall attend
Historical Commission meetings and act as a liaison between the City Council
and the Commission.
      (5)   The Council shall appoint a staff person to act as city staff
liaison to the Historical Commission.
      (6)   The Historical Commission shall establish regular meeting dates but
special meetings may be called by any two members of the Commission upon three
days written notice to all members. The Commission shall select a chairperson,
vice-chairperson and secretary from its membership.
   (B)   Removal.  Any Commission member may be removed for cause only by a
majority vote of all Council members.
   (C)   Finances.
      (1)   The city shall allow the Historical Commission access to city
equipment, including but not limited to photo copier, fax, computers, storage
area, and website to promote history and request volunteers, and/or projects.
      (2)   The city shall allocate money in the general funds each year to
support the Commission.
   (D)   Powers and duties of Commission.
      (1)   The Commission shall research historical people, places and events
to be used when naming parks, roads, building and the like.
      (2)   The Commission shall collect data, photos, documents for the
potential of a Dayton history book.
      (3)   The Commission, upon request, provides photos and displays to be
used in city buildings, schools and businesses.
   (E)   Reports.  The Commission shall provide a report to the City Council
showing its operations for the preceding year. The Commission shall make its
recommendation and an estimate of the funds required for its work for the
ensuing fiscal year. It shall also render such other regular or special
reports, advisory recommendations or make such investigations as it deems
advisable or as may be requested by the Council.
(Ord. 2014-03, passed 2-25-2014)
CHAPTER 33:  PERSONNEL
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Purpose
   
33.02   Scope
   
33.03   Appointments
   
33.04   Probationary period
   
33.05   Compensation
   
33.06   Work hours
   
33.07   Vacation leave with pay
   
33.08   Sick leave
   
33.09   Military leave
   
33.10   Parental leave of absence
   
33.11   Leaves without pay
   
33.12   Jury or witness duty
   
33.13   Rest periods and holidays
   
33.14   Resignation
   
33.15   Grievance policy
   
33.16   Lay-offs
   
33.17   Discipline
   
33.18   Retirement policy
   
33.19   Unlawful acts
   
33.20   Officials under Worker’s Compensation Act
   
33.21   Outside employment
Employment Background Checks
   
33.35   Purpose
   
33.36   Criminal history employment background investigations
Cross-reference:
   Background checks for licenses, see §§
34.01 and
34.02
   Organizations and Officials, see
Ch. 32
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01  PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to establish a uniform and equitable
system of personnel administration for employees of the city.
(1978 Code, § 208.01)
§ 33.02  SCOPE.
   (A)   Personnel covered. Except as otherwise specifically provided, this
subchapter applies to all employees of the city, except the following:
      (1)   All elective officials;
      (2)   The City Attorney and the Health Officer;
      (3)   Members of city boards, commissions and committees;
      (4)   Volunteer firefighters and other volunteer personnel;
      (5)   Emergency employees; and
      (6)   Other employees not regularly employed in permanent positions.
   (B)   Provisions superseded in certain cases. Any employee included in a
collective bargaining agreement entered into in accordance with the Public
Employment Labor Relations Act, being M.S. §§ 179A.01 et seq., as they may be
amended from time to time, shall be exempt from any provision of this
subchapter which is inconsistent with such agreement. Nothing in this part is
intended to modify or supersede any provision of the Veterans’ Preference Act,
being M.S. Ch. 197, as it may be amended from time to time.
(1978 Code, § 208.02)
§ 33.03  APPOINTMENTS.
   Every appointment to municipal service shall be made by the Council on the
basis of merit and fitness for the position. When required by law or by the
Council, merit and fitness shall be ascertained by written, oral or other
examinations designed to evaluate the ability of the candidate to discharge the
position for which the examination is held.
(1978 Code, § 208.03)
§ 33.04  PROBATIONARY PERIOD.
   (A)   Purpose. The probationary period is an integral part of the selection
process and shall be utilized for observing the employee’s work, for securing
the most effective adjustment of the employee to the position, and for
rejecting any employee whose performance does not meet the required work
standards.
   (B)   Duration. Every original appointment and every promotional appointment
is subject to a probationary period of one year after appointment.
Notwithstanding §
33.02(A) of this chapter, every original and promotional appointment of a
police officer is subject to a probationary period of one year after
appointment.
   (C)   Termination.
      (1)   The Council may terminate a probationary employee any time during
the probationary period if, in the Council’s opinion, the working test
indicates that the employee is unable or unwilling to perform the duties of the
position satisfactorily or that his or her habits and dependability do not
merit continuance in the position. The employee so terminated shall be notified
in writing of the reasons for the termination and shall not have the right to
appeal unless he or she is a veteran, in which case the procedure prescribed in
M.S. § 197.46, as it may be amended from time to time, shall be followed.
      (2)   A permanent employee terminated during the probation period from a
position to which he or she was transferred or promoted and not terminated from
the city service as provided in §
33.17(D) of this chapter shall be placed on leave of absence without pay. When
a vacancy arises in the class from which the employee was promoted or
transferred, the employee shall be reinstated in that position.
   (D)   Completion. Immediately prior to the expiration of the probationary
period, the Council shall, upon suitable information, determine whether or not
the services of the employee have been satisfactory. If the employee’s services
have been satisfactory, the employee shall become a permanent employee at the
end of the probationary period.
(1978 Code, § 208.04)  (Ord. 91-6, passed 6-3-1991)
§ 33.05  COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Amount. Employees of the city shall be compensated according to the
schedule established by the Council for that position. Any wage or salary so
established is the total remuneration for employment, but shall not be
considered as reimbursement for official travel or other expenses which may be
allowed for the conduct of official business. Unless approved by the Council,
no employee shall receive pay from the city in addition to the salary
authorized for the position or positions to which he or she has been appointed.
   (B)   Full-time, part-time and temporary employees. Full-time employees are
those who work 32 hours, or more per week in a regularly established position
with the city. Part-time employees are those who work less than 32 hours per
week in a regularly established position. Temporary employees are those who
work in a position, regardless of the number of hours per week, for a limited
duration. The amount paid part-time employees shall bear the same relationship
to the full-time rate for the position as the time actually worked bears to the
time required for full-time service. Temporary employees and part-time
employees are not entitled to severance pay, sick leave, vacation leave or
holidays with pay.
   (C)   Overtime. Employees to whom the State Fair Labor Standards Act, being
M.S. §§ 177.21 et seq., as they may be amended from time to time, applies shall
be compensated for overtime rates at one and one-half the regular rate of pay.
To the extent permitted by law, compensatory time off shall be taken as
approved by the Council for periods of not less than four hours at a time.
   (D)   Pay days. Employees shall be paid bi-weekly.
   (E)   Severance pay. Full-time employees with a minimum of five years
continuous service shall be entitled to severance pay in an amount equal to
one-half of accumulated sick leave. Payment of severance pay shall be made
within 30 days of termination, whether voluntary or involuntary, of employment
with the city. Notwithstanding the provisions of this division (E), no payment
of severance pay shall be made to any employee whose employment is terminated
as a result of that employee committing a crime against the city. CRIME AGAINST
THE CITY shall mean any crime, as defined in M.S. § 609.02, as it may be
amended from time to time, which:
      (1)   Is directed against the city as victim; or
      (2)   Results in exposing the city to liability in defending a claim from
a third party and for which the employee is convicted.
(1978 Code, § 208.05)  (Ord. 88-2, passed 1-19-1988)
§ 33.06  WORK HOURS.
   Work schedules for personnel shall be established by the appropriate
department head with the approval of the Council. The regular work week for
employees is five eight-hour working days in addition to a lunch period, Monday
through Friday, except as otherwise approved by the Council.
(1978 Code, § 208.06)
§ 33.07  VACATION LEAVE WITH PAY.
   (A)   Amount allowed. Every permanent employee having less than five years
consecutive full-time service shall earn vacation leave at the rate of five-
sixths working day for each calendar month of full-time service. Each permanent
employee with at least five, but less than ten, consecutive years of full-time
service shall earn vacation leave at the rate of one and one-quarter working
days for each calendar month of full-time service; each permanent employee with
at least ten years of consecutive full-time service shall earn vacation leave
at the rate of one and one-half working days for each calendar month of full-
time service; and each permanent employee with at least 16 years of consecutive
full-time service shall earn vacation leave at the rate of one and three-
fourths working days for each calendar month of full-time service.
   (B)   Accrual. An employee may accrue vacation leave from prior calendar
years to a maximum of two times the amount of leave earned in the present
calendar year. The accrued leave may be used in addition to the leave that the
employee has earned during the present calendar year.
   (C)   When taken. Vacation leave may be used as earned subject to approval
by the Council of the time at which it may be taken.
   (D)   Terminal leave. Any employee leaving the municipal service in good
standing after giving proper notice of such termination of employment shall be
compensated for vacation leave accrued and unused to the date of separation.
(1978 Code, § 208.07)  (Ord. 90-18, passed 9-17-1990)
§ 33.08  SICK LEAVE.
   (A)   Amount. Every probationary and permanent employee is entitled to sick
leave with pay at the rate of one day for each calendar month of full-time or
major fraction thereof. Sick leave may be accumulated to a maximum of 120 days
and may be granted in units of not less than two hours or one-quarter of a work
day.
   (B)   Purposes. Sick leave may be granted when the employee is unable to
perform work duties due to illness, disability, the necessity for medical,
dental or chiropractic care, childbirth or exposure to contagious disease where
such exposure may endanger the health of others with whom the employee would
come in contact in the course of performing work duties. Sick leave may also be
granted for a maximum of three days for death of an employee’s spouse, child,
father or mother, or the death of a spouse’s mother and father.
   (C)   Proof. To be eligible for sick leave with pay, an employee shall:
      (1)   Report as soon as possible to his or her department head the reason
for his or her absence;
      (2)   Keep his or her department head informed of his or her condition if
the absence is of more than three days’ duration; and
      (3)   Submit a medical certificate for any absence if required by the
Council.
   (D)   Penalty. Using or claiming sick leave for a purpose not authorized by
division (B) above may be cause for disciplinary action under §
33.17 of this chapter.
   (E)   Accrual during leave. For the purpose of accumulating additional
vacation or sick leave, an employee using earned vacation leave or sick leave
is considered to be working.
   (F)   Applicability to leave benefits. During the probationary period
following an original appointment, an employee is not entitled to sick leave or
vacation leave. After the end of the probationary period, an employee is
entitled to sick leave and vacation leave accrued from the start of
probationary employment.
(1978 Code, § 208.08)  (Ord. 88-2, passed 1-19-1988)
§ 33.09  MILITARY LEAVE.
   Every employee to whom M.S. §§ 192.26 or 192.261, as they may be amended
from time to time, applies is entitled to the benefits afforded by those
sections subject to the conditions herein prescribed.
(1978 Code, § 208.09)
§ 33.10  PARENTAL LEAVE OF ABSENCE.
   (A)   Any employee, who qualifies under the provisions of state statute,
shall be granted a parental leave of absence, without pay, upon request to the
Council, upon the terms and conditions set forth at M.S. §§ 181.940 to 181.944,
as they may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Request for such leave shall be made in writing at least 60 days prior
to the date on which the leave shall commence.
(1978 Code, § 208.10)  (Ord. 90-8, passed 3-19-1990)
§ 33.11  LEAVES WITHOUT PAY.
   (A)   The Council may grant any permanent employee a leave of absence
without pay for a period not exceeding 90 days; except that, it may extend such
leaves to a maximum period of one year in case the employee is disabled or
where extraordinary circumstances, in its judgment, warrant such extension.
   (B)   No vacation or sick leave benefits shall accrue during a leave of
absence without pay.
(1978 Code, § 208.11)
§ 33.12  JURY OR WITNESS DUTY.
   When an employee performs jury duty or is subpoenaed as a witness in court
or voluntarily serves as a witness in a case in which the city is a party, the
employee is entitled to compensation from the city equal to the difference
between his or her regular pay and the amount received as a juror or witness.
(1978 Code, § 208.12)
§ 33.13  REST PERIODS AND HOLIDAYS.
   (A)   Rest periods. Every regular employee, when working under conditions
where a break period is practicable, shall be granted a 15-minute break period
in each half of the employee’s shift. Each department head shall schedule rest
periods so as not to interfere with work requirements.
   (B)   Holidays. The following calendar days and such other days as the
Council may fix are paid holidays: New Year’s Day, President’s Day, Martin
Luther King Jr. Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veteran’s Day,
Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day and floating holiday to be chosen by employees.
All employees in regular positions are entitled to time off with full pay on
holidays. The City Hall shall be closed for business on each such holiday, but
employees may be required to work on paid holidays when the nature of their
duties or other conditions require. An employee required to work on a holiday
shall receive another day off within 30 days thereafter, as the Council
determines, unless consideration is given to this factor in determining work
schedules. When New Year’s Day, Independence Day or Christmas Day falls on a
Sunday, the following Monday is a paid holiday and, if any such day falls on
Saturday, the preceding Friday is a holiday. Each holiday commences at the
beginning of the first shift on the day on which the holiday occurs and
continues for 24 hours thereafter. Eligible employees shall receive pay for
official holidays at their normal rate of pay if they are at work or on a leave
of absence with pay the last regular shift to which they would have been
assigned prior to the holiday and the first regular shift to which they would
have been assigned following the holiday. In addition to meeting the foregoing
criteria, part-time employees are entitled to pay on a holiday only if they
would normally be scheduled to work on the day of the week designated as the
holiday and they shall be paid only for the number of hours they would have
worked.
(1978 Code, § 208.13)  (Ord. 88-2, passed 1-19-1988)
§ 33.14  RESIGNATION.
   Any employee wishing to leave the municipal service in good standing, except
for mandatory retirement under §
33.18 of this chapter, shall file with the Clerk at least 14 days before
leaving, a written resignation stating the effective date of the resignation
and the reason for leaving. Failure to comply with this procedure may be
considered cause for denying the employee future employment by the city and
denying terminal leave benefits. Unauthorized absence from work for a period of
three working days may be considered by the Council as a resignation without
such benefits.
(1978 Code, § 208.14)
§ 33.15  GRIEVANCE POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city insofar as possible to prevent the occurrence
of grievances and to deal promptly with those which occur. When any employee
grievance comes to the attention of a supervisory employee, the supervisor
shall discuss all relevant circumstances with the employee, consider and
examine the causes of the grievance, and attempt to resolve it to the extent
that he or she has authority to do so. If the grievance is not dealt with
satisfactorily at that level, the grievance may be carried up to the next
higher administrative level, including the Council.
(1978 Code, § 208.15)
§ 33.16  LAY-OFFS.
   After at least two weeks’ notice to the employee, the Council may lay off
any employee whenever such action is necessary because of shortage of work or
funds, the abolition of a position or changes in organization. No permanent or
probationary employee shall be laid off while there is a temporary employee
serving in the same class of position for which the permanent or probationary
employee is qualified, eligible and available.
(1978 Code, § 208.16)
§ 33.17  DISCIPLINE.
   (A)   In general. City employees shall be subject to disciplinary action for
failing to fulfill their duties and responsibilities, including observance of
work rules adopted by the Council. It is the policy of the city to administer
disciplinary penalties without discrimination. Every disciplinary action shall
be for just cause and the employee may demand a hearing or use the grievance
procedure of §
33.15 of this chapter with respect to any disciplinary action which he or she
believes is either unjust or disproportionate to the offense committed. The
supervisor or department head shall investigate any allegation on which
disciplinary action might be based before any disciplinary action is taken.
   (B)   Disciplinary action steps. Except for severe infractions, disciplinary
action against any employee shall be progressive and follow the steps listed
below in numerical order:
      (1)   Oral reprimand;
      (2)   Written reprimand. A written reprimand shall state the employee is
being warned for misconduct; describe the misconduct; describe past actions
taken by the supervisor to correct the problem; urge prompt correction or
improvement by the employee; include timetables and goals for improvement when
appropriate; and outline future penalties should the problem continue. The
employee shall be given a copy of the reprimand and sign the original
acknowledging that he or she has received the reprimand. The signature of the
employee does not mean that he or she agrees with the reprimand. The reprimand
shall be placed in the city’s file on the employee, but shall be removed from
the file after one year from the date of issuance if there has been no
subsequent reprimand and no other disciplinary action has been instituted;
      (3)   Suspension without pay. Prior to the suspension, or as soon
thereafter as possible, the employee shall be notified in writing of the reason
for the suspension and its length. Upon the employee’s return to work, he or
she shall be given a written statement outlining further disciplinary actions
should the misconduct continue. An employee may be suspended pending
investigation of an allegation. A copy of each written statement shall be
placed in the employee’s personal file, but if the suspension is for
investigation and the allegation proves false, the statement shall be removed
and the employee shall receive any compensation to which he or she would have
been entitled had the suspension not taken place; and
      (4)   Dismissal. The Council may dismiss any employee after the employee
is given a notice in writing at least five work days before the effective date
of the dismissal. The notice shall contain the reasons for the dismissal; the
employee’s rights under these rules and the Veterans’ Preference Law, being
M.S. Ch. 197, as it may be amended from time to time, if he or she is a
veteran; and a statement indicating that the employee may respond to the
charges both orally and in writing and that he or she may appear personally
before the Council.
   (C)   Other disciplinary actions. The following other disciplinary actions
may be taken against any employee after the steps in divisions (B)(1) and (B)
(2) above have been followed:
      (1)   Involuntary demotion. This step shall be taken only if the employee
does not have the ability to function at the higher level;
      (2)   Forced transfer to a comparable position under a different
supervisor. This step may be taken only if the problem is due to personal
incompatibility between the supervisor and employee; and
      (3)   Withholding a salary increase or decreasing the employee’s salary.
The employee shall be notified in writing of the action and the reasons
therefore. A copy of the notice shall be placed in the employee’s file. In no
case shall an employee’s salary be decreased below the minimum of the salary
range of the class.
   (D)   Hearing. In any case of suspension, dismissal or demotion, the
employee shall be granted a hearing before the Council if the employee submits
a written request for such a hearing to the Council within five working days of
notification of the action taken. The hearing shall be held within ten working
days from the date the request is filed unless the city and the employee agree
on an earlier or later date. If the disciplinary action involves the removal of
a veteran, the hearing shall be held in accordance with M.S. § 197.46, as it
may be amended from time to time.
(1978 Code, § 208.17)
§ 33.18  RETIREMENT POLICY.
   (A)   General rule. Every appointed employee of the city shall automatically
be retired upon reaching the age of 70 years, except as provided in division
(B) below.
   (B)   Retention after age 70. If the Council finds that the interests of the
city will best be served by allowing a person to remain in the employ of the
city after reaching 70 years of age because his or her services are especially
needed or his or her replacement would be especially difficult, the employee
may be retained after his or her seventieth birthday for one year. Any such
employee may be retained for successive one-year periods upon approval of the
Council.
(1978 Code, § 208.18)
§ 33.19  UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   Falsification of records. No person shall knowingly make any false
statement, certificate, mark, rating or report in regard to any test,
certificate or appointment held or made under the city personnel system or in
any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial
execution of the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Rendering of consideration. No person seeking employment or promotion
in the municipal service shall either directly or indirectly give, render or
pay any money, service or other valuable consideration to any person, or on
account of or in connection with his or her test, appointment or promotion or
proposed appointment or promotion.
   (C)   Discrimination. No person shall be employed, promoted, demoted or
discharged by the city or in any way favored or discriminated against because
of political opinions or affiliations, race, age, color, national origin,
religion, sex, marital status, status with regard to public assistance or
disability, or because of the exercise of rights under provisions of the Public
Employment Labor Relations Act, being M.S. §§ 179A.01 et seq., as they may be
amended from time to time.
(1978 Code, § 208.19)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 33.20  OFFICIALS UNDER WORKER’S COMPENSATION ACT.
   Pursuant to M.S. § 176.011, Subd. 9, as it may be amended from time to time,
the elected officials of the city are hereby included in the coverage of the
State Worker’s Compensation Act, being M.S. §§ 176.001 et seq., as they may be
amended from time to time.
(1978 Code, § 208.20)  (Ord. 88-15, passed 12-19-1988)
§ 33.21  OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   Purpose. The city does not encourage employees to work at positions
outside the city service and retains the right to not allow employees to
maintain certain outside employment.
   (B)   Policy/certain outside employment prohibited.
      (1)   Full-time employees may not engage in paid regular outside
employment which might in any way hinder their objective and impartial
performance of their public duties or impair their efficiency on the job. Such
employment shall not interfere with the employee’s job with the city. Approval
may be denied, by the City Administrator, where among other things, it appears
that the outside employment might; physically or mentally exhaust the employee
to the point that their performance may be affected; require that any special
consideration be given to the scheduling of the employee’s regular work hours;
present a conflict of interest with the employee’s city duties.
      (2)   This section does not apply to volunteer work. One who has been
denied approval by the City Administrator may appeal this decision to the City
Council.
   (C)   Notification. Before accepting outside employment, full-time employees
must first submit a statement to the City Administrator stating:
      (1)   Name, address and phone number of the other potential employer;
      (2)   Description of job to be taken; and
      (3)   Expected number of hours that the employee will spend on the job.
   (D)   Waiver. Full-time employees who engage in outside employment must sign
the following waiver:
“The undersigned, an employee of the City of Dayton, does hereby waive and
release said city from any liability, expense or cost because of any injury or
sickness incurred by reason of any employment accepted by the undersigned other
than as an employee of said city. During an absence caused by an injury or
sickness incurred by reason of non-city employment, I waive any claims against
the city for wages or other benefits excepting therefrom my rights to use
previously accrued sick leave. I also agree to provide the City of Dayton with
notice of any injury or sickness which results from my non-city employment by
notifying the City Administrator.”
   (E)   Compliance. Failure to comply with this section is cause for
discipline under §
33.17 of this chapter.
(1978 Code, § 208.21)  (Ord. 88-16, passed 12-19-1988)
EMPLOYMENT BACKGROUND CHECKS
§ 33.35  PURPOSE.
   The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to establish regulations that
will allow law enforcement access to state’s computerized criminal history
information for specified non-criminal purposes of employment background
checks.
(Ord. 2008-20, passed 12-9-2008)
§ 33.36  CRIMINAL HISTORY EMPLOYMENT BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   The City Police Department is hereby required, as the exclusive entity
within the city, to conduct a criminal history background investigation on the
applicants for all employment positions for regular part-time, full-time or
seasonal employees of the city, unless the City Administrator concludes that
said background investigation is not required.
   (B)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order
to screen employment applicants, the Police Department is authorized to access
data maintained in the State Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions Computerized
Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data
that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police Department
under the care and custody of the Chief of Police or his or her designee. A
summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data may be
released by the Police Department to the City Administrator and the City
Council, Assistant to the City Administrator, City Clerk or other city staff
involved in the hiring process.
   (C)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize
the Police Department by written consent to undertake the investigation. The
written consent must fully comply with the provisions of M.S. Ch. 13, as it may
be amended from time to time, regarding the collection, maintenance and use of
the information.
   (D)   Except for the positions set forth in M.S. § 364.09, as it may be
amended from time to time, the city will not reject an applicant for employment
on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction unless the crime is directly
related to the position of employment sought and the conviction is for a
felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor coupled with incarceration. If the
city rejects the applicant’s request on this basis, the city shall notify the
applicant in writing of the following:
      (1)   The grounds and reasons for the denial;
      (2)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in M.S. §
364.06, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment; and
      (4)   All competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
(Ord. 2008-20, passed 12-9-2008)
CHAPTER 34:  ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
Section
License Background Checks
   
34.01   Purpose
   
34.02   Criminal history license background investigations
Assessment of Current Services; Street Lighting Systems
   
34.15   Installation of new street lighting systems
   
34.16   Assumption of existing street lighting systems
   
34.17   Records
   
34.18   Personal liability
   
34.19   Assessments
Local Improvement Policy
   
34.30   Intent
   
34.31   Cut-off date for petitions
   
34.32   Classification of improvements
   
34.33   Financing Class B and C improvements
   
34.34   Assessment regulations for Class B improvements
   
34.35   Assessment rules for Class C improvements
   
34.36   Special rules
   
34.37   Federal, state and county aid use
   
34.38   Deferment of special assessments for senior citizens
   
34.39   Partial prepayment
   
34.40   Certification of assessments
   
34.41   Permanent Improvement Revolving Fund
Cross-reference:
   Background checks for employees, see §§
33.35 and
33.36
   Health and Sanitation; Nuisances, see
Ch. 90
   Public Property; Improvements and Excavations, see
Ch. 153
LICENSE BACKGROUND CHECKS
§ 34.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to establish regulations that
will allow law enforcement access to the state’s computerized criminal history
information for specified non-criminal purposes of licensing background checks.
(Ord. 2008-20, passed 12-9-2008)
§ 34.02  CRIMINAL HISTORY LICENSE BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   The City Police Department is hereby required, as the exclusive entity
within the city, to conduct a criminal history background investigation on the
applicants for all licenses issued by the city, including, but not limited to,
liquor licenses, peddler licenses and massage parlor license, unless the City
Administrator concludes that said background investigation is not required. The
extent and nature of any said background investigation is at the discretion of
the City Administrator unless otherwise required by law.
   (B)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order
to screen license applicants, the Police Department is authorized to access
data maintained in the State Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions Computerized
Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data
that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police Department
under the care and custody of the Chief of Police or his or her designee. A
summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data may be
released by the Police Department to the City Administrator and the City
Council, Assistant to the City Administrator, City Clerk or other city staff
involved in the license approval process.
   (C)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize
the Police Department by written consent to undertake the investigation. The
written consent must fully comply with the provisions of M.S. Ch. 13, as it may
be amended from time to time, regarding the collection, maintenance and use of
the information.
   (D)   Except for the positions set forth in M.S. § 364.09, as it may be
amended from time to time, the city will not reject an application for a
license on the basis of the prior conviction unless the crime is directly
related to the license sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross
misdemeanor or misdemeanor coupled with incarceration. If the city rejects the
application on this basis, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of
the following:
      (1)   The grounds and reasons for the denial;
      (2)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in M.S. §
364.06, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for a license; and
      (4)   All competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
(Ord. 2008-20, passed 12-9-2008)
ASSESSMENT OF CURRENT SERVICES; STREET LIGHTING SYSTEMS
§ 34.15  INSTALLATION OF NEW STREET LIGHTING SYSTEMS.
   Installation of new street lighting systems for which the city plans to
assess benefitted properties shall be carried out in accordance with the
procedures set forth in applicable sections of M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(1978 Code, § 303.01)
§ 34.16  ASSUMPTION OF EXISTING STREET LIGHTING SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Notice. The Council may determine by resolution from time to time
those street lighting systems previously constructed for which it wishes to
assume responsibility for payment of current service charges and assess
benefitted properties for such charges by the method provided herein. Before
any such service is furnished pursuant to such resolution, the Council shall
cause to be published notice that the Council is going to consider such
project. Such notice shall be published in the official newspaper at least once
no less than ten days prior to such meeting, and shall state the date, time and
place of such meeting, the streets, alleys or other public and private areas
affected and the particular projects proposed or other public and private areas
affected and the particular projects proposed and the current annual charge for
such service to the area.
   (B)   Public hearing. At such hearing or at any adjournment thereof, the
Council shall hear property owners with reference to the scope and desirability
of the project. At the conclusion of said hearing, or within six months
thereafter, the Council may confirm the original resolution and project with
any modifications it deems necessary. Said public hearing may be waived by the
filing of a petition by 100% of fee owners of property which will be assessed
for street lighting service under the terms of this subchapter stating that
they deem the project desirable and agree to be assessed the cost therefor.
   (C)   Current city operation. The cost of street lighting systems currently
operated and paid for by the general revenues of the city on the effective date
of this subchapter shall be assessed to property benefitted thereby in
accordance with this section. Once a street lighting system is brought within
the terms of this subchapter, there is no need for annual compliance with this
section and charges may be assessed in accordance with the procedure outlined
in §§
34.17 through
34.19 of this chapter.
(1978 Code, § 303.02)
§ 34.17  RECORDS.
   The Clerk shall keep a record of the costs of operation of the street
lighting system, including clerical, administrative and incidental costs, and
the portion of property benefitted by the street lighting system, whether or
not the property abuts on the street, alley or other public or private area in
which the system is located or based upon the benefits received. All such costs
shall be collected in the manner provided by this subchapter.
(1978 Code, § 303.03)
§ 34.18  PERSONAL LIABILITY.
   The fee owner of property benefitted by a street lighting system which is
within the scope of this subchapter pursuant to the provisions of §
34.16 of this chapter shall be personally liable for the cost of such service.
(1978 Code, § 303.04)
§ 34.19  ASSESSMENTS.
   Before September 1 of each year, the Clerk shall list the total charges for
street lighting service against each separate lot or parcel to which they are
attributable under this subchapter. The Council may then spread the charges
against property benefitted as a special assessment under M.S. § 429.101, as it
may be amended from time to time, and other pertinent statutes for
certification to the County Auditor for collection the following year with
current taxes; provided that, the hearing required by M.S. § 429.061, as it may
be amended from time to time, shall be held at the first meeting of the Council
in September and owners assessed for such service shall be given notice of the
adoption of the final assessment for street lighting service and that such
property owners may prepay such assessment pursuant to the provisions of M.S. §
429.061, as it may be amended from time to time.
(1978 Code, § 303.05)
LOCAL IMPROVEMENT POLICY
§ 34.30  INTENT.
   It is the purpose of the Council, in adopting this subchapter, that the city
have a uniform policy on local improvements. All references to assessments on a
certain basis such as front footage is the Council’s estimate of the type of
assessment basis which most fairly reflects the benefit to property owners. In
cases where the stated policy does not fairly reflect benefit, the city will
proceed under §
34.33 of this chapter.
(1978 Code, § 304.01)
§ 34.31  CUT-OFF DATE FOR PETITIONS.
   No petition for construction of any local improvement as defined by M.S. §
429.011, as it may be amended from time to time, shall be accepted or acted
upon by the Council unless it is filed with the City Clerk on or before
December 1 of the year prior to the year of requested construction; provided,
the Council may, by resolution, waive this requirement upon a finding that
earlier construction is feasible and desirable.
(1978 Code, § 304.02)
§ 34.32  CLASSIFICATION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   In general. Public improvements are divided into the three classes
specified in the following subdivisions according to their respective benefit
to the whole city and to property specially served by the improvement and
taking into account past city practice.
   (B)   Class A.
      (1)   Class A improvements are those which are of general benefit to the
city at large, including:
         (a)   Public buildings, except a building which is part of an
improvement described in division (B)(2) below;
         (b)   Any public park, playground or recreational facility; and
         (c)   Any improvement not described in M.S. § 429.021, Subd. 1, as it
may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Any such improvement shall be financed from general city funds and
not from special assessments.
   (C)   Class B.
      (1)   Class B improvements are those which are of both general benefit
and special benefit to abutting or nearby property.
      (2)   Class B improvements include:
         (a)   Permanently surfacing arterial streets;
         (b)   Storm sewers;
         (c)   The construction of off-street parking facilities; and
         (d)   The installation and maintenance of street lighting systems.
   (D)   Class C. Class C improvements are those which are primarily, if not
exclusively, of benefit to property abutting or in the area of the improvement,
including:
      (1)   The construction of sidewalks;
      (2)   The construction of curbs and gutters;
      (3)   Grading, graveling, oiling and applying non-permanent surfacing to
streets;
      (4)   Permanently surfacing residential streets;
      (5)   The abatement of nuisances and the draining of swamps, marshes and
ponds on public or private property and filling the same; and
      (6)   Current services under §§
34.15 through
34.19 of this chapter.
(1978 Code, § 304.03)
§ 34.33  FINANCING CLASS B AND C IMPROVEMENTS.
   It is the policy of the city to finance Class B and C improvements by the
methods prescribed in this section and §§
34.34 and
34.35 of this chapter. The apportionment of the cost between benefitted
property and the city at large and the method of levying assessments prescribed
in those sections shall be followed in each case unless the Council, by
resolution, finds that because of special circumstances stated in the
resolution, a different policy is necessary or desirable in the particular
case. Any local improvement described in M.S. § 429.021, as it may be amended
from time to time, and not placed in Class A, B or C by §
34.32 of this chapter shall be financed as the Council determines to be most
feasible and equitable in each case.
(1978 Code, § 304.04)
§ 34.34  ASSESSMENT REGULATIONS FOR CLASS B IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Arterial street surfacing. Arterial streets shall be those so
designated from time to time by resolution of the Council. When an arterial
street is paved with concrete, bituminous mat or other permanent surface, the
cost of the pavement on a 36-foot roadway shall be assessed against the
benefitted property on the basis of frontage and/or area of the abutting
properties and those served by the street. When the standards for such paving
are higher than those the city would use for a residential street, the cost to
be assessed shall be based on the cost of paving a residential street of the
same width. The rest of the cost shall be paid from general funds.
   (B)   Storm sewers. Thirty percent of the cost of constructing storm sewers
shall be paid by the city from general funds. The remainder of the cost shall
be assessed against the property in the area served by the sewer on the basis
of the square footage of the property. The area to be assessed shall be
determined on the basis of topographic maps and other pertinent data.
(1978 Code, § 304.05)  (Ord. 85-10, passed 11-18-1985)
§ 34.35  ASSESSMENT RULES FOR CLASS C IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Sidewalks. The cost of the construction of sidewalks shall be assessed
on the basis of frontage against property abutting the side of the street on
which the sidewalk is located.
   (B)   Streets. The cost of construction of curbs and gutters on any street,
of grading, graveling, oiling and applying non-permanent surfacing to any
street or of applying permanent surfaces to residential streets shall be
assessed on the basis of frontage.
   (C)   Nuisances. The cost of abating nuisances and draining of swamps,
marshes and ponds on public or private property and filling the same shall be
assessed in a manner determined by the Council in each case to measure most
equitably the benefit received by property to be assessed. The assessment in
any such case may be made against non-abutting property to the extent the
property is benefitted by the improvement.
(1978 Code, § 304.06)
§ 34.36  SPECIAL RULES.
   (A)   Corner lots. In any assessment made on the basis of frontage, corner
lots shall be assessed for footage along the front of the lot, plus one-third
of the side footage; the other two-thirds of the side footage shall be spread
among all other assessed properties. In the case of an assessment for a lateral
water or sewer main, Class C corner lots shall be assessed for the footage
along the front side of the lot and shall be assessed for the footage along the
front side of the street abutting the lot unless the lot is large enough to
accommodate another building which would be benefitted by construction of the
second main.
   (B)   Intersections. In the case of any kind of street improvement,
intersection costs shall be paid by the city.
   (C)   Adjusted frontage. When the amount of an assessment is determined by
frontage, an equivalent front footage shall be determined according to the
following rules when an irregular lot requires such an adjustment to maintain
fairness in the assessment.
      (1)   Front footage shall be measured at setback on cul-de-sacs and
sharply curved streets and irregularly shaped lots.
      (2)   Equivalent front footage shall be determined by dividing the square
footage of the lot by the general lot depth of the subdivision for pie-shaped
lots and irregular shaped lots where other rules do not apply.
      (3)   Where frontage curves so greatly as to give a general appearance of
a corner, the lot shall be considered a corner lot and equivalent front
footage, as well as side footage where required, determined on the basis of an
irregularly shaped lot.
      (4)   Where a lot consists of a combination of rectangular and pie-shaped
or irregular portions, the equivalent front footage shall be determined as the
sum of the straight front footage, plus the remainder in accordance with
applicable rules.
(1978 Code, § 304.07)
§ 34.37  FEDERAL, STATE AND COUNTY AID USE.
   (A)   If the city receives financial assistance from the federal government,
the state or the county, or to defray a portion of the cost of a street
improvement project, such aid shall be used first to reduce the share of the
project cost which would be met from general city funds according to the
assessment formula contained in this subchapter.
   (B)   If such aid is more than the amount of the improvement cost to be
borne by the city, the remainder of the aid so received shall be used to reduce
each individual assessment proportionately.
(1978 Code, § 304.08)
§ 34.38  DEFERMENT OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR SENIOR CITIZENS.
   (A)   Deferred payments.
      (1)   The Council may defer the payment of any special assessment on
homestead property owned by a person who is 65 years of age or older. The
deferment shall be granted upon a certification by the owner on a form
prescribed by the County Assessor supplemented by the City Clerk to establish
the qualification of the owner for such deferment. The application shall be
made within 30 days after the adoption of the assessment roll by the Council.
The Council shall either grant or deny the deferment and, if it grants the
deferment, it may require the payment of the interest due each year.
      (2)   If the Council grants the deferment, the Clerk shall notify the
County Auditor and the County Assessor who shall, in accordance with M.S. §
435.194, as it may be amended from time to time, record a notice of the
deferment with the Register of Deeds setting forth the amount of the
assessment.
   (B)   Deferred payments. The option to defer the payment of special
assessments shall terminate and all amounts accumulated, plus applicable
interest, shall become due upon the occurrence of any one of the following
events:
      (1)   The death of the owner when there is no spouse who is eligible for
deferment;
      (2)   The sale, transfer or subdivision of all or any part of the
property;
      (3)   Loss of homestead status on the property; or
      (4)   Determination by the Council for any reason that there would be no
hardship to require immediate or partial payment.
   (C)   Terminations.
      (1)   Upon the occurrence of one of the events specified in division (B)
above, the Council shall terminate the deferment.
      (2)   Thereupon, the Clerk shall notify the County Assessor and the
County Auditor of the termination, including the amounts accumulated on unpaid
installments, plus applicable interest, which shall become due and payable as a
result of the termination.
(1978 Code, § 304.09)
§ 34.39  PARTIAL PREPAYMENT.
   (A)   After the adoption by the Council of the assessment roll in any local
improvement proceeding, the owner of any property specially assessed in the
proceeding may, prior to the certification of the assessment or the first
installment to the County Auditor, pay to the Finance Director any portion of
the assessment not less than $200.
   (B)   The remaining unpaid balance shall be spread over the period of time
established by the Council for installment payment of the assessment.
(1978 Code, § 304.10)
§ 34.40  CERTIFICATION OF ASSESSMENTS.
   After the adoption of any special assessment by the Council, the Clerk shall
transmit a certified duplicate of the assessment roll with each installment,
including interest, set forth separately to the County Auditor to be extended
on the proper tax lists of the county.
(1978 Code, § 304.11)
§ 34.41  PERMANENT IMPROVEMENT REVOLVING FUND.
   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby established the Permanent Improvement
Revolving Fund of the city to be held and administered by the Finance Director
separate and apart from all other funds of the city, for the purpose of
financing local improvements.
   (B)   Source of funds. The Fund shall be a permanent fund of the city and
the moneys necessary for its maintenance shall be provided by taxation, by the
appropriation of available moneys from other funds of the city and/or by the
issuance and sale of permanent improvement revolving fund bonds of the city as
deemed necessary from time to time by the Council.
   (C)   Disposition of funds. Moneys in the Fund shall be used only as
directed by resolution of the Council for the purpose of advancing to local
improvement funds the cost of improvements for which assessments are to be
levied. All such moneys so advanced to an improvement fund shall be restored as
soon as sufficient moneys are received in the improvement fund, together with
interest at a rate fixed by the Council at not less than 6% per annum during
the time for which such moneys have been so furnished.
   (D)   Investment. Whenever there are moneys in the Fund not immediately
needed for local improvements, such moneys shall be invested by the Finance
Director under the direction of the Council in any securities authorized for
investment of municipal sinking funds by law.
   (E)   Transfer of surplus. When the Fund accumulates moneys in excess of any
amounts reasonably anticipated to be needed for local improvement fund
advances, the Council may, by resolution adopted by a four-fifths vote, declare
any part of such excess to be surplus and transfer it to the General Fund.
(1978 Code, § 304.12)
CHAPTER 35:  FINANCE, FUNDS AND FEES
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Escrow deposits
   
35.02   Fee and escrow schedule
Funds
   
35.15   Park Development Fund
   
35.16   Capital Outlay Reserve Fund
   
35.17   Cable Revenue Fund
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01  ESCROW DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Intent. Certain licensed and permitted activities carried on in the
city require the assistance of the City Engineer, Planner, Attorney and city
staff. As these activities benefit private persons and not necessarily the city
as a whole, it is appropriate that the cost of these services be borne by those
benefitting thereby. This section is intended to provide a method whereby this
end will be furthered.
(1978 Code, § 209.01)
   (B)   Escrow deposit required. Applications for license, permits or approval
which will or may require the assistance of the City Engineer, Planner,
Attorney or staff for processing, review and/or recommendation, including, but
not limited to, those for subdivision approval, rezoning, conditional use
permits, planned unit developments or variances, special use permits, well
permits, a sewer permit, excavation permits and building permits shall be
accompanied by a cash deposit which shall be placed in an applicant’s escrow
fund in an amount sufficient to pay all engineering, legal, planning and staff
fees and costs which will, or likely will, be incurred by the city in
connection with said application and supervision of the permitted activity.
Said deposit will be held in the fund and shall be credited to the applicant
making the deposit. All engineering, legal and city staff expenses incurred in
connection with a permit application and approval shall be charged to the
aforementioned applicant’s account and credited to the city.
(1978 Code, § 209.02)
   (C)   Fee schedule. The Council shall adopt a fee schedule for services to
be rendered by the City Engineer, Planner, Attorney and support staff. The
schedule will be provided upon request to all applicants for permits or
approvals listed in division (B) above and all others for which an escrow
deposit is required.
(1978 Code, § 209.03)
   (D)   Fees for individual permits. Based upon the schedule in division (C)
above, the City Administrator shall determine the amount of the escrow deposit
required after consultation with the City Engineer, Planner, Attorney and
Council. The City Attorney, Planner, Engineer and Administrator shall itemize
all time, services and materials to be billed to any escrow account.
(1978 Code, § 209.04)
   (E)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Applications. No application for a license, permit or approval
listed in division (B) above, or other license, permit or approval for which an
escrow deposit is required, will be accepted or processed by the city unless
accompanied by an escrow deposit as provided in this section.
      (2)   Deficits.
         (a)   If, at any time, it appears that a deficit will occur in any
escrow account, the Clerk, after consultation with the City Engineer, Planner
and Attorney, shall determine the amount, if any, of additional deposits
necessary to cover further expenses connected with the permit or approval
application and shall notify the applicant to make such deposit.
         (b)   Any applicant refusing to make such additional deposits or owing
the city money for services will have all work on his or her application
stopped or may have his or her permit or approval revoked ten days after mailed
notice to him or her.
         (c)   The applicant may demand in writing a hearing within five days
of receipt of said notice. Failure to so demand a hearing constitutes a waiver
thereof.
         (d)   If the permit or approval has not been granted, the city shall
stop all further processing of the application until such time as the required
deposit is made.
(1978 Code, § 209.05)
   (F)   Refund. Any money remaining in an applicant’s escrow account upon
completion of the permitted activity shall be returned to the applicant if it
is determined by the Council that all legal, planning, engineering and city
staff fees and costs required by this section have been satisfied.
(1978 Code, § 209.06)
(Ord. 91-1, passed 1-7-1991; Ord. 96-8, passed 8-27-1996; Ord. 2007-14, passed
9-11-2007; Ord. 2008-21, passed 12-9-2008; Ord. 2009-12, passed 5-26-2009; Ord.
2009-16, passed 12-8-2009)
§ 35.02  FEE AND ESCROW SCHEDULE.
 
City of Dayton Fee Schedule 2019
Use                                                                              Fee
Administration
Activity Center rental:
   Damage deposit                                                             $300
   Local residents/businesses/seniors                                         $125/ first 3 hours, $30 per
                                                                                 additional hour
   Non-resident/business                                                      $150/first 3 hours, $40 per
                                                                                 additional hour
Animals
   Commercial kennel license (5 dogs)                                         $75 per year (if more than 5
                                                                                 dogs, IUP/CUP may be needed)
   Dog yearly license                                                         $10 per year
   Residential kennel license (5 dogs)                                        $50 per year (if more than 5
                                                                                 dogs, IUP/CUP may be needed)
Bad check fee                                                                    $38
Burn permit                                                                      $25 (illegal burn fee will
                                                                                 double)
Certified copies                                                                 $10 (after first copy)
Certify for non-payment to taxes (utilities/escrow)                              15% of the bill
City publications (if copies requested)
   Audit                                                                      Actual cost + staff time
   Budget                                                                     Actual cost + staff time
   Capital Improvement Plan (CIP)                                             Actual cost + staff time
   City Code                                                                  Actual cost + staff time
   Comprehensive Plan                                                         Actual cost + staff time
   Engineering Design Manual                                                  Actual cost + staff time
   Other publications                                                         Actual cost + staff time
   Subdivision Ordinance                                                      Actual cost + staff time
   Zoning Ordinance                                                           Actual cost + staff time
                                                                                 Actual cost + staff time
Copies/fax/maps (per sheet)                                                      (if retrieval is greater than
                                                                                 5 minutes)
   11" x 17" color maps (Zoning, Land Use and the like)                       $5
   Black/white up to 8-1/2" x 11" - 10 - 100 copies                           $0.25
   Black/white up to 8-1/2" x 11" - 101 copies +                              $0.30
   Black/white oversize - 11" x 17"                                           $0.50
   Color up to 8-1/2" x 14"                                                   $1.00
   Color oversize - 11" x 17"                                                 $1.20
   Fax                                                                        $0.25/page
Dangerous dogs
   License                                                                    $490 per year + annual license
   Sign                                                                       $10
   Tags                                                                       $5
Data request                                                                     Actual cost + staff time
Facility reservation fees
   Additional restroom rental                                                 Actual cost
   Central Park                                                               $200 per day
   Concession stand                                                           $50 per day
   Damage deposit (in addition to fee)                                        $100 per day
   McNeil Park                                                                $100 per day
   McNeil Park with lights overlook                                           $150 per day
   Overlook Park                                                              $50 per day
General licensing
   Adult entertainment establishment                                          $5,000
   Solicitor/peddler/transient merchant
      Application fee                                                      $35
      Monthly fee                                                          $65
      Weekly fee                                                           $30
      Yearly fee                                                           $300
   Therapeutic massage therapist
      Massage technician license                                           $500
Interest charge on past due escrows                                              10% annually (if not paid
                                                                                 within 30 days of bill date)
Large assembly permit (200+ people)                                              $100 per event
Liquor/tobacco licensing
   Off-sale liquor                                                            $100 per year (due July 1)
   Off-sale 3.2% license                                                      $15 per year (due July 1)
   On-sale liquor license                                                     $3,000 per year (due July 1)
   On-sale Sunday liquor                                                      $200 per year (due July 1)
   Set up license                                                             $125 per year (due April 1)
   Temporary intoxicating beverage license                                    1 day license - $25
   Temporary one day 3.2 license                                              $15 per day
   Tobacco license                                                            $200 per year (due January 1)
Non-resident notary fee                                                          $1 per document
Permit to exceed - road restrictions                                             $100
Project recovery rate factor
   City staff services                                                        $59.50 (per hour)
   Engineering services                                                       Actual cost
   Legal services                                                             Actual cost
   Miscellaneous consultants                                                  Actual cost
Public hearing notice
   Champlin-Dayton Press publication                                          Actual cost
   Mailing labels (Hennepin/Wright County)                                    Actual cost
   Mailings                                                                   Actual cost
Recording - Hennepin/Wright County
   Abstract and Torrens properties                                            Actual cost + staff time
Rental housing license
   Application - single-family/townhome                                       $75/per unit (includes initial
                                                                                 inspection)
   Re-inspections required prior to licensing                                 $75/per inspection
   Application - apartments                                                   $150/per building
   Inspections- apartments                                                    $25/per unit
Sewer and water utility rates
   Champlin fee per/unit; Natures Crossing                                    $12.060/month
   MN connect fee                                                             $1.06/bi-monthly
   Sewer base                                                                    $20.56/bi-monthly
      Sewer usage per 1,000 (gallons)                                      $4.48
   Sewer only NDL 1,000 gallons and above                                     $6.05
   Water base                                                                    $14.07/bi-monthly
      Water usage per 1,000 (gallons) 0 - 6,000 gallons                    $3.06
      Water usage per 1,000 (gallons) 6,000 - 10,000 gallons               $3.38
      Water usage per 1,000 (gallons) 10,001 - 33,000                      $3.70
      Water usage per 1,000 (gallons) over 33,001                          $4.07
      Water availability fee charged to existing residences with available $14.70/bi-monthly
service, but have not connected
   Water meter use fee:
      Residential meter                                                    $14.07
      3/4-inch water (base fee)                                            $32.80
      1-inch water (base fee)                                              $41.75
      1-1/2-inch water (base fee)                                          $53.68
      2-inch water (base fee)                                              $86.48
      3-inch water (base fee)                                              $328.02
      4-inch water (base fee)                                              $416.85
      6-inch water (base fee)                                              $626.22
      10-inch water (base fee)                                             $1,491.00
Special agricultural preserve application                                        $50 per application (per
                                                                                 statute)
Special assessment searches                                                      $25 each
Zoning letter                                                                    $50 per property
Building Inspections. Permitting and Development
Accessory building over 200 square feet                                          Based on valuation1 + plan
                                                                                 check1 + state surcharge
Additional c/o inspections (after two)                                           $100 each
Air conditioning installations                                                   $61 +$1 (state surcharge)
                                                                                 $62.00
Basement refinishing permit                                                      Based on valuation1 + plan
                                                                                 check1 + state surcharge
Building moving permit                                                           Based on valuation1 + plan
                                                                                 check1 + fee to Metro West
Building re-inspection fee (after second inspect)                                $47, established under State
                                                                                 Building Code
Connection charges
   Sewer                                                                      $75 + 1 (state surcharge) $76
   Water                                                                      $75 + 1 (state surcharge) $76
Deck permit                                                                      Based on valuation1 + plan
                                                                                 check1 + state surcharge
Demolition permits
                                                                                 $10 per $100 demolition costs
   Commercial units                                                           ($200 minimum + state
                                                                                 surcharge)
   Garages/barns                                                              $50 + $1 (state surcharge) $51
   Multiple-family structure   
      First two units                                                      $150 + $1 (state surcharge)
                                                                                 $151
      Each additional unit                                                 $50
   Single-family structures                                                   $100 + $1 (state surcharge)
                                                                                 $101
Drain tilling                                                                    $61 + $1 (state surcharge) $62
Fence permit   
   Fences less than seven feet                                                $127 + $1 (state surcharge)
                                                                                 $128
   Fences greater than seven feet                                             $127 + $82.55 plan check fee1
                                                                                 + state surcharge1
Fire suppression permit                                                          Based on valuation1 + plan
                                                                                 check1
Grading/excavation permit (cubic yards)
   50 - 99                                                                    $0
                                                                                 $100 for first 100 cubic
   100 - 999                                                                  yards, plus $65 per each
                                                                                 additional 100 cubic yards or
                                                                                 fraction thereof
                                                                                 $350 for the first 1,000 cubic
   1,000 - 9,999                                                              yards plus $60 per each
                                                                                 additional 1,000 cubic yards
                                                                                 or fraction thereof
                                                                                 $650 for the first 10,000
   10,000 - 99,000                                                            cubic yards plus $50 per each
                                                                                 additional 10,000 cubic yards
                                                                                 or fraction thereof
                                                                                 $1,200 for first 100,000 cubic
   100,000 and over                                                           yards plus $25 per each
                                                                                 additional 10,000 cubic yards
                                                                                 or fraction thereof
Hauling fee when using city streets                                              (materials hauled in or out of
                                                                                 site)
   Less than 50,000 cubic yards                                               $0
                                                                                 First 50,000 cubic yards costs
   Greater than 50,000 cubic yards                                            $0 plus $.55 per additional
                                                                                 one cubic yard or fraction
                                                                                 thereof
Heating installations
   Furnace                                                                    $61 + $1 (state surcharge) $62
Irrigation systems for new systems not installed with home                       $99 + $1 (state surcharge)
Mechanical permit (commercial)                                                   Based on valuation1 + plan
                                                                                 check1 + 1 (state surcharge) 
                                                                                 $61 + $5 fixture (new
Mechanical permit (residential)                                                  construction) + $1 (state
                                                                                 surcharge)
Mobile home                                                                      Based on valuation1 + plan
                                                                                 check1
Modular home plan review                                                         Based on valuation1 + plan
                                                                                 check1
Plan check fees
   Additional consultant review (engineer, planner and the like)              Actual cost (may be billed
                                                                                 separately)
   Routine                                                                    65% of permit fee
Plumbing permit (commercial)                                                     Based on valuation1 + plan
                                                                                 check1
                                                                                 $61 + $5/fixture (new
Plumbing permit (residential)                                                    construction) + $1 (state
                                                                                 surcharge)
Replacement windows/doors (per structure)                                        $61 + $1 (state surcharge) $62
Re-roofing permit (per structure)                                                $61 + $1 (state surcharge) $62
Retaining wall permit over four feet in height                                   Based on valuation1 + plan
                                                                                 check1
RPZ                                                                              $61 + $1 (state surcharge) $62
Septic system tank demolition                                                    $50
Septic system permit/site inspection                                             $255
Septic system repair                                                             $125
Siding permit (per structure)                                                    $61 + $1 (state surcharge) $62
Sign permit
   Change in sign face (no increase in size)                                  $25
   Increase in size of existing sign                                          Based on valuation1 + plan
                                                                                 check1 $75 minimum
   New sign on existing support                                               Based on valuation1 + plan
                                                                                 check1 $75 minimum
   New permanent monument sign                                                Based on valuation1 + plan
                                                                                 check1 $75 minimum
   New permanent pole mounted sign                                            Based on valuation1 + plan
                                                                                 check1 $75 minimum
   New permanent wall sign                                                    Based on valuation1 + plan
                                                                                 check1 $75 minimum
   Non-profit event signage (if documented 501(c)(3))                         No cost
   Temporary/event signage                                                    $25
State surcharge                                                                  0.0005% of the job value ($1
                                                                                 minimum, up to $1,000,000)
Small cell wireless permit
                                                                                 $500 for collocation of up to
   Facility collocation permit                                                five small wireless, $100 per
                                                                                 small wireless facility beyond
                                                                                 five
   New structure permit                                                       $1,000 per new pole
Swimming pool permit                                                             Based on valuation1 + plan
                                                                                 check1 + state surcharge
Utility/ROW permit                                                               $100 + $3,000 escrow
Water heater                                                                     $15 + $1 (state surcharge) $16
Water softener                                                                   $15 + $1 (state surcharge) $16
Work without permit                                                              Double fee/fine
* Any building permit type not mentioned (e.g. residential, commercial, industrial, new construction) fee will
be based on valuation + plan check fee + state surcharge per Metro West Inspection Services Inc. Building
Permit Fee Schedule - 1997. When work requiring a permit has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, a
special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in
addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The
minimum investigation fee shall be no greater than the permit fee.
Fire
                                                                                 $75 fee upon receipt of third
                                                                                 false alarm notice at an
False alarm fine                                                                 address in one calendar year.
                                                                                 Each additional false alarm
                                                                                 after the third is $100
Inspections
   First follow-up                                                            $50
   Second follow-up                                                           $100
   Third follow-up                                                            $150
   Fourth follow-up                                                           $200
Planning and Development
Accessory building site plan review                                              $50
Administrative subdivision                                                       $300 application fee
                                                                                 $200 escrow fee
Comprehensive Plan amendment                                                     $300 application fee
                                                                                 $2,500 escrow fee
Concept plan review                                                              $300 application fee
                                                                                 $2,000 escrow fee
Conditional use permit (CUP)/interim use permit (IUP)
   All others                                                                 $300 application fee
                                                                                 $800 escrow fee
   Residential/agriculture                                                    $150 application fee
                                                                                 $400 escrow fee
Development/land use sign (for public hearings)                                  $50 per sign (as determined by
                                                                                 city staff)
Home occupation permit
   Administrative                                                             $50 application fee
   Extended home business                                                     Same as IUP fees and escrow
Park dedication fees
   Commercial                                                                 $5,512 per acre
   Industrial                                                                 $4,961 per acre
   Residential                                                                $3,156 per unit
Planned unit development
   Amendment                                                                  $300 application fee
                                                                                 $2,000 escrow fee
   Final                                                                      $300 application fee
                                                                                 $5,000 escrow fee
   Preliminary                                                                $300 application fee
                                                                                 $5,000 escrow fee
Plat fees
   Final plat                                                                 $300 application fee
                                                                                 $5,000 escrow fee
   Preliminary plat                                                           $300 application fee
                                                                                 $5,000 escrow fee
Rezoning or text amendment                                                       $300 application fee
                                                                                 $1,500 escrow fee
Site plan application                                                            $300 application fee
                                                                                 $500 escrow fee
                                                                                 $50 per lot included in final
Technology/software fee                                                          plat paid at time of
                                                                                 application
Trail dedication                                                                    $2,104/unit
Trail fee (bikeway/pathway)
   Internal trails (new plats)                                                $2,004/unit
Variance
   All other districts                                                        $300 application fee
                                                                                 $1,000 escrow fee
   Residential or agriculture district                                        $150 application fee
                                                                                 $500 escrow fee
Waiver of plat                                                                   $300 application fee
                                                                                 $1,500 escrow fee
Wetland applications
   Inspection of restoration plan                                             $250
   Land development WCA review - 1 - 25 lots                                  $300 application fee
                                                                                 $2,500 escrow fee
   Land development WCA review - 26 - 50 lots                                 $300 application fee
                                                                                 $3,000 escrow fee
                                                                                 $300 application fee
   Land development WCA review - each lot over 50                             $25 per lot escrow fee after
                                                                                 50 lots (base $3,000 escrow
                                                                                 fee)
   WCA violation                                                              $5,000 escrow fee
   Wetland application - exemption                                            $150 application fee
                                                                                 $650 escrow fee
   Wetland application - no loss determination                                $150 application fee
                                                                                 $250 escrow fee
   Wetland application - replacement plan                                     $150 application fee
                                                                                 $1,250 escrow fee
   Wetland banking application                                                $150 application fee
                                                                                 $1,250 escrow fee
   Wetland delineation review                                                 $150 application fee
                                                                                 $650 escrow fee
Zoning permit                                                                    $50
In addition to the above fees, applicants shall be responsible for any and all staff fees, attorney’s fees and
outside consultant fees incurred by the city for review of the application and other appurtenant work. The
current attorney’s fee hourly rate is $200 - $225 (subject to change). The applicant shall be required to
deposit with the city an escrow in an amount determined by the city sufficient for payment of projected staff,
attorney’s and outside consultant fees. If the escrow amount is not deposited with the city, the application
shall be deemed incomplete.
Police
                                                                                 $75 fee upon receipt of third
                                                                                 false alarm notice at an
False alarm fine                                                                 address in one calendar year.
                                                                                 Each additional false alarm
                                                                                 after the third is $100
Finger printing                                                                  $15
Police reports                                                                   $10
DEVELOPMENT TRUNK AND CONNECTION FEES
CONNECTION FEES (at building permit)
Sewer Access Charge (SAC)
   Non-residential                                                            $3,218/unit ($733 City +
                                                                                 $2,485 MCES)
   Residential                                                                $3,218/unit ($733 City +
                                                                                 $2,485 MCES)
Water Access Charge (WAC)
   Non-residential                                                            $8,736/acre
   Residential                                                                $2,912/unit
Water Access Charge (South - Maple Grove) paid to Maple Grove
   Non-residential                                                            $9,395/acre; or current fee
                                                                                 charged by Maple Grove
   Residential                                                                $2,350/unit (neighborhoods in
                                                                                 South Dayton)
PARK AND TRAIL DEDICATION
Park dedication
   Non-residential                                                            $5,512 per acre commercial and
                                                                                 $4,961 per acre industrial
   Residential                                                                $3,156/unit
Trail dedication
   Residential                                                                $2,104/unit
TRUNK AREA CHARGES
Sanitary Sewer
   Non-residential                                                            $5,374/acre
   Residential                                                                Higher of $1,791/unit or
                                                                                 $5,374/acre
                                                                                 Credit eligibility calculated
Sanitary Sewer lateral benefit charge (residential and non- residential)         as part of development
                                                                                 agreement
Storm Water
   Non-residential                                                            $7,119/acre
   Residential                                                                $7,119/acre
Water
   Non-residential                                                            $7,285/acre
   Residential                                                                Higher of $2,428/unit or
                                                                                 $7,285/acre
Notes
Acre represents development acre defined as: developable area = total area - wetland per NWI)
Per unit residential is based on 3/units per acre.
1   See Metro West Inspection Services Inc. Building Permit Fee Schedule - 1997. This 1997 fee schedule
developed by Metro West remains in effect and details permit fees, plan check fees, and state surcharges based
on valuation of work.
 
(Ord. 2009-16, passed 12-8-2009; Ord. 2015-01, passed 1-28-2015; Ord. 2016-06,
passed 4-12-2016; Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-9-2018; Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-8-2019)
FUNDS
§ 35.15  PARK DEVELOPMENT FUND.
   (A)   Fund established. There is hereby established in the city, in addition
to other funds established in accordance with law, a Park Development Fund.
Said Fund shall be utilized for any legal expenditure and park development
expenditures as recommended by the Park Commission and City Council, including
replacement and purchase of park equipment as authorized from time to time by
the city. The Fund shall be maintained by the City Administrator or Financial
Officer in an authorized banking institution in investments permitted by law as
approved by the City Council.
   (B)   Fund investments. The City Council shall annually appropriate an
amount determined by it to be placed in the Park Development Fund from the
General Fund or any other available fund or account of the city. The Park
Commission shall make a recommendation prior to City Council action.
   (C)   Intra-fund transfers. In the event that the City Council determines
that it is necessary to transfer funds from the Park Development Fund for a
non-fund purpose to another fund or account to be utilized for some other
purpose than that set forth in division (A) above, the transfer shall be made
only upon resolution of the City Council setting forth the date and time of
repayment to the Park Development Fund and the interest, if any, to be paid.
(Ord. 98-11, passed 12-22-1998)
§ 35.16  CAPITAL OUTLAY RESERVE FUND.
   (A)   Fund established.
      (1)   There is hereby established in the city, in addition to other funds
established in accordance with law, a Capital Outlay Reserve Fund. Said Fund
shall be utilized for capital expenditures as may be designated from time to
time by the city, including, replacement and purchase of equipment and
buildings.
      (2)   The Fund shall be maintained by the City Clerk or Finance Director
in an authorized banking institution in investments permitted by law as
approved by the City Council.
(1978 Code, § 214.01)
   (B)   Fund investments. The Council shall annually appropriate an amount as
determined by it to be placed in the Capital Outlay Reserve Fund from the
General Fund or any other available fund or account of the city.
(1978 Code, § 214.02)
   (C)   Intra-fund transfers. In the event that the Council determines that it
is necessary to transfer funds from the Capital Outlay Reserve Fund to another
fund or account to be utilized for some other purpose than that set forth in
division (A) above, the transfer shall be made only upon resolution of the
Council setting forth the date and time of repayment to the Capital Outlay
Reserve Fund and the interest, if any, to be paid.
(1978 Code, § 214.03)
(Ord. 86-9, passed 9-15-1986)
§ 35.17  CABLE REVENUE FUND.
   (A)   Fund established. There is hereby established in the city, in addition
to other funds established in accordance with law, a Cable Revenue Fund. Said
Fund shall be utilized for any legal expenditure as authorized from time to
time by the city. The Fund shall be maintained by the City Clerk or Finance
Director in an authorized banking institution in investments permitted by law
as approved by the City Council.
(1978 Code, § 215.01)
   (B)   Fund investments. The Council shall appropriate all amounts received
from the cable television franchise fee to be placed in the Cable Revenue Fund.
(1978 Code, § 215.02)
   (C)   Intra-fund transfers. In the event that the Council determines that it
is necessary to transfer funds from the Cable Revenue Fund to another fund or
account to be utilized for some other purpose than that set forth in division
(A) above, the transfer shall be made only upon resolution of the Council
setting forth the date and time of repayment to the Cable Revenue Fund and the
interest, if any, to be paid.
(1978 Code, § 215.03)
(Ord. 87-14, passed 9-21-1987)
TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SOLID WASTE
      
51.   WASTEWATER; SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
      
52.   WATER SYSTEM
CHAPTER 50:  SOLID WASTE
Section
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Unauthorized accumulation, scattering and the like
   
50.03   Disposal required
   
50.04   Containers
   
50.05   Vehicles
§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Organic waste resulting from the preparation of food and decayed
and spoiled food from any source.
   RECYCLABLES. Paper, plastic, tin cans, aluminum, motor oil, glass and other
metal goods, each separated or otherwise prepared so as to be acceptable to the
recycling center where they are to be deposited.
   RECYCLING CENTER. Premises within the city approved by the Council for
receipt, storage and processing of recyclables, and premises outside the city
approved as a recycling center by the local unit of government having
jurisdiction.
   REFUSE. Includes, garbage and rubbish, but shall not include sewage.
   RUBBISH. Non-garbage solid waste such as tin cans, glass, paper, sweepings,
clippings, ash and the like.
(1978 Code, § 501.01)
§ 50.02  UNAUTHORIZED ACCUMULATION, SCATTERING AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Unauthorized accumulation. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on
any premises is a nuisance and prohibited.
   (B)   Refuse on public and private property. No person shall place any
refuse in any street, alley or public place and no person, except the rightful
owner of the property, shall place any refuse upon private property, except in
proper containers for collection or other lawful disposal. No person shall
throw or deposit refuse in any stream or other body of water.
   (C)   Scattering of refuse. No person shall deposit anywhere within the city
any refuse in any manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements
upon any public place or any other premises within the city.
   (D)   Burying of refuse. No person shall bury any refuse in the city. This
division (D) does not prevent anyone from residential composting, commercial
composting or landspreading when done in accordance with §§
90.01 through
90.04 of this code of ordinances.
(1978 Code, § 501.02)  (Ord. 90-11, passed 4-16-1990)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.03  DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
   Every person shall, in a sanitary manner, store and dispose of refuse that
may accumulate upon property owned or occupied by him or her in accordance with
the terms of this chapter. All refuse shall be collected at least once per
week. Refuse shall be collected from hotels, restaurants, grocery stores and
all other commercial establishments producing garbage three times per week.
(1978 Code, § 501.03)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.04  CONTAINERS.
   (A)   General requirement. Every householder, occupant or owner of any
residence and any restaurant, industrial establishment or commercial
establishment shall provide on the premises one or more containers to receive
and contain all refuse which may accumulate between collections or other
disposal. All normal accumulations of refuse shall be deposited in such
containers except that leaves, trimmings from shrubs, grass clippings,
shavings, excelsior and other rubbish of similar volume and weight may be
stored in closed containers not meeting the requirements of division (B) below.
   (B)   Container requirements. Each container shall be water-tight, shall be
impervious to insects and rodents, shall be fire-proof and shall not exceed 32
gallons in capacity; except that, any construction site, commercial or business
establishment having refuse volume exceeding two cubic yards per week shall
provide bulk or box-type refuse storage containers of a type approved by the
Council. Containers shall be maintained in good and sanitary condition. Any
container not conforming to the requirements of this chapter or having ragged
or sharp edges or any other defect likely to hamper or injure the person
collecting the contents shall be promptly replaced after notice by the city.
   (C)   Placement. The container shall be placed near the rear door of the
building which it serves. If required by the refuse collector, the container
shall be placed at the front property line for collection, but it shall not be
so placed before 8:00 p.m. the night before collection and shall be removed by
6:00 p.m. the day of collection.
   (D)   Use of containers. Refuse shall be drained of liquid and household
garbage shall be wrapped before being deposited in a container. Highly
inflammable or explosive material shall not be placed in containers.
(1978 Code, § 501.04)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.05  VEHICLES.
   Each refuse collection vehicle shall be marked on the outside so as to
identify the licensee. Every vehicle used for hauling garbage shall be covered,
leak-proof, durable and of easily cleanable construction. Every vehicle used
for hauling refuse shall be sufficiently air-tight and so used as to prevent
unreasonable quantities of dust, paper or other collected materials to escape.
Every vehicle shall be kept clean to prevent nuisances, pollution or insect
breeding and shall be maintained in good repair.
(1978 Code, § 501.05)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 51:  WASTEWATER; SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
Section
Sanitary Sewer Discharges
   
51.01   Purpose
   
51.02   Discharge prohibited
   
51.03   Disconnection
   
51.04   Inspections
   
51.05   New construction
   
51.06   Winter discharge
Individual Sewage Treatment Systems
   
51.20   General provisions
   
51.21   Definitions
   
51.22   Standards incorporated by reference
   
51.23   Administration
   
51.24   Permitting
   
51.25   Construction inspections
   
51.26   Existing systems
   
51.27   Violations
   
51.28   Additional standards for health and environmental protection
   
51.29   More restrictive standards
   
51.30   Fees
Wastewater Treatment and Collection Facilities
   
51.40   Definitions
   
51.41   Control by authorized representative
   
51.42   Use of public sewers required
   
51.43   Private wastewater disposal
   
51.44   Building sewers and connections; design
   
51.45   Use of public wastewater treatment facilities
   
51.46   Prosecution for damages to the facility
   
51.47   Powers and authority of inspectors
   
51.48   Sewer service charge system
 
   
51.99   Penalty
SANITARY SEWER DISCHARGES
§ 51.01  PURPOSE.
   The discharge of water from roof, surface, ground water sump pump, footing
tile, swimming pool, natural precipitation or private sewage system into the
city sewerage system results in flooding and overloading of the sewage system.
When this water is discharged into the sanitary sewer system, it is treated at
the Metropolitan Sewage Treatment Plant. This results in very large and
needless expenditures. The City Council, therefore, finds it in the best
interest of the city to prohibit such discharges and to impose surcharges
estimating the burden placed on the system from unlawful discharge.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 4-14-2009)
§ 51.02  DISCHARGE PROHIBITED.
   Except as otherwise expressly authorized in this subchapter, no water from
any roof, surface, ground water sump pump, footing tile, swimming pool, spa,
hot tub, natural precipitation or private sewage system shall be discharged
into the sanitary sewer system. Dwellings and other buildings and structures
which require, because of infiltration of water into basements, crawl spaces
and the like, a sump pump discharge system shall have a permanently installed
discharge line which shall not at any time discharge water into the sanitary
sewer system, except as provided herein. A permanent installation shall be one
which provides for year-round discharge capability to the outside of the
dwelling, building or structure. A direct connection to the public storm sewer
or street in public right-of-way/easement shall be reviewed by the city and may
require a permit. The water discharge shall be a free discharge. An air
separation shall be provided before connecting to a public storm sewer.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 4-14-2009)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.03  DISCONNECTION.
   Any person, firm or corporation having a roof surface, ground water sump
pump, footing tile or swimming pool now connected and/or discharging into the
sanitary sewer system shall disconnect or remove same. Any disconnects or
openings in the sanitary sewer system shall be closed or repaired in an
effective, workmanlike manner.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 4-14-2009)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.04  INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Every person owning improved real estate that discharges into the
city’s sanitary sewer system shall allow an employee of the city or a
designated representative of the city to inspect the buildings to confirm that
there is no sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer
system. In lieu of having the city inspect his or her property, any person may
furnish a certificate from a licensed plumber certifying that his or her
property is in compliance with this subchapter.
   (B)   Each sump pump connection identified may be reinspected periodically
for compliance with this subchapter.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 4-14-2009)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.05  NEW CONSTRUCTION.
   All new dwellings with sumps for which a building permit is issued after 1-
1-2009 shall be piped to the outside of the dwelling before a certificate of
occupancy is issued.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 4-14-2009)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06  WINTER DISCHARGE.
   (A)   The City Administrator is authorized to issue a permit to allow a
property owner to discharge surface water into the sanitary sewer system.
   (B)   The permit shall authorize such discharge only from November 15 to
March 15 and a property owner is required to meet at least one of the following
criteria in order to obtain the permit:
      (1)   The freezing of the surface water discharge from the sump pump or
footing drain is causing a dangerous condition, such as ice buildup or
flooding, on either public or private property;
      (2)   The property owner has demonstrated that there is a danger that the
sump pump or footing drain pipes will freeze up and result in either failure or
damage to the sump pump unit or the footing drain and cause basement flooding;
and/or
      (3)   The water being discharged from the sump pump or footing drain
cannot be readily discharged into a storm drain or other acceptable drainage
system.
   (C)   Following ten days’ written notice and an opportunity to be heard, the
City Administrator may require a property to discharge its sump pump into the
sanitary sewer from November 15 to March 15 if surface water discharge is
causing an icy condition on streets.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 4-14-2009)
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS
§ 51.20  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. This subchapter is enacted to provide minimum standards for
the regulation of subsurface sewage treatment systems (ISTS) including: their
proper location, design and construction; their necessary modification and
reconstruction; their operation, maintenance and repair for the purpose of
protecting surface water and groundwater from contamination by human sewage and
waterborne household and commercial wastes; the protection of the public’s
health and safety; and the elimination and prevention of the development of
public nuisances, pursuant to the authority granted under M.S. Chs. 115 and
145A, as they may be amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules Chs. 7080, 7081
and 7082, that may pertain to sewage and wastewater treatment. All sewage
generated in unsewered areas of the county shall be treated and dispersed by an
approved SSTS that is sited, designed, installed, operated and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter or by a system that has been
permitted by the MPCA.
   (B)   Sewage discharge to ground surface or surface water. It is unlawful
for any person to construct, maintain, or use any wastewater treatment system
regulated under this subchapter that results in raw or partially treated
wastewater seeping to the ground surface or flowing into any surface water. Any
surface discharging system must be permitted by the MPCA under the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System program.
   (C)   Objectives. The principal objectives of this subchapter are as
follows:
      (1)   The protection of the city’s lakes, rivers and streams, wetlands,
and groundwater essential to the promotion of public health, safety, welfare,
socioeconomic growth and development of the city in perpetuity;
      (2)   The regulation of proper ISTS construction, reconstruction, repair
and maintenance to prevent the entry and migration of contaminants, thereby
ensuring the non-degradation of surface water and groundwater;
      (3)   The establishment of minimum standards for ISTS placement, design,
construction, reconstruction, repair and maintenance to prevent contamination
and, if contamination is discovered, the identification and control of its
consequences and the abatement of its source and migration;
      (4)   The appropriate utilization of privy vaults and other non-water
carried ISTS; and
      (5)   The prevention and control of water-borne disease, lake
degradation, groundwater related hazards, and public nuisance conditions
through technical assistance and education, plan reviews, inspections, ISTS
surveys and complaint investigation.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 2-25-2015) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.21  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Dayton Planning and Building Department and its designated
agents who shall be a qualified employee or licensee.
   ISTS. An individual sewage treatment system as defined in Minn. Rules
7080.1100, subp. 41.
   MSTS. A Midsized Subsurface Sewage Treatment System as defined in Minn.
Rules 7081.0020, subp.4.
   OTHER ESTABLISHMENT.  Any private or public structure, other than a
dwelling, that generates sewage having characteristics other than residential-
type waste or has an average waste flow greater than 2,000 gallons per day and
discharges to an individual sewage treatment system.
   OWNER.  The fee owner(s) and, if applicable, the contract-for-deed
purchaser. Ownership interests shall be determined by reference to the records
of the county. The owner of each lot served by an ISTS is responsible for the
lawful operation and maintenance of each ISTS.
   SSTS. Subsurface Sewage Treatment System as defined in Minn. Rules
7080.1100, subp. 82.
   TYPE I SYSTEM. An ISTS designed according to Minn. Rules parts 7080.2200 to
7080.2240.
   TYPE II SYSTEM. An ISTS designed according to Minn. Rules parts 7080.2250 to
7080.2290.
   TYPE III SYSTEM. An ISTS designed according to Minn. Rules 7080.2300.
   TYPE IV SYSTEM. An ISTS designed according to Minn. Rules 7080.2350.
   TYPE V SYSTEM. An ISTS designed according to Minn. Rules 7080.2400.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 2-25-2015)
§ 51.22  STANDARDS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
   This subchapter hereby incorporates by reference Minn. Rules Chs. 7080 and
7081, as they may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 2-25-2015)
§ 51.23  ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Generally. The city shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
      (1)   To review all applications for ISTS;
      (2)   To issue all required permits;
      (3)   To conduct construction inspections and to perform all necessary
tests to determine its conformance with this subchapter;
      (4)   To investigate complaints regarding ISTS;
      (5)   To perform compliance inspections and to issue certificates of
compliance or notices of noncompliance where appropriate;
      (6)   To issue stop work orders and notices of violation pursuant to this
subchapter;
      (7)   To take complaints to the Municipal or County Attorney for
violations of this subchapter;
      (8)   To maintain proper records for ISTS including site evaluation
records, design records including calculations and summaries for all system
component sizings and as-builts, complaints on noncompliance, compliance
inspections, site evaluations, applications and exhibits, variance requests,
issued permits, certificates of compliance, and enforcement proceedings; and
      (9)   To submit annual reports to the MPCA to demonstrate enforcement of
this subchapter per Minn. Rules 7082.0040, Subpart 5, as it may be amended from
time to time.
   (B)   Issuance of notices. Neither the issuance of permits, certificates of
compliance nor notices of noncompliance as requested or issued shall be
construed to represent a guarantee or warranty of the system’s operation or
effectiveness. Such certificates signify that the system in question is or has
been designed and installed in compliance or non-compliance with the provision
of these standards and regulations.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 2-25-2015)
§ 51.24  PERMITTING.
   (A)   Required permits. A permit from the city is required before any ISTS
in city’s jurisdiction is installed, replaced, abandoned, altered, repaired,
rejuvenated or extended. Installation, replacement, alteration, repair or
extension of an ISTS shall not begin prior to the receipt of a permit from the
city for each specific installation, replacement, alteration, repair or
extension pursuant to this subchapter. Such permits are not transferable as to
person or place. Such permits shall expire 12 months after date of issuance.
Upon request of an inspector, permits shall be provided by the permittee at the
time of inspection.
   (B)   Permits not required. Permits shall not be required for the following
activities:
      (1)   Repair or replacement of pumps, floats or other electrical devices
of the pump;
      (2)   Repair or replacement of baffles in the septic tank;
      (3)   Installation or repair of inspection pipes and manhole covers;
      (4)   Repair or replacement of the line from the building to the septic
tank; or
      (5)   Repair or replacement of the line from the septic tank or pump
chamber to the distribution box of lines.
   (C)   Permit application. All applications for an ISTS permit shall include
the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of property owner;
      (2)   Property identification number;
      (3)   Legal description of the property;
      (4)   ISTS designer name, address, telephone number and state MPCA
license number (or city qualified employee name and number);
      (5)   ISTS installer name, address, telephone number and MPCA license
number;
      (6)   Site evaluation report on forms approved by the city;
      (7)   System design with full information including applicable
construction information on forms approved by the city;
      (8)   The location of at least one designated additional soil treatment
area that can support system as described in Minn. Rules parts 7080.2200
through 7080.2230, or site conditions described in Minn. Rules 7081.0270,
subps. 3 through 7, on lots created after January 23, 1996;
      (9)   A management plan as described in Minn. Rules 7082.0600 and this
subchapter; and
      (10)   Any other information requested pertinent to the process.
   (D)   Operating permit.
      (1)   An operating permit is required for all treatment systems installed
under Minn. Rules 7080.2290 (holding tanks), Minn. Rules 7080.2350-2400 (Type
IV & V Systems), and Minn. Rules Ch. 7081 (MSTS). Sewage shall not be
discharged to a treatment system requiring an operating permit until the city
certifies that the treatment system was installed in substantial conformance
with the approved plans, receives the final record drawings of the SSTS, and a
valid operating permit is issued to the owner.
      (2)   The operating permit shall be valid for 12 months and renewed by
the expiration date. The city shall review all required monitoring data
submitted from the previous year and the renewal application before approving
any subsequent operating permits. An operating permit shall include:
         (a)   A detailed description of the operation, maintenance, and
monitoring, reporting and compliance limits and boundaries necessary to ensure
both continued system performance as designed and protection of public health
and the environment for the life of the system;
         (b)   A requirement that the person responsible for monitoring notify
the city when monitoring plan requirements are not met;
         (c)   A disclosure of the location and condition of the additional
soil treatment and dispersal system;
         (d)   A stipulation of acceptable and prohibited discharges; and
         (e)   The signatures of the system designer and owner.
   (E)   Compliance monitoring.
      (1)   Performance monitoring of a SSTS shall be performed by a licensed
inspection business or licensed service provider hired by the holder of the
operating permit in accordance with the monitoring frequency and parameters
stipulated in the permit.
      (2)   A monitoring report shall be prepared and certified by the licensed
inspection business or licensed service provider. The report shall be submitted
to the department on or before the compliance reporting date stipulated in the
operating permit. The report shall contain a description of the maintenance and
servicing activities performed since the last compliance monitoring report as
described below:
         (a)   Owner name and address;
         (b)   Operating permit number;
         (c)   Average daily flow since last compliance monitoring report;
         (d)   Description of type of maintenance and date performed;
         (e)   Description of sample taken (if required), analytical laboratory
used and results of analyses;
         (f)   Problems noted with the system and actions proposed or taken to
correct them; and
         (g)   Name, signature, license and license number of the licensed
professional who performed the work.
   (F)   License requirements. All design, installation, alteration, repair,
maintenance, operation, pumping and inspection activities for SSTS located in
the county must be completed by a business licensed by the state under Minn.
Rules Ch. 7083, an appropriately certified qualified employee, or a person
exempted under Minn. Rules 7083.0700, subps. 1(A), (C), (D), (F), (G), (H) and
(I). Individuals exempt from a state SSTS license under Minn. Rules 7083.0700,
subps. 1(A), (C), (D), (F), (G), (H) and (I), must follow all applicable local,
state and federal requirements. Property owners that employ a business to
perform this work must hire a business that is licensed in accordance with
Minn. Rules Ch. 7083.
   (G)   Application review and determination. If after consideration of the
application for a permit, the city determines that the proposed work complies
with provision of this subchapter, the city shall issue a written permit
granting preliminary approval authorizing initiation of the work as proposed.
If the city determines that the proposed work will not comply with the
provisions of this subchapter, the city shall deny the permit application. The
permit application may be revised or corrected and resubmitted to the city for
reconsideration.
   (H)   Variances.
      (1)   Variances to wells and water supply lines require approval from the
Minnesota Department of Health. The city may grant variances to the technical
standards and criteria of Minn. Rules Ch. 7080 or this subchapter. However, the
city is prohibited from granting variances to:
         (a)   Minn. Rules 7080.2150, Subp. 2;
         (b)   Minn. Rules 7081.0080, Subps. 2 to 5, however, variances may be
granted to Minn. Rules 7081.0080, Subp. 4(0)(1), for the replacement of MSTS
serving existing dwellings or other establishments; and
         (c)   Flow determinations under Minn. Rules 7081.0110, if the
deviation reduces the average daily flow from more than 10,000 gallons to
10,000 gallons per day or less.
      (2)   All requests for a variance shall be requested in writing to the
city on forms approved by the city.
   (I)   Periodically saturated soil disagreements.
      (1)   If a documented discrepancy arises on the depth of the periodically
saturated soil between licensed businesses for SSTS design or compliance
purposes, all disputing parties must follow the procedure outlined in this
subsection.
         (a)   The disputing parties must meet at the disputed site in an
attempt to resolve differences; and
         (b)   If the provision does not resolve the differences, then:
            1.   Obtain an opinion from a state licensed professional soil
scientist who is a certified SSTS designer or inspector and who is independent
of, and agreed upon by, both parties; and
            2.   If opinions rendered do not resolve the dispute, all initial
and follow-up documents and information generated must be submitted to the
city. The city shall take into consideration all information and opinions
rendered and make a final judgment. The city shall render findings of fact,
conclusions of law and findings setting forth the reasons for any final
decisions it renders.
      (2)   If a documented discrepancy arises on the depth of the periodically
saturated soil between an SSTS licensed business and the city for SSTS design
or compliance purposes, all disputing parties shall follow the procedure
outlined in this item.
         (a)   A representative of the city and the licensed business must meet
at the disputed site in an attempt to resolve differences.
         (b)   If the provision does not resolve differences, then the SSTS
licensed business may obtain an opinion from a state licensed professional soil
scientist who is a certified SSTS designer or inspector and who is independent
of, and agreed upon by, both parties.
         (c)   If still unresolved, the city shall take into consideration all
information and opinions rendered and make a final judgment. The city shall
render findings of fact, conclusions of law and findings setting forth the
reasons for any final decisions they render.
      (3)   Upon resolution of a dispute, amendments to initial disputed
documents containing the resolution shall be made and submitted to the city and
all other parties involved.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 2-25-2015)
§ 51.25  CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Requirements. Compliance inspections shall be conducted by the city
anytime an ISTS is installed, replaced, altered, repaired or extended. The
installation and construction of the ISTS shall be in accordance with the
permit requirements and application design. If any ISTS component is covered
before being inspected by the city, it shall be uncovered if so ordered by the
city. Proposals to alter the permitted construction shall be reviewed and the
proposed change accepted by the city prior to construction. Inspections shall
be conducted at least once during the construction that is prior to covering of
the ISTS to assure that the system has been constructed per the submitted and
approved design.
   (B)   Inspector. Compliance inspections for construction, replacement,
alteration or repair work on ISTS shall be conducted by the city.
   (C)   Request for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permittee to
notify the city of the date and time the inspection is requested at least 24
hours (excluding weekend days and holidays) preceding the requested inspection
time. If the permitee provides proper notice as described above and the city
does not appear for an inspection within two hours after the time scheduled,
the permitee may complete the installation and submit an as-built for the
system.
   (D)   Access to premises and records. Upon the request of the city, the
applicant, owner, permittee or any other person shall allow access at any
reasonable time to the affected premises as well as any related records, for
the purposes of regulating and enforcing this subchapter. If entry is refused,
the city shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
No person shall hinder or otherwise interfere with the city in the performance
of their duties and responsibilities pursuant to the enforcement of this
subchapter. Refusal to allow reasonable access to the city shall be deemed a
separate and distinct offense, whether or not any other specific violations are
cited.
   (E)   Stop work orders. Whenever any ISTS work is being done contrary to the
provisions of this subchapter, the city may order the work stopped by verbal or
written notice served upon the installer or the owner of the land. All
installation and construction shall cease and desist until subsequent
authorization to proceed is received from the city.
   (F)   As-builts. As-builts shall be submitted to the city within five
working days of completion of the work on the ISTS on forms provided or
approved by the city. The as-built shall include photographs of the system
prior to covering and a certified statement that the work was installed in
accordance with submitted design and permit conditions and that it was free
from defects. If an as-built is not submitted, the city may require the
uncovering of the system for inspection.
   (G)   Inspection reports. A certificate of compliance or notice of
noncompliance shall be prepared by the city following an inspection or review
of as-builts submitted in accordance with division (F) of this section. A
certificate of compliance or notice of noncompliance shall include a signed
statement by the inspector identifying the type of ISTS inspected and whether
the system is in compliance with Minnesota Rules. A copy of the certificate of
compliance or notice of noncompliance shall be provided to the property owner
within 30 days of the compliance inspection and a copy kept on file with the
city.
      (1)   Certificates of compliance issued by the city for new construction
and replacement shall be valid for five years from the date of the compliance
inspection or as-built certification unless the health authority or licensed
inspector identifies the system as an imminent public health threat.
      (2)   Notices of violation may be issued with notices of noncompliance
when the city determines that new construction, replacement or repairs are not
in compliance with this subchapter.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 2-25-2015)
§ 51.26  EXISTING SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Requirements. The city shall require a compliance inspection of an
existing system whenever:
      (1)   In designated shoreland management or wellhead protection areas, an
application for any type of building or land use permit is made;
      (2)   The city deems a compliance inspection necessary, including, but
not limited to, upon receipt of information of a potential ISTS failure or
imminent health threat;
      (3)   An additional bedroom on the property is requested. If a request
for an additional bedroom is received between November 1 and April 30, the city
may issue a building permit immediately with the contingent requirement that a
compliance inspection of the existing ISTS shall be completed by the following
June 1 and the applicant submits a certificate of compliance by the following
September 30; or
      (4)   Any addition or remodel of a licensed food, beverage, or lodging
establishment or any other establishment where the sewage treatment system’s
designed flow may be effected.
   (B)   Inspector. Only the city or licensed designer I or inspector, shall
conduct an inspection when a compliance inspection is required for an existing
ISTS.
   (C)   SSTS built before April 1, 1996.  SSTS built before April 1, 1996,
outside of areas designated as shoreland areas, wellhead protection areas, or
SSTS providing sewage treatment for food, beverage, or lodging establishments
must have at least two feet of vertical separation between the bottom of the
dispersal system and seasonal saturation or bedrock. The vertical separation
measurement shall be made outside the area of system influence in an area of
similar soil.
   (D)   SSTS built after March 31, 1996. SSTS built after March 31, 1996, or
SSTS located in a shoreland area, wellhead protection area, or serving a food,
beverage, or lodging establishment as defined under Minn. Rules 7080.1100,
subp. 84, must have a three-foot vertical separation between the bottom soil
infiltrative surface and the periodically saturated soil and/or bedrock. Unless
otherwise determined by the city, existing systems that have no more than a 15%
reduction to the minimum required 36-inch separation distance are considered
compliant, (such as, a separation distance no less than 30.6 inches). This
reduction is to account for settling of sand or soil, normal variation of
separation distance measurements and interpretation of limiting layer
characteristics. The vertical separation measurement shall be made outside the
area of the system influence in an area of similar soil.
   (E)   Abandonment of existing systems. Whenever the use of a SSTS or any
system component is discontinued as the result of a system repair,
modification, replacement or decommissioning following connection to a
municipal or private sanitary sewer, or condemnation or demolition of a
building served by the system, further use of the system or any system
component for any purpose is prohibited. Abandonment shall be completed in
accordance with Minn. Rules 7080.2500.
   (F)   Inspection reports. A copy of the certificate of compliance or notice
of noncompliance resulting from a compliance inspection shall be provided to
the property owner and the city within 30 calendar days of inspection.
   (G)   Certificates of compliance issued by a licensed ISTS Inspector for an
existing system shall be valid for three years from the date of the compliance
inspection unless the city or licensed inspector identifies the system as an
imminent public health threat.
   (H)   Notice. A notice of noncompliance shall be issued in the following
circumstances and the conditions noted in violation of this subchapter shall be
remedied as follows:
      (1)   An ISTS determined to be failing shall be upgraded, replaced or
repaired in accord with Minnesota Rules Chs. 7080 or 7081, as they may be
amended from time to time, within three years, or its use is discontinued. The
city, at its discretion, may grant an extension of an additional two years.
      (2)   An ISTS posing an imminent threat to public health or safety shall
be upgraded, replaced or repaired within ten months. The city will give
consideration to weather conditions in determining compliance dates. If an ISTS
is determined to be a public health nuisance by the city, the city may order
the owner of the ISTS to cease use immediately and not allow use of the ISTS
until it is corrected in accordance with the recommendations of the city.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 2-25-2015) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.27  VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Cause to issue a notice of violation. Noncompliance with this
subchapter by an applicant, permittee, installer or other person, as determined
by the city, shall constitute a violation.
   (B)   Serving a notice of violation. The city shall serve, in person or by
mail, a notice of violation upon any person determined to be not in compliance
with this subchapter.
   (C)   Contents of a notice of violation. A notice of violation shall contain
the following:
      (1)   A statement documenting the findings of fact determined through
inspections, reinspection or investigation;
      (2)   A list of specific violation or violations of this subchapter;
      (3)   The specific requirements for correction or removal of the
specified violation; and
      (4)   A mandatory time schedule for correction, removal and compliance
with this subchapter.
   (D)   Notification of MPCA. The city shall in accordance with state law
notify the MPCA of any inspection, installation, design, construction,
alteration or repair of an ISTS by a licensed person or any pumping by a
licensed pumper performed in violation of the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 2-25-2015)
§ 51.28  ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR HEALTH AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION.
   (A)   Siting of an ISTS. Notwithstanding any state or federal requirements,
the separation distance from an ISTS to a Type 3, 4, 5 or 6 wetland shall be no
less than 50 feet.
      (1)   SSTS in flood plains. No permit shall be issued for SSTS located in
a floodway and wherever possible, located within any part of a floodplain
should be avoided. If no option exists to locate a SSTS outside of a
floodplain, location within the flood fringe is allowed if the requirements of
Minn. Rules 7080.2270 and all relevant local requirements are met.
      (2)   Class V injection wells. All owners of new or replacement SSTS that
are considered to be Class V injection wells as defined in C.F.R. Title 40,
Part 144, are required to submit SSTS inventory information to the United
States Environmental Protection Agency and the MPCA. Owners are also required
to identify all Class V injection wells in property transfer disclosures.
      (3)   Holding tanks. Holding tanks may be used for the following
applications only after it can be shown conclusively by the property owner that
a SSTS permitted under this subchapter cannot be feasibly installed:
         (a)   As a replacement for an existing failing SSTS;
         (b)   For an SSTS that poses an imminent threat to public health or
safety; or
         (c)   For use with buildings with limited water use.
      (4)   Determination of hydraulic loading rate and SSTS sizing. Table IX
from Minn. Rules 7080.2150, subp. 3(E), entitled Loading Rates for Determining
Bottom Absorption Area for Trenches and Seepage Beds for Effluent Treatment
Level C and Absorption Ratios for Determining Mound Absorption Areas Using
Detail Soil Descriptions and Table IX from Minn. Rules 7080.2150, subp. 3(E),
entitled Loading Rates for Determining Bottom Absorption Area for Trenches and
Seepage Beds for Effluent Treatment Level C and Absorption Ratios for
Determining Mound Absorption Areas Using Percolation Tests and herein adopted
by reference shall both be used to size SSTS infiltration areas using the
larger sizing factor of the two for SSTS design.
   (B)   Maintenance report. Licensed maintenance businesses must abide by the
requirements described in Minn. Rules 7083.0770, subp. 2. All written reports
required by Minn. Rules 7083.0770, subp. 2, must be provided to the homeowner
and the city within 30 days after any maintenance work is performed.
   (C)   Systems not operated under a management plan. For owners of SSTS that
are not operated under a management plan or operating permit, the following
shall apply:
      (1)   Maintenance, inspection and reporting.
         (a)   The owner of any individual sewage treatment system shall have
the septic tank(s) properly pumped, cleaned and inspected on a regular basis,
but in no case less than once every three years.
         (b)   A licensed pumper must be retained by the owner for pumping,
cleaning, inspection, maintenance and repair.
         (c)   In the event a septic pumper fails to complete the maintenance
report form and return it to the city as required herein, the city, pursuant to
M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, the city shall provide
written notice to the property owner. After providing a second written notice,
the failure to submit documentation of pumping and inspection of a septic
system shall be considered a violation of this subchapter and subject to the
criminal penalties and/or civil remedies outlined in §
51.99 of this chapter. The city may provide for the property owner’s septic
system to be pumped, cleaned and evaluated and for all costs related hereto to
be assessed against the property benefitted.
      (2)   Maintenance report form.
         (a)   Evaluation of the on-site sewage tank and system shall be made
by a licensed inspector or pumper. A listing of licensed pumpers is available
from the MPCA and will also be available from the city.
         (b)   The above-described system maintenance shall include, but not be
limited to, pumping and cleaning of the septic tank, evaluation of the
condition of the tank, baffles and system, and an examination of the drain
field for evidence of system failure.
         (c)   For ISTS having inspection openings, the inspection should also
include the following measurements:
            1.   The distance between sludge and the bottom of outlet baffles;
and
            2.   The distance between scum and the bottom of outlet baffles.
         (d)   Where there is less than 12 inches between the sludge and the
bottom of the outlet baffles, or where the scum line is found less than three
inches above the bottom of the outlet baffles, this condition shall be noted on
the inspection report.
         (e)   The owner shall require remedial activity to take place to
correct deficiencies wherever found.
      (3)   Failing septic systems.
         (a)   Upon inspection, if the system is found to be failing or
creating a health hazard, the owner of the property shall have the system
pumped and repaired or replaced pursuant to a schedule as determined by the
City Building Inspector. Section
51.23 of this subchapter regarding failing systems shall be followed.
         (b)   In the event the property owner fails to comply with the pumping
schedule or have the system repaired or replaced, the failure to submit
documentation of pumping, inspection, repair or replacement of a failing septic
system shall be considered a violation of this subchapter and subject to the
criminal penalties and/or civil remedies outlined in §
51.99 of this chapter. The city, pursuant to M.S. § 429.101, as it may be
amended from time to time, may provide for the property owner’s septic system
to be pumped and repaired or replaced and for all costs related thereto to be
assessed against the property benefitted.
      (4)   Costs.
         (a)   Any on-site inspection or pumping conducted or contracted by the
city shall be invoiced to the property owner in an amount established by
resolution of the City Council.
         (b)   Pursuant to M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to
time, the City Council hereby authorizes the city staff to certify any unpaid
costs or charges imposed pursuant to this subchapter to the County Auditor for
collections as other taxes.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 2-25-2015)
§ 51.29  MORE RESTRICTIVE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Minn. Rules 7080.0130, subp. 3(A) is hereby modified requiring at
least two septic tanks with a minimum capacity of 1,000 gallons each.
   (B)   Minn. Rules part 7080.0160, subp. 1(C), is hereby modified to require
a minimum dosing tank of 1,000 gallons.
   (C)   Minn. Rules part 7080.0910 specifying alternative and experimental
systems shall be utilized only on existing developed lots with existing septic
systems which have failed. Systems designed or installed in a slope greater
than 12% shall be considered experimental on any lot.
   (D)   All wastewaters discharged into the septic system shall be metered on
all non-single family
   (E)   The pump for all new systems which have applied for a permit after the
date of passage of this subchapter shall employ an audible alarm and warning
light located inside of the principal structure to alert occupants of failure.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 2-25-2015)
§ 51.30  FEES.
   The city shall, from time to time, establish fees for activities undertaken
by the city pursuant to this subchapter. Fees shall be due and payable at a
time and in a manner to be determined by the city.
(Ord. 2015-03, passed 2-25-2015)
WASTEWATER TREATMENT AND COLLECTION FACILITIES
§ 51.40  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also referred to as the Clean
Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   BOD5 or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter standard laboratory procedures in five
days at 20°C and as expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   BUILDING DRAIN. The point of a building which conveys wastewater to the
building sewer, beginning three feet outside the building wall.
   CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of the city; the City
Council, its authorized representative, or the authorized representative of the
sanitary sewer district.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. A charge to users of the wastewater treatment facility
for the purpose of repaying capital costs.
   INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   Any entity as defined in the Standard Industrial Manual (latest
edition) as categorized, that discharge wastewater to the public sewer:
         (a)   Division A: Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;
         (b)   Division B: Mining;
         (c)   Division D: Manufacturing;
         (d)   Division E: Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Sewers; and
         (e)   Division I: Services.
      (2)   Any user whose discharges, singly or by interaction with other
wastes:
         (a)   Contaminate the sludge of the wastewater treatment system;
         (b)   Injure or interfere with the treatment process;
         (c)   Create a public nuisance or hazard;
         (d)   Have an adverse effect on the waters receiving wastewater
treatment plant discharges;
         (e)   Exceed NDSW limitations; and
         (f)   Exceed normal residential unit volumes of wastewater.
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I). Water other than wastewater that enters the sewer
system from the ground or from surface runoff, as defined in Minnesota Rules.
   MPCA. Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Federal regulations
establishing pretreatment standards for introduction of pollutants in publicly-
owned wastewater treatment facilities. § 307(b) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. §
1317(b).
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A permit
issued by the MPCA setting limits on pollutants that a permittee may legally
discharge pursuant to §§ 402 and 405 of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1342 and
1345.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewers,
which flows into a body of surface water or ground water.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE (NDSW). Wastewater that primarily introduced
by residential users with BOD5 concentrations not greater than 300 mg/l and
total suspended solids (TSS) concentrations not greater than 300 mg/l.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL USER. A user of the treatment facility whose building is not
used as a private residence and discharges NDSW.
   OPERATION, MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT COSTS (OM&R). Expenditures necessary
to provide for the dependable, economical and efficient functioning of the
treatment facility throughout its design life including operator training, and
permit fees. Replacement refers to equipment replacement costs, not the cost of
future replacement of the entire facility.
   OWNER or USER. Non-residential user, residential user and industrial user.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. A user of the treatment facility whose building is used
primarily as a private residence and discharges NDSW.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
      (1)   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal, also referred to as a service connection.
      (2)   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer designed to carry only liquid and water-
carried wastes from residential, non-residential and industrial sources
together with minor quantities of I/I.
      (3)   STORM SEWER. A sewer intended to carry unpolluted surface and
subsurface water from any source.
   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The total of the user charge and the debt service
charge.
   SLUDGE. A discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration or in
quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes,
more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
   STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (SDS) PERMIT. A permit issued by the MPCA pursuant to
M.S. § 115.07, as it may be amended from time to time, for a disposal system as
defined by M.S. § 115.01, Subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time.
   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). The total suspended matter that either floats
on the surface of, or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids,
and is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater (latest edition).
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards. An example could be non-contact cooling water.
   USER CHARGE. A charge to users of a treatment facility for the user’s
proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance, including
replacement.
   WASTEWATER. Liquid and water-carried wastes from residential, non-
residential and industrial users, together with any ground water, surface water
and storm water that may be present.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITIES or TREATMENT FACILITIES. The land, devices,
facilities, structures, equipment and processes owned or used by the city for
the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation
of municipal wastewater, and the disposal of residues resulting from such
treatment.
(Ord. 2000-2, passed - -2000; Ord. 2000-8, passed - -2000)
§ 51.41  CONTROL BY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE.
   The City Council shall appoint an authorized representative who shall have
control and general supervision of all public sewers and service connections in
the city, and shall be responsible for administering the provisions of this
subchapter to ensure that a proper and efficient public sewer is maintained.
The authorized representative may delegate responsibilities to designated
representatives.
(Ord. 2000-2, passed - -2000; Ord. 2000-8, passed - -2000)
§ 51.42  USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Owners of property directly adjacent to the sanitary sewer collection
system, but with a working private septic system, shall be allowed to continue
to use their private septic system. If however, at any time, the private septic
system fails, as determined by the City Building Inspector or Zoning
Administrator through an inspection and no reasonable option exists to repair
it or replace it on a suitable on-site alternate septic site, the owners shall
install a suitable service connection to the sanitary sewer system at their own
expense.
   (B)   If a property owner chooses to continue to use a private septic system
where city sanitary and water service is available, a water availability charge
may be imposed.
   (C)   Any property that has been provided with service stubs and fails to
make payment to the city for the installation of the service stubs and has not
been assessed for the stub by the time the stubs are installed, shall be
charged, pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to time, a
per stub amount and a monthly charge, as determined by the City Council, for
the availability of said stubs. Any unpaid availability charges shall be
certified with the taxes against the property.
(Ord. 2000-2, passed - -2000; Ord. 2000-8, passed - -2000; Ord. 2008-09, passed
3-11-2008; Ord. 2008-12, passed 3-25-2008; Ord. 2015-04, passed 3-10-2015; Ord.
2017-05, passed 3-29-2017)
§ 51.43  PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of §
51.42 of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions required by the city,
the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) and all other regulatory
agencies. The owner(s) shall obtain the appropriate permits for construction
and operation of a private wastewater disposal system. Operation of the private
wastewater disposal system is subject to approval by the city and all other
appropriate regulatory agencies.
   (B)   The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the
city.
   (C)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the MPCA, the State
Department of Health or other responsible federal, state or local agencies.
(Ord. 2000-2, passed - -2000; Ord. 2000-8, passed - -2000)
§ 51.44  BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS; DESIGN.
   (A)   (1)   No person(s) shall make any alterations to the public sewer or
any appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
city. No private building drain shall extend beyond the limits of the building
or property for which the permit has been given.
      (2)   Any new connection to the sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited
unless sufficient capacity is available in all downstream facilities including,
but not limited to, capacity for flow, BOD5 and TSS as determined by the
authorized representative.
      (3)   Application for permit for public sewer service shall be made on
printed forms, shall state the legal description and street and official house
number of the premises and the nature of the improvement to be performed. The
application for the written permit to connect to public sewer or alter
connected service pipes shall be made jointly by the master plumber who will
make the installation and by the owner of such premises or his or her
authorized agent or by the occupant or person in possession of the premises.
The permit shall issue to the owner and his or her master plumber applicant,
and each applicant by such application shall subscribe to and be obligated to
be bound by the city’s applicable ordinances and rules and regulations.
      (4)   The applicant must pay all required permit fees and any other
charges, which shall be set forth by resolution of the City Council.
      (5)   No person, except a master plumber duly licensed in the state or
duly authorized employee of the city, is permitted to do any work on service
pipes connected with public sewer.
   (B)   (1)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for
each building. Old building sewers may be used to service new buildings only
when they are found to meet all requirements of this subchapter.
      (2)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
wastewater shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building
sewer.
   (C)   The construction and connection of the building sewer to the public
sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State Building and Plumbing
Code, applicable rules and regulations of the city and the materials and
procedural specifications set forth in the American Society of Testing
Materials (ASTM) and the Water Pollution Control Federation (WPFC) Manual of
Practice No.9. All such connections shall be made gas- and water-tight and
verified by proper testing to prevent infiltration/ inflow.
   (D)   No unpolluted water sources shall be connected to the sanitary sewer.
   (E)   (1)   No person, except authorized persons employed by the city or
master plumber permittee bearing specific authority by written permit required
herein, shall connect to public sewer.
      (2)   A master plumber permittee requesting a connection shall give
notice at least eight business hours in advance of need. The master plumber
permittee requesting must help uncover the main and locate the tap if requested
by the city. The connection shall be made under the supervision of a designated
representative.
      (3)   A bond shall be filed with the city by the master plumber permittee
requesting the connection in the sum of $10,000 conditioned upon the full,
complete and satisfactory completion of each connection undertaken by the
master plumber permittee in the city. If the master plumber permittee is to do
his or her own installation/excavation work, the said $10,000 bond shall also
bond such installation/excavation work as required herein
      (4)   Prior to the issuance of the permit to connect to public sewer and/
or for sewer service, insurance coverage shall be obtained by the person
requesting such permit protecting against damage to property or injury to death
to person, which policy or policies shall indemnify and hold harmless the city
and all of its officers and personnel against any claims, demands, damages,
actions or causes of action arising out of or by reason of the doing of the
work or activities related to or incident to the permits required herein and
from any costs, disbursements or expenses of defending the same. The property
damage insurance coverage shall be in the amount of $200,000 or more, and the
public liability insurance for injury or death to person shall be in the amount
of $1,000,000 aggregate for injury to each person. Proof of such insurance
shall be filed with the city prior to the commencement of construction work and
such policy shall provide that the city shall receive written notice at least
ten days before any termination or modification of such insurance.
      (5)   Should the insurance coverage hereinbefore provided be inadequate
in amount, then such person shall indemnify and hold harmless the city and all
of its officers and personnel in like manner.
      (6)   If the master plumber permittee is to do his or her own
installation/excavation work, the said insurance shall also insure such
installation/excavation work required herein.
   (F)   (1)   An appropriate installation/excavation license is required to
install a service connection. Any person desiring a license shall apply in
writing to the City Council, providing satisfactory evidence of the applicant’s
qualifications. If approved by the City Council, the license shall be issued by
a designated representative upon the filing of a bond and insurance as
hereinafter provided.
      (2)   At the time of granting such installation/excavation license, a
bond must be filed with the city by the person receiving the license, unless
such installation/excavation licensee is excused therefor under this
subchapter, and said bond shall be in the sum of $10,000 conditioned upon the
full, complete and satisfactory completion of every installation/excavation
undertaken in connection with the installation for which the licensee
undertakes.
      (3)   Prior to the issuance of the installation/excavation license,
insurance coverage shall be obtained by the person requesting such permit,
unless such installation/excavation licensee is excused therefor under this
subchapter, protecting against damage to property or injury to death to person,
which policy or policies shall indemnify and hold harmless the city and all of
its officers and personnel against any claims, demands, damages, actions or
causes of action arising out of or by reason of the doing of the work or
activities related to or incident to the license required herein and from any
costs, disbursements or expenses of defending the same. The property damage
insurance coverage shall be in the amount of $200,000 or more, and the public
liability insurance for injury or death to person shall be in the amount of
$1,000,000 aggregate for injury to each person. Proof of such insurance shall
be filed with the city prior to the commencement of construction work and such
policy shall provide that the city shall receive written notice at least ten
days before any termination or modification of such insurance.
      (4)   Should the insurance coverage hereinbefore provided be inadequate
in amount, then such person shall indemnify and hold harmless the city and all
of its officers and personnel in like manner.
      (5)   The cost of a license for installation/excavation shall be set
forth by resolution of the City Council. All licenses shall expire on December
31 of the license year unless the license is suspended or revoked by the City
Council for any reasonable cause.
      (6)   The City Council may suspend or revoke any license issued under
this section for any of the following causes:
         (a)   Giving false information in connection with the application for
a license;
         (b)   Incompetence of the licensee;
         (c)   Willful violation of any provisions of this section or any rule
or regulation pertaining to the making of service connections; and/or
         (d)   Failure to adequately protect and indemnify the city and the
user.
   (G)   The city shall maintain and repair or replace all sewer service
connection lines within public rights-of-way or easements when rendered
unserviceable through ordinary use. However, when replacement, repair or
adjustment of any sewer service connection is rendered necessary by the act,
neglect or carelessness of the owner or occupant of any premises, any expense
caused by the city thereby shall be charged against and collected from the
owner or occupant of the premises. Water and sewer service may be discontinued
until the cause is corrected and the charge is collected.
   (H)   All sewer service connection lines within public rights-of way or
easements shall remain the property of the city. All other sewer service
connection line shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
(Ord. 2000-2, passed - -2000; Ord. 2000-8, passed - -2000)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.45  USE OF PUBLIC WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITIES.
   (A)   No unpolluted water or storm water shall be discharged to the sanitary
sewer. Such water shall be discharged only to storm sewers or to natural
outlets approved by the city and other regulatory agencies.
   (B)   No person(s) shall discharge any of the following substances to the
public sewer:
      (1)   Liquids, solids, gases or other substances which singly or by
interaction with others may cause fire or explosion;
      (2)   Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow
in a sewer;
      (3)   Wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or greater than 9.5 or
having any other corrosive or caustic property capable of causing damage or
hazard; and/or
      (4)   Wastewater containing toxic pollutants, as defined in § 307(a) of
the Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a) and M.S. § 115.01,
Subd. 20, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Discharges of the following substances shall be limited to
concentrations or quantities which will not harm the wastewater facility,
streams, soils, vegetation, ground water and will not otherwise create a hazard
or nuisance. The authorized representative may set limitations lower than the
prohibition limits outlined below. Consideration will be given to such factors
as the quantity of waste in relation to flows and velocities, materials of
construction, the city’s NPDES and SDS permits, capacity of the treatment
plant, degree of treatability of wastes and other pertinent factors:
      (1)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65.6°C), or
causing, individually or in combination with other wastewater, the influent at
the treatment facilities to have a temperature exceeding 104°F (40°C), or
having heat in amounts which will be detrimental to biological activity in the
treatment facilities;
      (2)   Wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oils in excess of 100
mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0°C and 65.6°C);
      (3)   A discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration or in
quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes,
more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal
operation;
      (4)   Food wastes not properly shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under normal flow conditions with no particle
greater than one-half inch in any dimension;
      (5)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids;
      (6)   Wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment
process;
      (7)   Wastewater containing inert suspended solids in such quantities
that would cause disruption to the wastewater treatment facilities;
      (8)   Radioactive wastes or isotopes in concentrations that exceed limits
established by applicable state and federal regulations;
      (9)   Wastewaters with BOD5 or suspended solids levels that require
additional treatment, except as may be permitted by specific written agreement
with the city subject to division (K) below; and
      (10)   Wastewater containing substances which cannot be treated to
produce effluent quality required by the permit or causes a violation of any
applicable local, state or federal regulation.
   (D)   (1)   In the event of discharges to the public sewers which contain
substances or possess characteristics prohibited in divisions (B) and (C) above
or which, in the judgment of the authorized representative, may have
deleterious effects to the treatment facility, receiving waters, soils,
vegetation or which create a hazard or nuisance, the authorized representative
may:
         (a)   Refuse to accept the wastes;
         (b)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers, pursuant to § 307(b) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b)
and all addenda thereof;
         (c)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and
         (d)   Require payment to cover all the added costs of handling,
treating and disposing of wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer
charges.
      (2)   If the authorized representative permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design, installation, maintenance and
efficient operation of the facilities and equipment shall be at the owner’s
expense and shall be subject to review and approval by the city pursuant to the
requirements of the MPCA.
   (E)   No user shall increase the use of process water or in any manner
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in this section,
the national categorical pretreatment standards and any state or local
requirement.
   (F)   (1)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided at the
owner’s expense when, in the opinion of the authorized representative, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease
in excessive amounts, any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients.
All interceptors shall be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of interceptors,
including proper removal and disposal of the captured materials by appropriate
means, and shall maintain a record of dates and means of disposal which are
subject to review by the authorized representative.
      (2)   Any material removal and hauling must be performed by the owner’s
personnel or a currently licensed waste disposal firm and in compliance with
all applicable laws and regulations.
   (G)   Where required by the authorized representative, industrial users
shall install and maintain at their own expense a suitable structure or control
manhole with such necessary meters and other testing equipment needed to
facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastewater. The manhole
will be safe and accessible at all times. The City Council may require
submission of laboratory analyses to illustrate compliance with this subchapter
and any special conditions for discharge established by the City Council or
responsible regulatory agency. All measurements, tests and analyses to which
reference is made in this subchapter shall be determined in accordance with the
latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
published by the American Public Health Association.
   (H)   (1)   Where required by the authorized representative, user(s) shall
provide protection from an accidental discharge of substances regulated by this
subchapter. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharges of
prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s expense.
Detailed plans and operating procedures of said facilities shall be submitted
to the authorized representative for review and approval prior to construction
of the facility. Approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not
relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary
to meet the requirements of this subchapter.
      (2)   Users shall notify the authorized representative immediately if a
sludge or accidental discharge of wastewater occurs in violation of this
subchapter. Notification will allow measures to be taken to minimize damage to
the treatment facilities. Notification will not relieve users of liability for
any expense, loss or damage to the treatment facilities or for fines imposed on
the city by any state or federal agency as a result of their actions.
      (3)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board
or other prominent place advising employees of the emergency notification
procedure in the event of a sludge or accidental discharge.
   (I)   (1)   No person shall permit any substance or matter which may form a
deposit or obstruction of flow to be discharged into the public sewer. Whenever
any service connection becomes clogged, obstructed, detrimental to the use of
the public sewer or unfit for the purpose of drainage, the owner shall make
repairs as directed by the authorized representative.
      (2)   Each day after three days that the owner neglects to make said
repairs shall constitute a separate violation of this division (I). The
authorized representative may then cause the work to be done and recover
related expenses from the owner or agent by an action in the name of the city.
   (J)   In addition to penalties that may be imposed for violation of any
provision of this section, the city may assess against the user the cost of
repairing or restoring sewers and associated facilities damaged as a result of
the discharge of prohibited wastes and may collect the assessment as an
additional charge for the use of the public sewer system.
   (K)   No statement contained in this section shall prevent any special
agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial user. Industrial
waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the facility for
treatment, subject to adequate payment by the industrial user; providing that,
national categorical pretreatment standards and the city’s NPDES and SDS permit
limitations are not violated.
(Ord. 2000-2, passed - -2000; Ord. 2000-8, passed - -2000)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.46  PROSECUTION FOR DAMAGES TO THE FACILITY.
   No person(s) shall willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of
the wastewater treatment facilities. Any person violating this provision shall
be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of a misdemeanor and shall
reimburse the city for all costs.
(Ord. 2000-2, passed - -2000; Ord. 2000-8, passed - -2000)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.47  POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   Duly authorized employee(s) of the city, bearing proper credentials
and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties at all
reasonable times for inspection, observations, measurement, sampling, testing,
repair and maintenance in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Industrial users shall be required to provide information concerning
industrial processes which have a direct beating on the type and source of
discharge to the collection system. An industry may withhold information
considered confidential. However, the industry must establish that the
information in question might result in an advantage to competitors and that
the industrial process does not have deleterious results on the treatment
process.
(Ord. 2000-2, passed - -2000; Ord. 2000-8, passed - -2000)
§ 51.48  SEWER SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   (1)   The city hereby establishes a sewer service charge system with
fees being set by resolution. All revenue collected from users of the
wastewater treatment facilities will be used for annual operation, maintenance,
replacement and capital costs. Each user shall pay a proportionate share of
operation, maintenance and replacement costs based on the users proportionate
contribution to the total wastewater loading.
      (2)   The sewer service charge system shall set forth the projected
operation, maintenance and replacement (“OM&R”) costs of all users which shall
serve as the basis for the unit charges made to users of the system. The sewer
service charge system may also set forth the assessment of additional charges
and debt retirement costs which shall be an additional charge.
      (3)   The sewer service charge system adopted by resolution upon
enactment of this subchapter shall be published in the local newspaper and
shall be effective upon publication. Subsequent changes in the sewer service
rates and charges shall be adopted by City Council resolution and published in
the local paper.
      (4)   Revenues collected through the sewer service charge system shall be
deposited in a separate fund known as the Sewer Service Fund.
   (B)   (1)   The city hereby establishes a Sewer Service Fund as an income
fund to receive all revenues generated by the sewer service charge system and
all other income dedicated to the wastewater treatment facility.
      (2)   The Sewer Service Fund administered by a designated representative
shall be separate and apart from all other accounts. Revenue received by the
Sewer Service Fund shall be transferred to the following accounts established
as income and expenditure accounts:
         (a)   Operation and Maintenance;
         (b)   Equipment Replacement; and
         (c)   Debt Retirement for the collection and treatment facility.
   (C)   (1)   A designated representative shall maintain a proper system of
accounts and records suitable for determining the OM&R and debt retirement
costs of the treatment facilities, and shall furnish the City Council with a
report of such costs annually.
      (2)   At that time, the City Council shall determine whether sufficient
revenue is being generated for the effective management of the facilities and
debt retirement. The City Council will also determine whether the user charges
are distributed proportionately. If necessary, the sewer service charge system
shall be revised to ensure proportionality of user charges and sufficient
funds.
      (3)   In accordance with state requirements, each user will be notified
annually in conjunction with a regular billing of that portion of the sewer
service charge attributable to OM&R.
      (4)   Sewer service charges shall be billed on a bi-monthly basis. Any
bill not paid in full 30 days after the due date will be considered delinquent.
At that time, the user will be notified regarding the delinquent bill and
subsequent penalty. The penalty shall be computed as 1.5% of the original bill
and shall be increased by the same percent for every quarter the bill is
outstanding.
   (D)   Where required by the city, users shall install and maintain, at their
own expense, meter(s) on their water supply to facilitate measurement of
wastewater generated. All users other than single-family residential users
shall have meters installed for billing purposes. The meters shall be
accessible to the city at all times.
(Ord. 2000-2, passed - -2000; Ord. 2000-8, passed - -2000)
§ 51.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Criminal penalty.
         (a)   General. Any person who violates any of the provisions of §§
51.20 through
51.29 of this chapter or who makes any false statement on a certificate of
compliance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment or a
fine or both as defined by law, except as noted below.
         (b)   First pumping and/or inspection violation. Any person who fails
to conduct required ISTS pumping or inspection shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine, as defined by law, for the first violation
only.
         (c)   Additional pumping and/or inspection violation(s). After a first
violation, if the violation fails to be taken care of within a set period of
time, regardless of whether the city pursues the charges of petty misdemeanor,
a property owner who fails to conduct a required ISTS pumping or inspection
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment or a fine or both
as defined by law.
         (d)   Repair and resolution. Any person who fails to repair and
resolve a failing septic system which is an imminent health hazard or is
approaching the status of an imminent health hazard shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both as defined by law.
      (2)   Civil remedy. In the event of a violation of §§
51.20 through
51.29 of this chapter, in addition to other remedies, the City Attorney may
institute appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct or
abate such violations.
      (3)   Permits. No building permit, certificate of occupancy, license or
other permit shall be issued for the construction, use or occupancy of any
parcel of property within the city unless the requirements of §§
51.20 through
51.29 of this chapter are met with respect to said parcel of property.
   (C)   (1)   Upon determination that a user has violated or is violating
applicable provisions of §§
51.40 through
51.48 of this chapter or related permits, the authorized representative may
issue a notice of violation. Within ten days of such notification, the violator
shall submit to the authorized representative an adequate explanation for the
violation and a plan for the correction and prevention of such occurrences,
including specific actions required. Submission of such a plan in no way
relieves the violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after
the issuance of the notice of violation.
      (2)   Any violation is subject to a fine not exceeding $700 and/or 90
days in jail. Each day in which any such violation occurs shall be deemed as a
separate offense. Such fines may be added to the user’s next sewer service
charge and will hence be subject to the same collection regulations as
specified in §§
51.40 through
51.48 of this chapter.
      (3)   To collect delinquent sewer service charge accounts, the city may
file a civil action suit or levy a lien against the violator. Related
attorneys’ fees fixed by court order shall also be collected. The violator
shall be liable for interest on all balances at a rate of 10% annually.
      (4)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
51.40 through
51.48 of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation.
(Ord. 2000-2, passed - -2000; Ord. 2000-08, passed - -2000; Ord. 2003-09,
passed 7-8-2003)
CHAPTER 52:  WATER SYSTEM
Section
General Provisions
   
52.001   Definitions
   
52.002   Time for connection
   
52.003   Permit application
   
52.004   Work on service pipes
   
52.005   Service charges
   
52.006   Water rates
   
52.007   Accounts; maintenance, delinquency
   
52.008   Discontinuance of service
   
52.009   Deficiency of water; shutting off water
   
52.010   Multiple connections
   
52.011   Tapping of mains
   
52.012   Insurance
   
52.013   Installation/excavation license
   
52.014   Repair of leaks
   
52.015   Service pipes
Property Assessment for Service Installations
   
52.030   Fees for curb box connection permits and water main tapping
   
52.031   Assessment certification
   
52.032   Payment in lieu of assessment certification
   
52.033   Service stub availability charge
Water Usage
   
52.050   Limitations on uses of city water
   
52.051   Unauthorized turn-on; replacement or repair
   
52.052   Fire protection
   
52.053   Use of fire hydrants
   
52.054   Cross-connections
   
52.055   Water use confined to premises
   
52.056   Connections beyond city boundaries
   
52.057   Water conservation restrictions
Water Meters
   
52.070   Water meter required
   
52.071   Charge for meter
   
52.072   Maintenance, repair and replacement
   
52.073   Complaints regarding meter accuracy
   
52.074   City property
   
52.075   Access to read meters
   
52.076   Water meter setting
 
   
52.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.001  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Dayton and its duly appointed agents and representatives.
   MUNICIPAL WATER or CITY WATER. The municipal water system of the city.
   OWNER. Any person who owns property with a well located on that property, or
property that connects or is required to connect to city water.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.002  TIME FOR CONNECTION.
   (A)   Existing properties. The city will not allow an existing well to be
repaired/improved if municipal water is available. Cross-connection between
private wells and municipal water is prohibited.
   (B)   New structures. All new structures must be connected to municipal
water at the time of construction.
   (C)   Connection administration. The Utility Supervisor may grant an
extension of time for compliance with this chapter not to exceed 60 days. The
Utility Supervisor may impose appropriate stipulations including the posting of
a performance bond or other financial security if desirable. If compliance with
the requirements of this section are not timely achieved, the city may make the
necessary connection and assess the costs against the property.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)  Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.003  PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Application for water service shall be made on printed forms shall state the
legal description and street and official house number of the premises to be
supplied by municipal water and the nature of the improvement to be performed.
The application for the written permit to connect to city water shall be made
jointly by the master plumber who will make the connection and by the owner of
such premises or his or her authorized agent or by the occupant or person in
possession of the premises. The permit shall issue to the owner and his or her
master plumber applicant, and each applicant by such application shall
subscribe to and be obligated to be bound by the city’s applicable ordinances
and rules and regulations.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.004  WORK ON SERVICE PIPES.
   No person, except a master plumber duly licensed by the state or duly
authorized employee of the city, is permitted to do any work on service pipe or
water meters connected with city water.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)  Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.005  SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   Curb box connection permit. A permit shall be obtained to connect to
existing water service leads at the curb box. The fee for each such permit
shall be set forth by resolution of the City Council. No permit shall be
issued, except to a licensed installer.
   (B)   Service installation. Additional charges shall be made and collected
for testing, inspection and making connections with the water mains where a
curb box and service lead is not installed. This charge shall be paid at the
time of making application. The amount to be charged shall be set forth by
resolution of the City Council, based upon the estimated cost of testing,
inspection and installing the service.
   (C)   Water turn-on. For turning on water when service has been turned off
for non-payment of water bill, failure to repair a leak, discontinuance of
service or for any other cause, a service charge set forth by resolution of the
City Council will be made.
   (D)   Curb box adjustments. For raising or lowering stop box tops to
correspond with ground level change or alteration made by the property owner, a
charge set forth by resolution of the City Council will be made.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.006  WATER RATES.
   (A)   Rates. The rate due and payable to the city by each owner or other
account holder with the city for water taken from the water supply shall be set
by resolution of the City Council adopted from time to time.
   (B)   Estimated rates. In case any meter is found to have stopped or to be
operating in a faulty manner, the amount of water used shall be estimated in
accordance with the amount used previously. In the event the remote reading
unit is found to have a reading different from the meter, the amount of water
billed shall be based on the reading of the water meter, not the remote reading
device.
   (C)   Water for construction or temporary purposes. When water is desired
for construction purposes or other temporary uses, the owner shall make
application in accordance with §
52.003 of this chapter.
   (D)   Water bills.
      (1)   Water bills shall be mailed to the owner or other account holder
and shall specify the water consumed and the charge in accordance with the
rates set forth by resolution of the City Council.
      (2)   Owners and other account holders shall have the option of paying a
rate for payments made on or before the due date listed on the bill or the
option of paying an extended payment rate for payments made after the due date
listed on the bill. The charges and rate shall be set forth by resolution of
the City Council.
   (E)   Fire connections. Should it be found that water metered is used
through a fire connection for any purpose other than the extinguishing of fire
upon premises, the owner and occupant will be notified, and a charge may be
made for the estimated amount of water so used. If such improper conditions are
not corrected within ten days, the water will be disconnected until proper
adjustments are made, and the owner shall be subject to the penalties set forth
by resolution of the City Council. Regular inspections shall be made of all
fire service connections with all piping, fire gates and other attached
appurtenances. City inspectors shall have access to the premises for such
inspections and shall keep a record of all inspections made.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.007  ACCOUNTS; MAINTENANCE, DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   Maintenance of water accounts.
      (1)   All water accounts shall be kept in the books of the Utility
Division by the house and street number and under the account number assigned
thereto and the name of the owner of the person applying for service.
      (2)   All bills and notices sent by the Utility Supervisor shall be
mailed to the house or street number of the property. If non-resident account
holders desire personal notice sent to a different address, they shall file an
application with the Utility Supervisor. Any error in address shall be promptly
reported to the Utility Supervisor. The Utility Supervisor reserves the right
to place all accounts in the name of the owner of the property and to send all
bills for payment to the owner of the property if disputes regarding payment
arises.
   (B)   Delinquent water accounts.
      (1)   Delinquent water accounts. Accounts shall be considered delinquent
when no payments have been received after 90 days following the due date and no
arrangements for payment have been agreed to by the owner or other account
holder.
      (2)   Disconnection of service charge. It shall be the duty of the
Utility Supervisor to endeavor to promptly collect delinquent accounts and, in
all cases where satisfactory arrangements for payment have not been made,
instructions shall be given to discontinue service by shutting off the water at
the stop box. In the case of delinquency, mailed notices shall be sent; and,
after three days following such mailing, the water may be disconnected.
      (3)   Assessment of delinquent accounts. All delinquent accounts shall be
certified by the City Clerk who shall prepare an assessment roll each year
providing for assessment of the delinquent amounts against the respective
properties served. The assessment shall include the amount of the delinquent
account and the administrative charge due set forth by resolution of the City
Council, together with interest thereon at the maximum lawful rate. This
assessment roll shall be delivered to the City Council for adoption on or
before October 1 of each year. Such action may be optional or subsequent to
taking legal action to collect delinquent accounts.
      (4)   Administrative assessment charge. An administrative assessment
charge set forth by resolution of the City Council shall be due upon the
mailing of the notice of the proposed assessment.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.008  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Chapter violations. Water service may be shut off at any stop box
connections, three days after mailed notices are sent, whenever the following
occur:
      (1)   The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any person working
on any pipes or equipment thereon which are connected with the city water
supply system, has intentionally violated any of the requirements of this code
relative to city water, or connection therewith;
      (2)   The owner or occupant of the premises served threatens to violate
or to cause to be violated, any of the provisions of this code;
      (3)   Any charge for water, service, meter or any other financial
obligations imposed, by the provisions of this code, on the present or former
owner or occupant of the premises served is unpaid; and/or
      (4)   Fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant in connection
with an application of service.
   (B)   Unpaid construction costs. Water service shall be shut off at the stop
box connection when it is determined that a sum equal to the portion of the
cost of constructing city water attributable to the parcel or property, as
determined by the assessment proceedings or pursuant to the provisions of §
52.032 of this chapter, has not been paid or is not in the process of being
paid in regular installments.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.009  DEFICIENCY OF WATER; SHUTTING OFF WATER.
   The city shall not be liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of
water to consumers, whether occasioned by shutting the water off for the
purpose of making repairs, or connections, of from any other cause. In the case
of fire, or alarm of fire, water may be shut off to ensure a supply for
firefighting; or in making repairs or construction of new works, water may be
shut off at any time and kept shut off as long as necessary.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.010  MULTIPLE CONNECTIONS.
   No more than one house or building shall be supplied from one service
connection, except by special permission of the Utility Supervisor and City
Engineer. Whenever two or more parties are supplied from one pipe connecting
with the distribution main, each building or part of building must have a
separate stop box and a separate meter.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)  Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.011  TAPPING OF MAINS.
   (A)   Tapping prohibited. No person, except authorized persons employed by
the city or master plumber permittee bearing specific authority by written
permit required herein, shall tap or cut into any disrupting mains or pipes of
the city water supply system or insert stopcocks, valves or any fittings
therein.
   (B)   Notice of tapping. A master plumber permittee requesting a tap shall
give notice at least eight business hours in advance of need. The master
plumber permittee requesting must help uncover the main and locate the tap if
requested by the city.
   (C)   Bond. A bond shall be filed with the city by the master plumber
permittee requesting a tap in the sum of $10,000 conditioned upon the full,
complete and satisfactory completion of each water connection undertaken by the
master plumber permittee in the city. If the master plumber permittee is to do
his or her own installation/excavation work, the said $10,000 bond shall also
bond such installation/excavation work as required by §
52.013 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)  Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.012  INSURANCE.
   (A)   (1)   Prior to the issuance of the permit to connect to city water
and/or for water service, insurance coverage shall be obtained by the master
plumber permittee requesting such permit protecting against damage to property
or injury to death to person, which policy or policies shall indemnify and hold
harmless the city and all of its officers and personnel against any claims,
demands, damages, actions or causes of action arising out of or by reason of
the doing of the work or activities related to or incident to the permits
required herein and from any costs, disbursements or expenses of defending the
same.
      (2)   The property damage insurance coverage shall be in the amount of
$200,000 or more, and the public liability insurance for injury or death to
person shall be in the amount of $1,000,000 aggregate for injury to each
person.
      (3)   Proof of such insurance shall be filed with the city prior to the
commencement of construction work and such policy shall provide that the city
shall receive written notice at least ten days before any termination or
modification of such insurance.
   (B)   Should the insurance coverage hereinbefore provided be inadequate in
amount, then such person shall indemnify and hold harmless the city and all of
its officers and personnel in like manner.
   (C)   If the master plumber permittee is to do his or her own installation/
excavation work, the said insurance shall also insure such installation/
excavation work as required by §
52.013 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.013  INSTALLATION/EXCAVATION LICENSE.
   (A)   An appropriate construction installation/excavation license is
required to install a service connection. Any person desiring a license shall
apply in writing to the City Council, providing satisfactory evidence of the
applicant’s qualifications. If approved by the City Council, the license shall
be issued by a designated representative upon the filing of a bond and
insurance as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   At the time of granting such installation/excavation license, a bond
must be filed with the city by the person receiving the license, unless such
installation/excavation licensee is excused therefor under this chapter, and
said bond shall be in the sum of $10,000 conditioned upon the full, complete
and satisfactory completion of every installation/excavation undertaken in
connection with the installation for which the licensee undertakes.
   (C)   Prior to the issuance of the installation/excavation license,
insurance coverage shall be obtained by the person requesting such permit,
unless such installation/excavation licensee is excused therefor under this
chapter, protecting against damage to property or injury to death to person,
which policy or policies shall indemnify and hold harmless the city and all of
its officers and personnel against any claims, demands, damages, actions or
causes of action arising out of or by reason of the doing of the work or
activities related to or incident to the license required herein and from any
costs, disbursements or expenses of defending the same. The property damage
insurance coverage shall be in the amount of $200,000 or more, and the public
liability insurance for injury or death to person shall be in the amount of
$1,000,000 aggregate for injury to each person. Proof of such insurance shall
be filed with the city prior to the commencement of construction work and such
policy shall provide that the city shall receive written notice at least ten
days before any termination or modification of such insurance.
   (D)   Should the insurance coverage hereinbefore provided be inadequate in
amount, then such person shall indemnify and hold harmless the city and all of
its officers and personnel in like manner.
   (E)   The cost of a license for installation/excavation shall be set forth
by resolution of the City Council. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of
the license year unless the license is suspended or revoked by the City Council
for any reasonable cause.
   (F)   The City Council may suspend or revoke any license issued under this
section for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Giving false information in connection with the application for a
license;
      (2)   Incompetence of the licensee;
      (3)   Willful violation of any provisions of this section or any rule or
regulation pertaining to the making of service connections; and/or
      (4)   Failure to adequately protect and indemnify the city and the user.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.014  REPAIR OF LEAKS.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner or other account holder to
maintain the service pipe from the curb box into the house or building.
   (B)   In case of failure upon the part of any owner or account holder to
repair any leak occurring in the owner’s or account holder’s service pipe
within 24 hours after verbal or written notice has been given the owner or
account holder, the water will be disconnected and will not be turned on until
the repair has been completed and the fee for restoration of disconnected
service as set forth by resolution of the City Council has been paid. When the
waste of water is great, or when damage is likely to result from the leak, the
water will be turned off if the repair is not proceeded with immediately upon
the giving of such notice.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.015  SERVICE PIPES.
   (A)   Placement of service pipes. Every service pipe shall be laid in a
manner as to prevent rupture by settlement. The service pipe must be placed not
less than seven and one-half feet below the surface and in all cases so
arranged as to prevent rupture by freezing.
   (B)   Other requirements. Service pipes shall extend from the curb box in
the inside of the building; or, if not taken into a building, then to the
hydrant or other fixtures which it is intended to supply. A shut-off or other
stopcock with waste valve, of the size and strength required, shall be placed
close to the inside wall of the building, well protected from freezing. Joints
on copper tubing shall be kept to a minimum, with not more than one joint used
for service up to 70 feet in length. All joints shall be left uncovered until
inspected. Connections with the mains for domestic supply shall be at least
three-fourths of an inch.
   (C)   Maintenance, repair and replacement.
      (1)   The city shall maintain and repair or replace all service pipe from
the main to the curb box when rendered unserviceable through ordinary use.
However, when replacement, repair or adjustment of any service pipe or curb box
is rendered necessary by the act, neglect or carelessness of the owner or
occupant of any premises, any expense caused by the city thereby shall be
charged against and collected from the owner or occupant of the premises.
      (2)   Water service may be discontinued until the cause is corrected and
the charge is collected.
   (D)   City property. All service pipe between the main and curb box, as well
as the curb box, shall remain the property of the city. All service pipe from
the curb box to the building is the responsibility of the property owner.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)  Penalty, see §
52.999
PROPERTY ASSESSMENT FOR SERVICE INSTALLATIONS
§ 52.030  FEES FOR CURB BOX CONNECTION PERMITS AND WATER MAIN TAPPING.
   The fee for permit for curb box connections and the charge for water main
tapping shall be paid for each connection in the amount set forth in §
52.005 of this chapter. Before any permit shall be issued, there shall also be
paid any sum required as set forth in §§
52.031 and
52.032 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.031  ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATION.
   No permit shall be issued to tap or connect with any city water main either
directly or indirectly from any lot or tract of land unless the City Clerk
shall have certified:
   (A)   All of the lot or tract of land, or the portion of the lot or tract to
be served by the connection or tap has been assessed for the construction of
city water with which the connection is made;
   (B)   If no assessment has been levied for the construction cost, that
proceedings for levying such assessment have been or will be commenced in due
course; or
   (C)   If no assessment has been levied and no assessment proceedings will be
completed in due course, that a sum equal to the portion of the cost of
constructing the water system which would be assessable against the lot or
tract has been paid to the city.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.032  PAYMENT IN LIEU OF ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   If no such certificate can be issued by the City Clerk, no permit to
tap or connect to any city water main shall be issued unless the applicant pays
an additional connection fee which shall be equal to the portion of the costs
of construction of city water which would be assessable against said lot or
tract to be served by such tapping connection.
   (B)   The assessable cost is to be determined by the City Engineer upon the
same basis as assessments most recently levied against other property for the
water system.
   (C)   If no such assessment has been levied, the assessable cost shall be
determined upon the basis of the uniform charge which may have been or which
shall be charged for similar tapping or connection with city water determined
on the basis of the total assessable cost of the system.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.033  SERVICE STUB AVAILABILITY CHARGE.
   Any property that has been provided with service stubs and fails to make
payment to the city for the installation of the service stubs and has not been
assessed for the stub by the time the stubs are installed shall be charged,
pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to time, a per stub
amount and a monthly charge, as determined by the City Council, for the
availability of said stubs. Any unpaid availability charges shall be certified
with the taxes against the property.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001; Ord. 2008-12, passed 3-25-2008)
WATER USAGE
§ 52.050  LIMITATIONS ON USES OF CITY WATER.
   (A)   Restrictions on water usage. Whenever it is determined, by either the
Mayor or the City Council, that a shortage of water supply may be imminent,
either may act in accordance with the procedures hereinafter described to limit
the uses of the city water and the times and hours during which water from the
city water supply may be used.
   (B)   Council action. The City Council may act by resolution to limit water
usage. The resolution shall state in detail the restriction imposed on water
usage and the charge for instances of non- compliance. The restrictions shall
become effective 24 hours after passage of the resolution. The Council shall
take such action as is reasonably practicable to inform the general public of
the imposition of the restrictions on water usage and of the charges and other
penalties which could be imposed for violation of such restrictions.
   (C)   Action by the Mayor. The Mayor may act by filing with the City Clerk a
written certification that there is an imminent shortage of water supply. The
certification shall specify in detail the restrictions on water usage and shall
endorse on each filing the time and date of filing. The Mayor shall take such
action as is reasonably practicable to inform the general public of the
imposition of restrictions on water usage and of the charges and other
penalties for violation of such restrictions. Restrictions imposed by the Mayor
may be revoked by written directive from the Mayor to the City Clerk, who shall
endorse on such directive the date and time of receipt, or by action by the
City Council.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.051  UNAUTHORIZED TURN-ON; REPLACEMENT OR REPAIR.
   (A)   No person shall turn on water to any premises without having written
authorization from the Utilities Superintendent.
   (B)   No person shall turn on water to any premises unless and until a meter
has been placed on the service and in such a manner that it will register all
water consumed and all other parts of the plumbing and pipe fitting in and
about the premises are in full compliance with the rules and regulations of
this chapter and all other lawful rules and regulations.
   (C)   No person shall make any connection with any service pipe which is not
in use between the water mains and the meters, without obtaining a written
permit from the Utilities Superintendent for the performance of such work.
   (D)   No person shall make any replacement of tap or connect any tap or
connection theretofore made in any water main without shutting off the water in
such old tap or connection at the corporation in the water main.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)  Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.052  FIRE PROTECTION.
   (A)   For the benefit derived for fire protection by any taxpayer in the
city, the city shall pay from the General Fund into the Public Utilities Fund a
sum for water consumed during the year as shall be determined from time to time
by the City Council.
   (B)   In case of fire, no property or user shall be charged for water used
in fighting the fire.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.053  USE OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
   No person, other than an employee of the Public Works Department or the Fire
Department, who is engaged in authorized municipal work, shall operate fire
hydrants or interfere in any way with the city water system without first
obtaining authority to do so for the City Engineer or Utility Supervisor.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)  Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.054  CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Prohibition. Cross-connection between city water and other systems, or
equipment containing water or other substances or unknown or questionable
safety are prohibited, except when and where, as approved by the city, suitable
protective devices such as break tanks, reduced pressure zone backflow
preventers, or their equal, are installed, tested and maintained, to ensure
proper operation on a continuing basis. Such protective devices may be required
on any water service when, in the opinion of the city, a condition exists that
could result in the back siphoning into city water of any water or other
substance of unknown or questionable safety. When a reduced pressure zone
backflow preventer is installed, an annual fee will be charged to administer
the testing and record keeping for the device as required by the current State
Plumbing Code.
   (B)   Disconnection of service. When cross-connections are found to exist,
the city will notify the owner to disconnect the cross-connections and, if not
done immediately, the city water supply shall be turned off and it shall remain
off until the cross-connection is removed and the fittings sealed so as to
prevent reconnection after service is restored.
   (C)   New connection. Before any new construction to the city is permitted,
the city shall ascertain that no cross-connection will exist when the new
connection is made.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)  Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.055  WATER USE CONFINED TO PREMISES.
   No person shall permit water from the city water supply system to be used
for any purpose, except upon the person’s own premises.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)  Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.056  CONNECTIONS BEYOND CITY BOUNDARIES.
   In cases where water mains of the city have been or shall be extended to or
constructed in any road, street, alley or public highway adjacent to or outside
the corporate limits of the city, owners and occupants of properties adjacent
to, or accessible to, such water mains may apply for permits to tap and make
property water service pipe connections with such water mains of the city in
conformity with and subject to the terms, conditions and provisions of the
ordinance of the city relating to the tapping of the city water mains and
making service pipe connections therewith, and to furnish and supply water from
city water to such owners and occupants of properties adjacent or accessible to
such water mains of the city. The granting of said permits is subject to review
and approval of the City Utility Supervisor and the City Engineer. Water
service rendered to such persons shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter, and persons accepting such service shall thereby agree to be bound and
obligated by the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.057  WATER CONSERVATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Purpose.  This section establishes water conservation restrictions;
and the plan will be in effect at any time the governor declares by executive
order a critical water deficiency, pursuant to M.S. § 103G.291. This section,
as passed, applies only to municipal water supply users.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CLERK. In statutory cities, the person assigned duties pursuant to M.S. §
412.151; or the City Manager pursuant to M.S. §§ 412.601 - 412.751 or in
charter cities as determined by city charter.
      DEPARTMENT. The City Water Department.
      EMERGENCY. The declaration of a critical water deficiency by the
governor.
      IRRIGATION. The watering of shrubs, trees, sod, seeded areas, gardens,
lawns, or any other outdoor vegetation, except outdoor vegetation utilized for
agricultural purposes.
      NOTIFICATION TO PUBLIC. Notification through local media, including
interviews and issuance of news releases.
      PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER. The city or other entity that owns, manages, or
operates a public water supply, as defined in M.S. § 144.382, Subd. 4.
      RECLAIMED WATER. Water collected from rooftops, paved surfaces, or other
collection devices and all water utilized more than once before re-entering the
natural water cycle.
      WATER RECIRCULATION SYSTEM. Any system which enables a user to reuse
water at least once prior to returning the water to the natural water cycle.
   (C)   Applications.
      (1)   This section applies to all customers of public water suppliers who
own or control water use on any premises.
      (2)   No person shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water
received from a public water supply for residential, commercial, industrial,
governmental, or any other purpose in any manner contrary to any provision in
this section.
      (3)   Mandatory emergency conservation measures shall be implemented
based upon the declaration of a critical water emergency by the governor.
   (D)   Declaration of critical water deficiency.  Upon the declaration of a
critical water deficiency by the governor, the public water supplier shall
immediately post notice of the emergency declaration at the usual meeting place
of the City Council, or the official city bulletin board. The city shall
provide notification to the public as quickly as possible or through
established water supply plans emergency response plans or procedures. Through
this resolution, the City of Dayton also reserves the right for its Mayor to
declare a critical water deficiency.
   (E)   Mandatory emergency water conservation measures.  Upon declaration of
a water emergency and notification to the public, the following mandatory
restrictions upon nonessential water use shall be enforced:
      (1)   Outdoor irrigation of yards, gardens, golf courses, parklands, and
other non-agricultural land, except for those areas irrigated with reclaimed
water, is prohibited.
      (2)   Washing or spraying of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis
courts, patios, or other paved areas with water from any pressurized source,
including garden hoses, except to alleviate immediate health or safety hazards,
is prohibited.
      (3)   The outdoor use of any water-based play apparatus connected to a
pressurized source is prohibited.
      (4)   Restaurants and other food service establishments are prohibited
from serving water to their customers, unless water is specifically requested
by the customer.
      (5)   Operation of outdoor misting systems used to cool public areas is
prohibited.
      (6)   The filling of swimming pools, fountains, spas, or other exterior
water features is prohibited.
      (7)   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, and other types of
mobile equipment is prohibited, except at facilities equipped with wash water
recirculation systems, and for vehicles requiring frequent washing to protect
public health, safety, and welfare.
   (F)   Variances.  The City Clerk or his or her designee is authorized to
grant variances to this section where strict application of its provisions
would result in serious hardship to a customer. A variance may be granted only
for reasons involving health or safety. An applicant may appeal the denial of a
variance within five days of the decision by submitting a written appeal to the
City Clerk. The City Council shall hear the appeal at the next City Council
meeting. The decision of the City Council is final.
   (G)   Violation.
      (1)   Violations shall be determined and cited by the City Clerk or his
or her designee. A violator may appeal the citation within five days of its
issuance by submitting a written appeal to the city. The City Council shall
hear the appeal at the next City Council meeting. The decision of the City
Council is final. Violators may be granted an administrative waiver if evidence
is provided that equipment failure was the cause of the violation. A letter
from a qualified vendor or equipment invoice will be required to show proof of
equipment failure.
      (2)   Upon discovery of a first violation, the violator shall be issued,
either personally or by mail, a warning letter that sets forth the violation
and which shall describe the remedy and fines for future violations.
      (3)   Upon subsequent violations at the same location, the violator shall
be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the
violation and shall describe the remedy. Fines shall be added to the monthly
water bill of the owner or current occupant of the premises where the violation
occurred. The imposition of the fine shall in no way limit the right of the
city to pursue other legal remedies.
   (H)   Enforcement.  The City Clerk or his or her designee is authorized to
designate city employees or law enforcement personnel to enforce the provisions
of this section.
(Ord. 2017-14, passed 10-10-2017)
WATER METERS
§ 52.070  WATER METER REQUIRED.
   Except for extinguishment of fires, no person, except authorized city
employees, shall use water from city water or permit water to be drawn
therefrom, unless the water is metered by passing through a meter supplied or
approved by the city. No person shall connect, disconnect, take apart or in any
manner change, or cause to be changed, or interfere with any such meter or the
action thereof unless authorized by the city.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)  Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.071  CHARGE FOR METER.
   Only water meters supplied by the city shall be used. A charge shall be made
to owners or account holders for water meters, and payment for meters shall be
made in advance before delivery for installation. The charge will be the actual
cost to the city of supplying the meter.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.072  MAINTENANCE, REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   The city shall maintain and repair or replace all meters when rendered
unserviceable through ordinary use.
   (B)   However, when replacement, repair or adjustment of any meter is
rendered necessary by the act, neglect or carelessness of the owner or occupant
of any premises, any expense caused by the city thereby shall be charged
against and collected from the owner or occupant of the premises.
   (C)   Water service may be discontinued until the cause is corrected and the
charge is collected.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.073  COMPLAINTS REGARDING METER ACCURACY.
   (A)   (1)   Upon request of any property owner or occupant, the city will
test the meter at the person’s premises. A deposit in an amount determined by
resolution of the City Council will be required before the meter is
discontinued.
      (2)   The deposit will be returned to the owner or occupant if the meter
is not found to be registering correctly within 3%; otherwise, the deposit will
be retained by the city to cover the cost of the test. The owner or occupant
may be present at the time of the test. The result of any test will be reported
to the owner or occupant.
   (B)   If the testing of a meter, as hereinabove provided, indicates that it
registers in excess of 3% error, the charge to the consumer for water consumed
and used during the quarter within which such test is made shall be adjusted in
a fair and equitable manner.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.074  CITY PROPERTY.
   All water meters are and shall remain the property of the city and may be
replaced or changed by the city whenever deemed necessary.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.075  ACCESS TO READ METERS.
   City employees reading meters shall have free access to reasonable hours of
the day to all parts of every building and premises connected with city water
for reading of meters and inspections. If city employees make repeated attempts
to read a meter, with or without a remote reading device, and are not provided
access to the meter, water service may be disconnected. This action shall be
subsequent to reasonable notice to the owner or other account holder informing
of the impending shutoff. The City Administrator shall be authorized to make
adjustments in water charges when the amount billed is erroneous due to meter
deficiency or other mistake.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.076  WATER METER SETTING.
   All water meters shall be installed as set forth in divisions (A) through
(D) below.
   (A)   The service from the water main to the meter, where the same enters
the building, shall be brought through the floor in a vertical position.
   (B)   The meter shall be so located that the bottom is from 12 to 18 inches
above the finished floor line. The meter shall not be set more than 12 inches,
measured horizontally, from the inside line of the basement wall. Deviation
from these standards may be made only with written permission of the city. An
approved yoke or horn shall be provided to support the meter in the proper
vertical position. Meters larger than one inch shall be set on a pedestal.
   (C)   All meter installation shall have a gate valve on the street side of
the meter. In no case shall there be more than 12 inches of pipe exposed
between the point of entrance through the floor and the gate valve. A gate
valve shall also be installed on the house side of the meter.
   (D)   The water service connecting with the main shall not be run within any
structure or under any basement floor for a distance of more than two feet,
measured from the inside foundation wall, before being connected to the water
meter, except if said service line is run specifically under the concrete
basement floor to a designated location shown on the approved plan. The water
service line, if installed under the concrete basement floor, must identify on
the approved building plan the point of entry under the foundation and said
water line shall be installed in a straight line between the point of entry and
the location where the service line extends through the concrete floor.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
§ 52.999  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, unless otherwise specified, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each act
of violation and every day upon which a violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   (1)   For each instance of non-compliance with water usage
restrictions imposed by §
52.050 of this chapter, a charge shall be assessed against the property on
which the violation occurred and added to the water bill for such premises. The
amount of the charge shall be specified by the Council in its resolution and
the Mayor in his or her certification to the City Clerk.
      (2)   Failure to comply with water usage restrictions after two warnings
shall be cause for discontinuance of water service.
      (3)   Failure to comply with water usage restrictions shall be a petty
misdemeanor punishable by the maximum fine allowed by law for such offense.
(Ord. 2001-2, passed 4-10-2001)
TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC AND PARKING PROVISIONS
      
71.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70:  TRAFFIC AND PARKING PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Truck restrictions
   
70.03   Seasonal weight restrictions
   
70.04   Parking, standing and stopping generally
   
70.05   Winter parking
   
70.06   Removing keys while loading or unloading
   
70.07   Exhibition driving
   
70.08   Police duties
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.
   Any term used in this traffic code and defined in M.S. § 169.01, as it may
be amended from time to time, has the meaning given it by that section.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 4-29-2014)
§ 70.02  TRUCK RESTRICTIONS.
   The City Council, by resolution, may designate streets on which travel by
commercial vehicles is prohibited. the City Manager shall erect appropriate
signs on such streets. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to operate a
vehicle in violation of this section. Such restrictions shall be in addition to
and not in  lieu of those established by state statutes and the Commissioner of
Transportation.
   (A)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   School buses when engaged in the act of transporting pupils to or
from school;
      (2)   Emergency vehicles;
      (3)   Trucks belonging to the city;
      (4)   Trucks belonging to utility companies when actually engaged in the
construction or repair of utility company facilities;
      (5)   Trucks delivering retail merchandise to homes on regular routes;
      (6)   Trucks employed in the removal of rubbish, trash or garbage, or in
the pumping of private sewage disposal systems;
      (7)   Trucks securing from the city a special permit to travel upon city
streets as provided in this section.
   (B)   No trucks shall travel on any street except on those streets
designated as truck routes.
   (C)   Truck routes shall consist of the following streets:
      (1)   All designated U.S. highways;
      (2)   All designated state highways;
      (3)   All designated county highways; and
      (4)   City streets as designated:
         (a)   South Diamond Lake Road from Brockton Lane to Dayton River Road
(County Road 12).
         (b)   Pineview Lane from 129th Avenue North to Dayton River Road
(County Road 12).
         (c)   Territorial Road from Brockton Lane to city border of Maple
Grove.
   (D)   Special permits may be obtained from the city for trucks in excess of
the weight limits imposed herein by submitted to the city an application. Upon
submission of a completed application, together with an agreement to pay for
any damage caused to the streets because of the travel thereon by the truck, a
special permit may be issued.
   (E)   The Council shall cause appropriate signs to be posted designating the
truck routes established herein.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 4-29-2014; Ord. 2016-16, passed 7-12-2016)  Penalty, see
§
70.99
§ 70.03  SEASONAL WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   The Maintenance Department may recommend the prohibition of operation of
vehicles upon any street within the city or recommend weight restrictions on
vehicles to be operated on such street whenever the street, by reason of
deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions, will be seriously
damaged or destroyed unless the use of vehicles on the street is prohibited or
the permissible weights thereof reduced. The Council shall act on such
recommendation to erect and maintain appropriate signs plainly indicating the
prohibition or restriction at each end of that portion of street so affected.
No person shall operate a vehicle on a posted street in violation of the
prohibition or restriction.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 4-29-2014)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04  PARKING, STANDING AND STOPPING GENERALLY.
   (A)   No parking, stopping or standing zones. The Council may, by
resolution, designate certain streets or portions of streets as no parking or
no stopping or standing zones or as zones for parking by physically disabled
persons and may limit the hours in which the restrictions apply. The
Maintenance Department shall mark, by appropriate signs, the zone so
designated. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or a traffic-control device,
no person shall stop or park a vehicle in an established no stopping or
standing zone where stopping or standing is prohibited. No vehicle shall be
parked in a no parking zone during hours when parking is prohibited, except
when permitted by state law and except that a vehicle may be parked temporarily
in such zone for the purpose of forming a funeral procession; and a truck may
be parked temporarily between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any
business day only for the purpose of loading or unloading where access to the
premises is not otherwise available.
   (B)   Parking prohibited during certain hours.
      (1)   No vehicle shall be parked upon any public street or right-of-way
within the city between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except by permit.
Permits will be issued by the city, to city residents only, upon completion and
approval of permit application. Permits will be issued at the discretion of the
Chief of Police. Permit parking is allowed along the curb or edge of roadway
within the applicant’s property line. A permit does not allow exemption from
any other section of this traffic code.
      (2)   The application fee shall be set by resolution as part of the
city’s fee schedule.
   (C)   Impoundment. Any police officer may cause to be removed a vehicle from
a street to a garage or other place of safety when the vehicle is left
unattended and constitutes an obstruction to traffic, endangers public safety
or hinders snow removal or street improvement maintenance operations. Whenever
an officer causes removal of a vehicle under this division (C), the officer
shall use all reasonable means available to ascertain the owner of such vehicle
and notify the owner of the same. Such notice shall also be given to the garage
where such vehicle is being held. If a registered owner is ascertained, such
vehicle shall be released only to such owner. Such vehicle shall not be
released until the fees for towing and storage are paid.
   (D)   Truck parking. No truck with a gross weight in excess of four and one-
half tons or greater than two axles shall be parked or allowed to stand for
greater than four hours, except during actual loading and unloading, on any
street or roadway within the city.
   (E)   Prima facie evidence. The presence of any motor vehicle on any street
standing or parked in violation of this traffic code is prima facie evidence
that the registered owner of the vehicle committed or authorized the commission
of the violation.
(Ord. 83-6, passed 6-20-1983; Ord. 2014-06, passed 4-29-2014)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.05  WINTER PARKING.
   No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle or permit it to stand
on any street within the city after a two-inch snowfall until after such street
has been plowed full width. Violation of this section shall be a petty
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 84-13, passed 11-19-1984; Ord. 2014-06, passed 4-29-2014)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.06  REMOVING KEYS WHILE LOADING OR UNLOADING.
   No person shall leave a motor vehicle, except a truck which is engaged in
loading or unloading, unattended on any street, used car lot or unattended
parking lot without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and
removing all ignition keys from the vehicle. Whenever any police officer finds
any motor vehicle standing in violation of this section, he or she shall remove
the keys from the vehicle and deliver them to police headquarters. Notice of
such removal shall be left with the motor vehicle.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 4-29-2014)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.07  EXHIBITION DRIVING.
   No person shall turn, accelerate, decelerate or otherwise operate a motor
vehicle within the city in a manner which causes unnecessary engine noise or
backfire, squealing tires, skidding, sliding, swaying, throwing of sand or
gravel or in a manner simulating a race. Unreasonable squealing or screeching
sounds emitted by tires or the unreasonable throwing of sand or gravel by the
tires is prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 4-29-2014)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.08  POLICE DUTIES.
   The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this traffic code and
the state traffic laws. Police officers are authorized to direct all traffic
within the city, either in person or by means of visible or audible signal, in
conformity with this traffic code and the state traffic laws. During a fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of
the Police Department may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding
the provisions of this traffic code and the state traffic laws. Officers of the
Fire Department may direct or assist the police in directing traffic at the
scene of a fire or in the immediate vicinity. It shall be unlawful to interfere
with such duties of officers.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 4-29-2014)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99  PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating §§
70.02,
70.03,
70.07 or
70.08 of this traffic code is guilty of a misdemeanor. Violation of any other
provision of this traffic code shall be a petty misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 4-29-2014)
CHAPTER 71:  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Motorized Dirt Bikes and All-Terrain Vehicles
   
71.01   Definitions
   
71.02   Use on lots of land
   
71.03   Exemptions
Snowmobiles
   
71.15   Youthful snowmobile operations; prohibitions
   
71.16   Operation on streets and highways
   
71.17   Hours of operation
   
71.18   Speed limits
   
71.19   Careless driving
   
71.20   Driving on sidewalks
   
71.21   Noise
   
71.22   Trespass
 
   
71.99   Penalty
MOTORIZED DIRT BIKES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
§ 71.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE or ATV. A motorized flotation-tired vehicle of not less
than three low pressure tires, but not more than six tires, that is limited in
engine displacement of less than 800 cubic centimeters and total dry weight
less than 600 pounds.
   ESTABLISHED RIDING AREA. Trails or area on a lot used by a motorized dirt
bike and/or ATV.
   LOT or LOTS. A lot which is part of an approved subdivision, the map of
which has been recorded with the County Recorder or the Registrar of Deeds, or
a lawful lot described by metes and bounds, the deed of which has been recorded
with the County Recorder or the Registrar of Deeds on or before 1-31-1980, or
one for which the city has granted a waiver from platting. LOT or LOTS shall
not include any lot that is currently located in the Agricultural (A-1) or
Special Agricultural (S-A) zones on lots that are six acres or larger in size.
   MOTORIZED DIRT BIKE. A two-wheeled vehicle being capable of cross-country
travel on natural terrain without benefit of a road or trail.
(Ord. 2002-14, passed 12-10-2002; Ord. 2003-06, passed 5-27-2003)
§ 71.02  USE ON LOTS OF LAND.
   (A)   The use of a motorized dirt bike and/or an ATV is not allowed on lots
of less than two acres in size.
   (B)   A motorized dirt bike and/or ATV may be used on lots of two acres or
greater in size located within the city on the condition that the riders shall
adhere to the following.
      (1)   The established riding area for a motorized dirt bike and/or ATV is
to be located no closer than 100 feet from any lot line or 50 feet if a fence,
approved by the city, has been constructed along the lot line.
      (2)   Dust and noise control measures are to be maintained by the lot
owner. These dust and noise control measures are to be enforced by the city if
owners of lots that are adversely affected by dust and noise, due to motorized
dirt bike and/or ATV use, file a written complaint with the city.
         (a)   Dust control measures shall include, but are not limited to, the
planting of 12-foot high coniferous trees planted ten feet on center or the
construction of a six-foot minimum board-on-board style fence.
         (b)   A motorized dirt bike and/or ATV must have a federally-approved
spark arrestor, the noise emission may not exceed 99 decibels at a distance of
20 inches at idle, and mufflers may not be altered to increase motor noise,
have a cut out bypass or similar device.
      (3)   No more than two riders that are unrelated to the immediate
household members that reside in the dwelling on the lot may operate a
motorized dirt bike and/or ATV on the lot. A motorized dirt bike and/or ATV may
only be operated on the lot during the following times: Monday through Friday,
9:00 a.m. through 7:00 p.m.; and Saturdays and Sundays, 10:00 a.m. through 5:00
p.m. Operation of a motorized dirt bike and/or ATV must cease for a minimum of
one hour after every hour of riding.
      (4)   Operation of a motorized dirt bike and/or ATV shall not be allowed
on either primary or secondary septic sites.
      (5)   Any unvegetated, established riding area must be watered down
before, during and after usage as needed to limit dust.
(Ord. 2002-14, passed 12-10-2002; Ord. 2003-06, passed 5-27-2003)  Penalty, see
§
71.99
§ 71.03  EXEMPTIONS.
   The following uses are exempt from this subchapter:
   (A)   Any motorized dirt bike and/or ATV used by the city or any other
governmental body in conducting official business; and
   (B)   Any motorized dirt bike and/or ATV used for the purpose of lot
maintenance.
(Ord. 2002-14, passed 12-10-2002)
SNOWMOBILES
§ 71.15  YOUTHFUL SNOWMOBILE OPERATIONS; PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person under 14 years of age shall make a direct crossing of a
trunk, county state aid or county highway as the operator of a snowmobile or
operate a snowmobile upon a street or highway within the city. A person 14
years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age, may make a direct
crossing of a trunk, county state aid or county highway only if he or she has,
in his or her immediate possession, a valid snowmobile safety certificate
issued by the Commissioner. No person under the age of 14 years shall operate a
snowmobile on any public land or water under the jurisdiction of the
Commissioner unless accompanied on the same or an accompanying snowmobile, or
on a device towed by the same or an accompanying snowmobile, by his or her
parent, legal guardian or other person 18 years of age or older. However, a
person 12 years of age or older may operate a snowmobile on public lands and
waters under the jurisdiction of the Commissioner if he or she has, in his or
her immediate possession, a valid snowmobile safety certificate issued by the
Commissioner.
   (B)   It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile to permit the snowmobile
to be operated contrary to the provisions of this section.
(1978 Code, § 702.01)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.16  OPERATION ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   Upon streets and highways. No person shall operate a snowmobile upon
the roadway, shoulder or inside bank or slope of any trunk, county state aid or
county highway in the city and, in the case of a divided trunk or county
highway, on the right-of-way between the opposing lanes of traffic, except as
provided in this act. No person shall operate a snowmobile within the right-of-
way of any trunk, county state aid or county highway between the hours of one-
half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, except on the right-
hand side of such right-of-way and in the same direction as the highway traffic
on the nearest lane of the roadway adjacent thereto. No snowmobile shall be
operated at any time within the right-of-way of any interstate highway or
freeway within the state.
   (B)   Crossing. A snowmobile may make a direct crossing of a street or
highway at any hour of the day; provided:
      (1)   The crossing is made at any angle of approximately 90 degrees to
the direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a
quick and safe crossing;
      (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main traveled way of the highway;
      (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard;
      (4)   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with another public street or highway; and
      (5)   If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour after
sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced visibility,
only if both front and rear lights are on.
   (C)   Equipment. No snowmobile shall be operated upon a public street or
highway unless it is equipped with at least one headlamp, one taillamp, each of
minimum candlepower as prescribed by regulations of the Commissioner, reflector
material of a minimum area of 16 square inches mounted on each side forward of
the handle bars, and with brakes each of which shall conform to standards
prescribed by rule of the Commissioner pursuant to the authority vested in him
or her by M.S. § 84.86, as it may be amended from time to time, and each of
which shall be subject to approval of the Commissioner of Highways. Any sled,
trailer or other device being towed by a snowmobile must be equipped with
reflective materials as required by rule and regulation of the Commissioner.
   (D)   Exception. A snowmobile may be operated upon a public street or
highway other than as provided by division (B) above in an emergency during the
period of times when, and at locations where, snow upon the roadway renders
travel by automobile impractical.
   (E)   Highway Act applicable. All provisions of M.S. Ch. 169, as it may be
amended from time to time, shall apply to the operation of snowmobiles upon
streets and highways, except for those relating to required equipment and
except those which, by their nature, have no application.
(1978 Code, § 702.02)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.17  HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No snowmobile shall be operated, except during the following times:
   (A)   From 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday;
   (B)   From 7:00 a.m. Friday to 1:00 a.m. Saturday;
   (C)   From 7:00 a.m. Saturday to 1:00 a.m. Sunday; and
   (D)   From 7:00 a.m. Sunday to 1:00 a.m. Monday.
(1978 Code, § 702.03)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.18  SPEED LIMITS.
   No snowmobile shall be operated upon city streets, alleys or other public
property at a speed greater than 20 mph. However, in no event shall a
snowmobile be operated at a speed greater than reasonable or proper under all
of the existing circumstances. Further, no snowmobile shall be operated at a
speed greater than ten mph within 100 feet of any fisherman, fish house,
shelter, pedestrian, skating rink, sliding area or any other area where such
operation would conflict with the lawful use of other property or endanger or
hinder other persons or within 50 yards from any farm buildings; provided,
however, that, the foregoing speed limit shall not apply to snowmobile events
upon public waters within the city if a State Department of Natural Resources
permit to allow greater than normally permitted speeds is obtained. The
exception to the prohibition on speed shall apply only for the duration of the
Department of Natural Resource’s permit.
(1978 Code, § 702.04)  (Ord. 86-10, passed 10-6-1986)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.19  CARELESS DRIVING.
   No snowmobile shall be operated in a careless, reckless or negligent manner
so as to endanger or be likely to endanger the person or property of others or
cause injury or damage thereto, while on public or private property.
(1978 Code, § 702.05)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.20  DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS.
   Snowmobiles shall not be operated on sidewalks within the city.
(1978 Code, § 702.06)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.21  NOISE.
   No snowmobile shall be operated in a manner so as to create a loud,
unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs, annoys or interferes with the
peace and quiet of persons.
(1978 Code, § 702.07)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.22  TRESPASS.
   No snowmobile shall be operated upon private property of another without
lawful authority or consent of the owner and/or occupant of said property.
(1978 Code, § 702.08)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
71.01 through
71.03 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2002-14, passed 12-10-2002)
TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
91.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
92.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
93.   LARGE ASSEMBLIES
      94.   ANIMALS
CHAPTER 90:  HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
Yard Waste Management
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Residential composting
   
90.03   Commercial composting
   
90.04   Landspreading
 
   
90.99   Penalty
YARD WASTE MANAGEMENT
§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL COMPOSTING. The processing of yard waste materials collected from
off-site activities and brought to a compost processing facility for the
purpose of converting yard waste to a humus, soil-like substance suitable as a
soil enhancer and additive.
   COMPOSTING. The process of converting soft herbaceous yard waste materials
into a humus, dirt-like substance, suitable for use as a soil additive and
enhancement. Eligible compostable materials include leaves, grass, garden and
vegetable debris, and excludes woody tree debris, animal waste, garbage and
refuse, scrap and other such extemporaneous materials.
   INCORPORATION. The broadcasting, plowing/disking or blending of yard waste
into the soil, to a depth sufficient to prevent blowing or littering.
   LAND MANAGEMENT. A process of conducting a program of soil testing and
monitoring of soil conditions to identify presence of any soil imbalances,
contamination and related problems.
   LANDSPREADING. The direct application and incorporation of unprocessed yard
waste on tillable land zoned agricultural, for the purpose of soil enhancement
and reduction of soil erosion.
   RESIDENTIAL COMPOSTING. The private activity of collecting and processing of
one’s own yard waste materials, on one’s own lot, according to the guidelines
set forth in §
90.02 of this chapter and according to the public health and nuisance
ordinances, and converting that yard waste material into a compost to be used
on property as a soil enhancer.
   YARD WASTE. Leaves, grass clippings and other herbaceous plant materials,
but does not include brush, tree trimmings or other woody plant materials.
(1978 Code, § 510.01)  (Ord. 90-10, passed 4-16-1990)
§ 90.02  RESIDENTIAL COMPOSTING.
   Residential composting shall be permitted in any residential district or
private residential lot, in compliance with this section.
   (A)   No residential composting shall be permitted on any lot in any
district prior to the time of construction of the principal dwelling.
   (B)   Residential composting shall only be done in an enclosure and in a
manner that prevents blowing of materials, odors and other nuisance.
   (C)   All containers used in residential composting shall be located in the
rear yard between the rear property line and the rear of the principal dwelling
no closer than three feet to any property line, no closer than 20 feet to any
residential building.
   (D)   All containers shall conform to the following maximum total square
footage allowances. In no event shall any enclosure container on any lot in any
district exceed 50 total square feet in area or four feet in height.
 
If the lot size is... ...then the area covered by the container(s) shall be no
                      larger than
Less than 2 acres     25 square feet
2 acres or more       50 square feet
 
   (E)   Residential compost material shall be limited to grass, leaves and
soft herbaceous garden debris, and shall not include food waste, animal waste,
plastic, garbage, refuse, sewage or other debris.
   (F)   Compost material shall include only yard waste that has been generated
on the lot on which the composting site is located and shall not include waste
of any kind that has been generated somewhere else and transported to the
composting site.
   (G)   The humus created by composting shall be used only for the purpose of
fertilizing the lot on which the composting site is located.
(1978 Code, § 510.02)  (Ord. 90-10, passed 4-16-1990)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03  COMMERCIAL COMPOSTING.
   (A)   Restrictions. Commercial composting operations shall be allowed, with
a conditional use permit issued by the City Council, only in those zones in
which it has been specifically designated as allowable, and according to the
conditions set forth at division (C) below.
   (B)   Application. Any person desiring to obtain a conditional use permit
for commercial composting shall make application therefor to the City Council
on a form provided by the city. Such application shall contain the information
required by § 1001.09 of the city Zoning/Subdivision Code, which is separately
published and maintained in the office of the Clerk for public inspection and
copying.
   (C)   Conditions. The following conditions shall apply to all commercial
composting done in the city, and no conditional use permit shall be issued
unless the applicant can demonstrate compliance with the following.
      (1)   Site development shall include, but not be limited to, sufficient
grading and leveling of the operations area to ensure proper drainage;
screening wherever necessary; on-site access road construction for truck and
equipment access; holding ponds or water retention plan to ensure that water
runoff is contained and monitored; and any other requirements that may be
deemed necessary in the conditions application review process.
      (2)   Yard waste brought to the site to be processed shall be in bulk
only, or if approved, in shreddable biodegradable paper compost bags, that can
be processed with the material.
      (3)   No yard waste material shall be allowed at a commercial compost
facility that includes food waste, animal waste, refuse, debris, sewage by
product or any other extraneous materials.
      (4)   Any or all non-compostable materials that are separated and
screened from the processable compost shall be removed from the site at least
once each week, and disposed of at the processors expense, in a licensed and
permitted MPCA landfill.
      (5)   Access to any commercial compost facility should be along a nine-
ton paved road if materials are delivered in vehicles weighing nine tons per
axle or greater. If any part of the approved access is on a city-owned gravel
roadway, the maintenance of that portion used for the facility will be the
responsibility of the commercial composting company.
      (6)   Commercial composting activity shall not generate a health, safety
or general nuisance, including, but not limited to, dust, odor, litter, vermin,
fire hazard, contamination or any other nuisance.
      (7)   The city and its assigned representatives shall, at any time, be
allowed to enter the site for purposes of inspection and review of operations
and compliance with applicable zoning and code regulations and conditions set
forth in the conditional use permit.
      (8)   Commercial composting shall be done in accordance with all
applicable rules and regulations of any local, state or federal agency having
jurisdiction over such activities.
      (9)   The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to suspend or
terminate any conditional use permit at any time if, following an inspection,
he or she finds that any of the conditions set forth in such permit have been
violated.
      (10)   In the event of suspension or termination of the conditional use
permit by the Zoning Administrator, the permit holder shall have the right to
appeal a decision to the City Council within ten days. If no written appeal of
the Zoning Administrator’s determination is filed within ten days, the appeal
rights of the applicant have been waived.
      (11)   The applicant agrees that in the event of non-compliance with the
conditions set forth herein and allowing a condition, which in the opinion of
the city, creates a nuisance, the applicant shall allow the city entry on the
premises for purpose of elimination of the nuisance and assessment of the cost
of clean-up and enforcement pursuant to M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended
from time to time.
      (12)   The applicant must demonstrate sufficient ownership interest in
the property to be utilized for the activity and all persons having an
ownership interest shall sign any and all applications and be bound by the
conditions of the conditional use permit.
      (13)   Such other conditions as the City Council shall impose, including,
but not necessarily limited to, requirements for bonds, letter of credit or
cash escrow deposit to secure performance of the conditions herein.
   (D)   Procedure. The procedures set forth at § 1001.09 of the city Zoning/
Subdivision Code, which is separately published and maintained in the office of
the Clerk for public inspection and copying shall be followed with regard to
the approval or denial of a conditional use permit under this section.
(1978 Code, § 510.03)  (Ord. 90-10, passed 4-16-1990)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04  LANDSPREADING.
   (A)   Restrictions. Landspreading shall be allowed only in an A-1 Zone and
only by license issued by the city and administered by the Zoning Administrator
and City Administrator, and subject to all conditions set forth in this
section.
   (B)   Application.
      (1)   Any person desiring to obtain a license for landspreading shall
make application therefor to the Zoning Administrator on a form provided by the
city. Such application shall contain at a minimum the following information:
         (a)   Name and address of the applicant;
         (b)   Complete site plan, showing the property on which the
landspreading will take place and the location of buildings, trees, roadways
and any water or wetlands, as defined at § 1001.07, Subd. 1(5) of the city
Zoning/Subdivision Code, which is separately published and maintained in the
office of the Clerk for public inspection and copying;
         (c)   Legal description of the site, including plat and parcel number,
total acres and proof of ownership;
         (d)   Statement as to the total number of acres included in the site
and total number of acres on which the landspreading will occur;
         (e)   Statement as to the total number of cubic yards of yard waste
that will be delivered to the site;
         (f)   A copy of a signed contract, if any, between the applicant and
any other party concerning the landspreading to take place on the site; or, if
no contract has been signed, any proposed contracts or agreements relating to
landspreading;
         (g)   Signature of all owners of the site and the applicant, agreeing
to the conditions set forth at division (D) below; and
         (h)   The applicant agrees that in the event of non-compliance with
the conditions set forth herein and allowing a condition, which, in the opinion
of the city, creates a nuisance the applicant shall allow the city entry on the
premises for purpose of elimination of the nuisance and assessment of the cost
of clean-up and enforcement pursuant to M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended
from time to time.
      (2)   The applicant shall make an escrow deposit with the city pursuant
to §§
35.01 and
35.02 of this code of ordinances.
      (3)   The application shall be accompanied by payment of the license fee
which shall be set from time to time by the City Council.
      (4)   The application shall also be accompanied by a bond or cash deposit
to be held by the city to be used for any abatement of the project if needed in
an amount to be determined by the city at the time of application.
   (C)   License approval or denial. The application shall be reviewed and
approved or denied by the Zoning Administrator. Licenses for landspreading
shall not be issued to an applicant who is not the owner of the proposed
landspreading site without all owners’ signatures on the application agreeing
to it and the conditions of the license. In the event the Zoning Administrator
denies an application for license, he or she shall send the applicant written
notice of such denial. The applicant shall have ten days from the date of such
written notice to make a written request to the city for a hearing on appeal by
the City Council. Failure to request an appeal shall be deemed a waiver of
appeal rights. The appeal shall be heard at a Council meeting within one month
of the city’s receipt of such request. The Council may approve or deny the
license.
   (D)   Conditions. The following provisions shall apply to all landspreading
done in the city.
      (1)   Access to the landspreading site shall be located on a paved road
if yard waste is delivered in vehicles having a gross weight of nine tons per
axle or greater. If any part or portion of a city gravel road is to be used as
an access, the city may require escrow to cover any repairs needed resulting
from excessive wear resulting from haul activity.
      (2)   Yard waste shall be received at the landspreading site in bulk form
only and shall not be contained in bags of any kind.
      (3)   Yard waste shall not be accepted if it contains any extraneous
materials, including food waste, animal waste, plastics, refuse, sewage or bags
of any kind. However, in the event that the licensee unknowingly accepts such
extraneous materials, it shall be the responsibility of the licensee to
properly dispose of such extraneous materials in accordance with applicable
state law and this subchapter, at the expense of the licensee.
      (4)   Yard waste shall not be stored within 300 feet, nor spread or
incorporated within 100 feet, of any residential building, except the dwelling
occupied by the landspreading site owner. Yard waste shall not be stored in
piles in excess of 25 feet in height, for more than 24 hours without cover, or
spread or incorporated within 100 feet of any residential dwelling.
      (5)   Yard waste shall not be stored within 300 feet, nor spread or
incorporated within 100 feet, of any body of water or any wetlands, as defined
at § 1001.07, Subd. 1(5) of the city Zoning/Subdivision Code, which is
separately published and maintained in the office of the Clerk for public
inspection and copying.
      (6)   Yard waste shall be spread and incorporated within 15 days of the
date it is received at the site. Yard waste received between November 15 and
April 1 of the following year may be stored in piles not higher than 25 feet
and must be covered with a secure tarp to prevent blowing and migration from
the site, and shall be spread and incorporated by April 15 of that year.
      (7)   In any one calendar year, only so much yard waste may be delivered
to any one site as can be spread on that approved site to a maximum depth of
three inches. For the purpose of this division (D)(7), in any one calendar
year, a maximum of 400 cubic yards of yard waste may be delivered, spread and
incorporated on each acre included in the site.
      (8)   Yard waste shall not be spread or incorporated over land having a
slope of 10% or greater.
      (9)   Landspreading and incorporation shall be done in accordance with
any applicable rules and regulations of any local, state or federal agency
having jurisdiction over such activities.
      (10)   Landspreading shall be accompanied by a program of active land
management designed to enhance fertility and reduce soil erosion.
      (11)   The landspreading operation, including delivery, storage,
spreading and incorporation, shall not generate nuisances, including, but not
limited to, dust, odor, litter, rodents, fire hazard, actual or threatened
water contamination and windblown debris or yard waste.
      (12)   No deliveries of yard waste shall be made to the site before 8:00
a.m or after 4:00 p.m.
      (13)   The Zoning Administrator, his or her employees or assigns shall be
permitted to enter the landspreading site from time to time for the purpose of
inspecting the site and ensuring that the operation is being conducted
according to the provisions of this section.
      (14)   The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to suspend or
terminate any license at any time if, following an inspection, he or she finds
that any of the provisions of this section have been violated.
   (E)   Effective date of license. A separate license shall be required for
each application and for the delivery and incorporation of the total number of
cubic yards of yard waste as set forth in said application only. Any and all
additional quantities of yard waste must be applied for as separate activities,
requiring a complete and separate license procedure.
(1978 Code, § 510.04)  (Ord. 90-10, passed 4-16-1990)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   In the event any provision of §§
90.01 through
90.04 of this chapter is violated, resulting in a nuisance, the Zoning
Administrator shall suspend the conditional use permit or license, if any, and
the city, its employees or assigns shall have the authority to enter the site
for the purpose of abating such nuisance. Any costs or expenses incurred by the
city in abating such nuisance, including legal costs, shall be billed to the
owner of the site. The owner of the site shall pay such charges. Charges that
remain unpaid for more than 30 days after the date of the initial bill may be
filed against the property as a statutory lien, pursuant to M.S. § 514.67, as
it may be amended from time to time.
(1978 Code, § 510.05)  (Ord. 90-10, passed 4-16-1990)
CHAPTER 91: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
91.01   Watercraft
   
91.02   Park rules and regulations generally
§ 91.01  WATERCRAFT.
   (A)   Purpose. The city desires to protect certain species of ducks and
other resident wildlife on and around the vicinity of French Lake pursuant to
M.S.§ 97A.015, Subd. 24, as it may be amended from time to time.
(1978 Code, § 703.01)
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MOTORBOAT. Any watercraft propelled in any respect by machinery,
including watercraft temporarily equipped with detachable motors; provided,
however, that, MOTORBOAT does not include a watercraft propelled by a motor not
exceeding 45 pounds of thrust and operated by a disabled person.
      WATERCRAFT. Any contrivance used or designed for navigation on water.
(1978 Code, § 703.02)
   (C)   Restrictions on operations.
      (1)   Watercraft. No person shall operate a watercraft on French Lake
before June 15 of each calendar year.
      (2)   Motorboat. No person shall operate a motorboat at any time on
French Lake.
      (3)   Exemption. Divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) above shall not apply to
personnel from the Department of Natural Resources while performing resource
management duties or to enforcement and emergency personnel while in the
performance of their official duties.
(1978 Code, § 703.03)
(Ord. 87-5, passed 5-4-1987; Ord. 91-20, passed 11-4-1991)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.02  PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS GENERALLY.
   The use and occupancy of public parks and recreation areas owned by and
located in the city shall be subject to the following regulations.
   (A)   No firearms, air rifles, B-B guns, sling shots, explosives or
fireworks shall be brought into or used in park areas.
   (B)   Gambling, use of alcoholic and 3.2% malt beverage or abusive,
boisterous, profane or indecent language, conduct or attire will not be
allowed. 3.2% malt beverages may be consumed if a temporary license is obtained
pursuant to §§
114.040 through
114.050 of this code of ordinances for the public premises; and, intoxicating
liquors may be consumed if a permit is issued pursuant to §§
114.065 through
114.074 of this code of ordinances. All consumption, display, sale or serving
must be in conformity with the permits issued under said sections.
   (C)   No advertising, selling or solicitation is allowed in parks or
recreation areas.
   (D)   Dogs and pets must be leashed. Wildlife must not be molested,
disturbed or injured.
   (E)   Active games must be limited to designated play areas.
   (F)   Motorists will observe speed limits as posted and park only in
designated areas.
   (G)   Picnicking and fires are allowed in designated areas only. Fires must
be attended at all times and extinguished after use.
   (H)   Except for use of the Activity Center pursuant to a lease, public
parks and recreation areas shall not be occupied or used from sunset to
sunrise, except for those organized activities sanctioned and approved by the
city.
   (I)   Dumping or depositing bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans
or refuse of any kind is prohibited, except in the containers provided in the
parks.
   (J)   Discharge in waters of any pond, stream or any other body of water of
any substance, liquid or solid, or any other matter or thing which will result
in pollution of the water is prohibited.
   (K)   Removal, breaking, destruction, injury, mutilation or defacement in
any way of any structure, monument, statue, vase, fountain, fence, railing,
flag pole, vehicle, bench, tree, shrub, fern, plant, flower, fireplace or other
property in any park is prohibited.
   (L)   Distribution or display of obscene literature is prohibited in all
parks and recreation areas.
   (M)   Climbing of trees or flag poles, sitting or standing upon monuments,
vases, fountains, railing or fences in any park or recreation area is
prohibited.
   (N)   No person or organization shall use a park or park area for group
celebrations, meetings, entertainment and the like, which are considered
“exclusive use”, except through use of a permit issued by the Public Works
Department Superintendent.
   (O)   Placing of advertising, decorations or other devices of any kind on
vases, statues, flag poles, monuments or structures is prohibited.
   (P)   The Public Works Superintendent is authorized to make such other rules
and regulations as he or she may deem, in his or her discretion, necessary for
better control and management of all parks and violation of any such rules and
regulations as he or she may promulgate is also hereby prohibited.
   (Q)   No person shall operate or park a motorized vehicle in a public park
or recreation area, except on roads or paths or areas designated as places
where motorized vehicles may be operated.
   (R)   Except in the Activity Center pursuant to a lease, and except Activity
Center for functions, the use of intoxicating liquor is prohibited.
(1978 Code, § 302.01) (Ord. 83-11, passed 7-5-1983; Ord. 84-10, passed 7-2-
1984; Ord. 2006-08, passed 9-5-2006)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
Open Burning
   
92.01   Open burning prohibited
   
92.02   Definitions
   
92.03   Exemptions
   
92.04   Burning permits
   
92.05   Prohibited materials
   
92.06   Permit holder responsibilities
   
92.07   Burning ban or air quality alert
   
92.08   Use of burners prohibited
   
92.09   Recreational burning
 
   
92.99   Penalty
OPEN BURNING
§ 92.01  OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.
   Except as otherwise permitted by this subchapter, all open burning is
prohibited in the city.
(Ord. 94-3, passed 6-20-1994)  Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BURNER. A firebox, barrel or similar container used for an outdoor fire, but
not including grills or barbecues used principally for the cooking of food.
   BURNING PERMIT. A permit issued by the City Fire Chief or designee
authorizing fires exempted from the general provisions hereof and setting
conditions therefor.
   OPEN FIRE or OPEN BURNING. A fire burning any matter, whether concentrated
or dispersed, which is not contained within a fully enclosed firebox, structure
or vehicle, and from which the products of combustion are emitted directly to
open atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct or chimney.
   PERSON. Includes any natural person acting either personally or in any
representative capacity, a corporation, a firm, a co-partnership or an
association of any nature or kind.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE. A fire set for cooking, warming or ceremonial purposes
which is not more than three feet in diameter by three feet high, and has had
the ground five feet from the base of the fire cleared of all combustible
material.
   STARTER FUELS. Dry, untreated, unpainted wood or charcoal fire starter.
Paraffin candles and alcohols are permitted as STARTER FUELS and as aids to
ignition only. Propane gas torches or other clean-burning devices causing
minimal pollution must be used to start an open fire.
   WOOD. Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, “presto logs”,
charcoal, cord wood or untreated dimensional lumber. WOOD does not include wood
that is green, leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked or treated with
paint, glue or preservatives. Clean pallets may be used for recreation fires
when cut into three-foot lengths.
(Ord. 94-3, passed 6-20-1994)
§ 92.03  EXEMPTIONS.
   The following types of open burning shall be exempt from the prohibition of
§
92.01 of this chapter:
   (A)   Recreational fires subject to the conditions of §
92.09 of this chapter;
   (B)   Fires purposely set under the supervision of the City Fire Department
for the instruction and training of firefighting personnel; and
   (C)   Fires for which a burning permit has been obtained.
(Ord. 94-3, passed 6-20-1994)
§ 92.04  BURNING PERMITS.
   (A)   General. Except for permits issued by the State Department of Natural
Resources for fire training and permanent burn sites, the City Fire Chief or
designee may issue a burning permit for any of the following:
      (1)   Fires set for the elimination of a fire hazard which cannot be
abated by any other practical means;
      (2)   Fires purposely set for forest and game management purposes when no
other alternative methods are practical;
      (3)   The burning of trees, brush, grass and other vegetable matter in
the clearing of land, the maintenance of street, roadway, highway or railroad
right-of-way, and in accepted agricultural land management practices, where
chipping, composting, landscaping or other alternative methods are not
practical;
      (4)   The disposal of diseased trees generated on site, diseased or
infected nursery stock or diseased bee hives; and
      (5)   Ground thawing for utility repair and construction.
   (B)   Procedure for permit issuance.
      (1)   Application for a burning permit shall be submitted to the City
Fire Chief on a form prescribed by the city.
      (2)   The Fire Chief or designee shall review the application to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter and any applicable state laws
and/or regulations.
      (3)   The Fire Chief or designee will inspect the proposed burn site on
such occasions and at such time as is deemed necessary to adequately review the
application. Submission of the application shall constitute authorization for
the Fire Chief or designee to enter the premises for this purpose.
      (4)   The Fire Chief or designee shall either grant or deny the
application.
   (C)   Denial of permit.
      (1)   Application for a burning permit may be denied for any one of the
following reasons.
         (a)   The proposed fire or burn site does not meet the requirements of
divisions (C)(1)(b) through (C)(1)(e) below.
         (b)   The Fire Chief or designee determines that there is a practical
alternative method of disposal of the material.
         (c)   The Fire Chief or designee determines that the fire would result
in a pollution or nuisance condition.
         (d)   The Fire Chief or designee determines that the burn cannot be
safely conducted and no plan has been submitted to adequately address the
safety concerns.
         (e)   The location of the burning is within 200 feet of an occupied
residence other than those located on the property on which the burning is
conducted.
      (2)   The reason for denial of any application shall be noted on the
application.
   (D)   Revocation of permit. An officer of the State Department of Natural
Resources, the City Fire Chief or the officer in charge may revoke any burning
permit for appropriate reasons including, but not limited to:
      (1)   A fire hazard exists or develops during the course of the burn;
      (2)   Pollution or nuisance conditions develop during the course of the
burn;
      (3)   The fire smolders with no flame present; and
      (4)   Any of the conditions of the permit are violated during the course
of the burn.
(Ord. 94-3, passed 6-20-1994)
§ 92.05  PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
   (A)   No permit may be issued for the open burning of oils, petro fuels,
rubber, plastics, chemically- treated materials or other materials which
produce excessive or noxious smoke such as tires, railroad ties, treated,
painted or glued wood, composite shingles, tar paper, insulation, composition
board, gypsum board (sheetrock) wiring, paint or paint filters.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued for the open burning of hazardous waste or
salvage operations, solid waste generated from an industrial or manufacturing
process or from a service or commercial establishment, or building material
generated from demolition of commercial structures, industrial structures and
farm buildings, or discarded material resulting from the handling, processing,
storage, preparation, serving or consumption of food.
(Ord. 94-3, passed 6-20-1994)
§ 92.06  PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The holder of any permit shall:
   (A)   Have a valid permit in possession at the burn site at all times during
the burn;
   (B)   Prior to starting burn, confirm that no burning ban or air quality
alert is in effect;
   (C)   Provide for constant attendance by the permit holder or competent
representative during a burn event;
   (D)   Not allow the fire to smolder;
   (E)   Be sure that the fire is completely extinguished before the permit
holder or representative leaves the site; and
   (F)   Be responsible for all costs incurred as a result of the burn
including, but not limited to, fire suppression, administrative fees, property
damage and personal injuries.
(Ord. 94-3, passed 6-20-1994)  Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.07  BURNING BAN OR AIR QUALITY ALERT.
   No recreation fire or open burn will be permitted when the city or the State
Department of Natural Resources has officially declared a burning ban due to
potential hazardous fire conditions or when the State Pollution Control Agency
has declared an air quality alert.
(Ord. 94-3, passed 6-20-1994)  Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.08  USE OF BURNERS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall use a burner within the city.
(Ord. 94-3, passed 6-20-1994)  Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.09  RECREATIONAL BURNING.
   Recreational fires shall comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   Burning shall occur only between 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. during any
day of the week.
   (B)   The fire shall not exceed three feet in diameter and a flame height of
approximately three feet.
   (C)   Only clean wood or charcoal may be burned. No burning of trash, leaves
or brush is allowed.
   (D)   The fire is ignited with an approved starter fluid or other clean-
burning devices.
   (E)   The fire is constantly attended by a person knowledgeable in the use
of fire-extinguishing equipment and an attendant supervises the fire until the
fire has been totally extinguished.
   (F)   Fire-extinguishing equipment, such as buckets, shovels or garden
hoses, are readily available.
   (G)   Fire is not conducted within 25 feet of a structure or combustible
materials.
   (H)   Any conditions that could cause a fire to spread to within 25 feet of
a structure shall be removed or eliminated prior to ignition.
   (I)   Outdoor barbecue pits shall be constructed of concrete or approved
non-combustible materials and shall not be located within 25 feet of
combustible walls, roofs or other combustible material.
(Ord. 94-3, passed 6-20-1994)  Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A violation of any provision of §
92.01 of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. Nothing in §
92.01 of this chapter shall preclude the enforcement of §
92.01 of this chapter by way of any appropriate remedy in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 94-3, passed 6-20-1994)
CHAPTER 93: LARGE ASSEMBLIES
Section
   
93.01   Intent
   
93.02   License required
   
93.03   Application for license
   
93.04   Conditions of license
   
93.05   Issuance of license
   
93.06   Revocation of license
   
93.07   Enforcement
§ 93.01  INTENT.
   It is the purpose of the Council to regulate the assemblage of large numbers
of people, in excess of those normally needing the health, sanitary, fire,
police, transportation and utility services regularly provided in the city, in
order that the health, safety and welfare of all persons within the city may be
protected.
(1978 Code, § 507.01)
§ 93.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   License required.
      (1)   No person shall permit, maintain, promote, conduct, advertise, act
as entrepreneur, undertake, organize, manage or sell or give tickets to an
actual or reasonably anticipated assembly of 200 or more people which continues
or which can reasonably be expected to continue for four or more consecutive
hours, whether on public or private property, unless a license to hold the
assembly has first been issued by the Council as provided herein.
      (2)   In addition to the license required herein, the applicant must
possess and submit to the city any other necessary state licenses and/or
permits necessary to carry on the assembly.
   (B)   Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to any regularly established,
permanent place of worship, stadium, athletic field, arena, auditorium,
coliseum or other similar permanently established place of assembly for
assemblies which do not exceed by more than 200 people the maximum seating
capacity of the structure where the assembly is held.
(1978 Code, § 507.02)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.03  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Filing. Application for a license to hold an actual or anticipated
assembly of 200 or more persons shall be made in writing to the Council at
least 30 days in advance of such assembly.
   (B)   Required information and statements. The application shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The name, date of birth, residence and mailing address of all
persons required to sign the application as provided herein; and, in the case
of a corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation together
with name, date of birth, residence, home mailing address of each person
holding 10% or more of stock of such corporation;
      (2)   The address and legal description of all property upon which the
assembly is to be held, together with the name, residence and mailing address
of the record owner(s) of all such property;
      (3)   Proof of ownership of all property upon which the assembly is to be
held or a statement made upon oath or affirmation by the record owner(s) of all
such property that the applicant has permission to use such property for an
assembly of 200 or more persons;
      (4)   The nature or purpose of the assembly;
      (5)   The total number of days and/or hours during which the assembly is
to last, or reasonably anticipated to last;
      (6)   The maximum number of persons which the applicant shall permit to
assemble at any time, not to exceed the maximum number which can reasonably
assemble at the location specified in the application, in consideration of the
nature of the assembly, or the maximum number of persons allowed to sleep
within the boundaries of the location of the assembly by the zoning or other
regulations of the city if the assembly is to continue overnight;
      (7)   The maximum number of tickets to be sold, if any and the price
thereof;
      (8)   The plans of the applicant to limit the number of people permitted
to assemble;
      (9)   The plans for fencing the location of the assembly and the gates
contained in such fence;
      (10)   The plans for supplying potable water including the source, amount
available and location of outlets;
      (11)   The plans for providing toilet and lavatory facilities including
the source, number and location, type and means of disposing of waste deposits;
      (12)   The plans for holding, collection and disposing of solid waste
materials;
      (13)   The plans to provide for medical facilities including the location
and construction of a medical structure, the names and addresses and hours of
availability of physicians and nurses, and provisions for emergency ambulance
service;
      (14)   The plans, if any, to illuminate the location of the assembly
including the source and amount of power and the location of lights used for
such purpose;
      (15)   The plans for parking vehicles including size and location of
lots, points of highway access and interior roads including routes between
highway access and parking lots;
      (16)   The plans for telephone service including the source, number and
location of telephones;
      (17)   The plans for camping facilities, if any, including facilities
available and their location;
      (18)   The plans for security including the number of guards, their
deployment and their names, addresses, credentials and hours of availability;
      (19)   The plans for fire protection as may be required by this chapter;
      (20)   The plans for sound control and sound amplification, if any,
including number, location and power of amplifiers and speakers;
      (21)   The plans for food concessions and concessioners who will be
allowed to operate on the grounds including the names and addresses of all
concessioners and their licenses or permit numbers; and
      (22)   The plans for area traffic control for egress from and exit onto
public roads and highways.
   (C)   Bond. All applications shall be accompanied by a bond, filed with the
Clerk, either in cash or written by a surety company licensed to do business in
the state in a minimum amount of $300,000, which will indemnify and hold
harmless the city or any of its agents, officers, servants and employees from
any liability or causes of action which might arise by reason of granting this
license, payment of employees or services rendered by the granting authority
and from any costs incurred in cleaning up any waste material produced or left
by the assembly or the correction and repair of any damage to public or private
property caused by said assembly.
   (D)   Fee.
      (1)   All applications shall be accompanied by a fee of $100.
      (2)   If a license is denied, the applicant shall be refunded any amounts
paid which are not reasonably incurred by the city in processing application or
in related investigation.
(1978 Code, § 507.03)  (Ord. 2014-12, passed 9-9-2014)
§ 93.04  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   Before a license may be issued and in order to maintain a license, the
following conditions must be complied with by the applicant:
   (A)   Number of persons. Determine the maximum number of people which will
be assembled or admitted to the location of the assembly; provided that, the
maximum number shall not exceed the maximum number which can reasonably
assemble at the location of the assembly in consideration of the nature of the
assembly, and provided that where the assembly is to continue overnight, the
maximum number shall not be more than is allowed to sleep within the boundaries
of the location of the assembly by the zoning or health ordinance of the city
or regulations of the state or other political subdivision thereof; and
   (B)   Plan. At the time the application is submitted, the sponsor will
provide a plan which complies with the provisions hereunder for operation of
the assembly. Ten days prior to the start of the assembly, local authorities
will inspect to determine whether the requirements of these provisions have
been met and may continue such inspections at any time therefrom throughout to
the completion of said assembly:
      (1)   A fence or barrier (sufficient to prevent ingress/exit except at
established gates) completely enclosing the proposed location of sufficient
height and strength to prevent people in excess of the maximum permissible from
gaining access to the assembly grounds, which shall have sufficient entrances
and exits to allow easy movement in and out of the assembly grounds and provide
traffic control onto established public road systems;
      (2)   Potable water, meeting all federal and state requirements for
sanitary quality, sufficient to provide drinking water for the maximum number
of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one gallon per person per day
and where the assembly is to continue for more than 12 hours, water for bathing
at the rate of at least ten gallons per person per day, or portion of a day;
      (3)   Separate enclosed toilets for males and females, meeting all state
and local specifications, conveniently located throughout the grounds
sufficient to provide facilities for the maximum number of people to be
assembled, in accordance with State Board of Health regulations and such other
regulations promulgated by the city or any other regulatory body;
      (4)   A sanitary method of disposing of solid waste, in compliance with
state and local regulations, sufficient to dispose of the solid waste
production of the maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at
least two and one-half pounds of solid waste per person per day, together with
a plan for holding and collecting all such waste at least once each day of the
assembly, and sufficient trash containers and personnel to perform such tasks;
      (5)   Physicians and nurses licensed to practice in the state sufficient
to provide the average medical care enjoyed by residents of the state for the
maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one physician
and one nurse for every 1,000 people, together with an enclosed covered
structure where treatment may be rendered, containing separately enclosed
treatment rooms for each physician and at least two emergency ambulances with
attendants for each 1,000 people;
      (6)   If the assembly is to continue during hours of darkness,
illumination sufficient to light the entire area of the assembly at the rate of
at least five footcandles, but not to shine unreasonably beyond the boundaries
of the enclosed location of the assembly;
      (7)   A free parking area inside of the assembly grounds sufficient to
provide parking space for the maximum number of people to be assembled at the
rate of at least one parking space for every four persons;
      (8)   Telephones connected to outside lines sufficient to provide service
to the maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one
separate line and receiver for each 500 persons;
      (9)   If the assembly is to continue overnight, camping facilities in
compliance with state and local regulations sufficient to provide camping
accommodations for the maximum number of people to be assembled; all persons
sleeping during night hours shall so sleep only in a tent, camper, enclosed
trailer, mobile home, building or similar enclosed item;
      (10)   Security and traffic, and narcotics control plan which will meet
the requirements of local authorities and County Sheriff and sufficient to
provide adequate security for the maximum number of people to be assembled of
at least one security guard for every 100 people to be provided for the first
1,000 people to assemble; for assemblies of more than 1,000 people, additional
security guards will be provided at the rate of one for each 250 people;
      (11)   Fire protection shall be provided by the sponsor which may
include, but not be limited to, the following: fire alarms, extinguishing
devices and fire lanes and shall be sufficient to meet all applicable state
laws and local regulations which are in effect or may be set forth by the city,
Hennepin County or the state;
      (12)   All reasonably necessary precautions to ensure that the sound of
the assembly will not carry unreasonably beyond the enclosed boundaries of the
location of the assembly;
      (13)   Administrative control center with telephones where local
authority can contact the sponsor and law enforcement personnel inside the
assembly area; and
      (14)   A bond as required by §
93.03(C) of this chapter.
(1978 Code, § 507.04)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.05  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   The application for a license shall be processed within 20 days of receipt
and shall be issued only if all conditions are complied with and the Council
determines that there will not be an adverse effect on the general health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the city.
(1978 Code, § 507.05)
§ 93.06  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The license may be revoked by the city at any time if any of the conditions
necessary for issuance of or contained in the license are not complied with, or
if any condition previously met ceases to be complied with by the licensee.
Upon written demand by the license applicant, a hearing may be held upon such
revocation before the Council at which the applicant may present relevant
testimony.
(1978 Code, § 507.06)
§ 93.07  ENFORCEMENT.
   The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the city by injunction in
any court of competent jurisdiction and/or by criminal penalties provided by
this code.
(1978 Code, § 507.07)
CHAPTER 94:  ANIMALS
Section
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Enforcement
   
94.03   Impoundment
   
94.04   Killing dangerous animals in lieu of impoundment
   
94.05   Notice and disposition of impounded animals
   
94.06   Potentially dangerous animals
   
94.07   Dangerous animals
   
94.08   Appeals
§ 94.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. A dog, cat, horse, bird, including, but not limited to, fowl and
poultry, or any other domesticated bird or animal, which is harbored, fed or
kept by any person or group of persons.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. The Chief of Police, or his or her designee.
   AT LARGE. An animal when it is off the property of the person owning,
harboring, or keeping the animal, and it is not under restraint.
   CITY. The City of Dayton, Minnesota.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Dayton, Minnesota.
   FARM ANIMAL. Any living horse, mule, donkey, pony, cattle, sheep, goat,
swine, chicken, goose, duck, turkey, rabbit or any other livestock in the
raising of which is determined by the state of Minnesota to be an agricultural
pursuit, including, but not limited to, Cervidae, llamas, and Ratitae.
   KENNEL, COMMERCIAL. Any premises where more than five animals of over six
months of age are boarded, trained, or bred for compensation or are offered for
sale, except for an animal hospital, pet shop or veterinary clinic.
   KENNEL, PRIVATE. A place where five dogs over six months of age are kept on
premises which are zoned and occupied for residential purposes and where the
keeping of such dogs is incidental to the occupancy of the premises for
residential purposes.
   LARGE ANIMAL. Shall include any livestock and non-domesticated animals more
than 12 months of age.
   OWNER. Any person possessing, harboring, keeping, repeatedly feeding, having
an interest in, or having care, custody or control of any animal.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, organization, department or other
legal entity.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE ANIMAL. Any animal which commits acts defined in Dayton City
Code
Chapter 130; and/or:
      (1)   Is found at large;
      (2)   Damages the property of anyone other than its owner;
      (3)   Causes fouling of the air by odor;
      (4)   Causes unsanitary conditions of enclosures or surroundings;
      (5)   By virtue of the number of types of animals maintained, is
offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare;
      (6)   Excessively makes disturbing noises;
      (7)   Molests passersby or passing vehicles;
      (8)   Attacks other domestic animals; or
      (9)   Has been designated by the Animal Control Officer to be a public
nuisance animal by virtue of being a menace to the public health, welfare and
safety.
   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the city offices are open for the
transaction of public business.
   SMALL ANIMAL. Any living domesticated animal commonly kept as pets,
including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Domestic dogs (excluding hybrids with wolves, coyotes or jackals),
properly vaccinated against rabies;
      (2)   Domestic cats (excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays), properly
vaccinated against rabies;
      (3)   Rodents, such as hamsters, mice, gerbils, white rats, guinea pigs,
chinchillas or hedgehogs, capable of being maintained continuously in a cage;
      (4)   Rabbits;
      (5)   Captive-bred species of common cage birds;
      (6)   Small non-venomous snakes;
      (7)   Non-poisonous lizards, iguanas, chameleons, salamanders and turtles
or other similar small reptiles, unless prohibited by state or federal law;
      (8)   Fish, unless prohibited by state or federal law;
      (9)   Domestically raised ferrets, properly vaccinated against rabies
(must be vaccinated yearly);
      (10)   Domestically raised pot-bellied pigs; or
      (11)   Peacocks.
   WILD AND EXOTIC ANIMAL.
      (1)   Any one of a nonhuman species of the animal kingdom, including
those born or raised in captivity, except those defined as a small animal.
      (2)   Includes, but is not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Wolves, wolf hybrids, coyotes, foxes, jackals, and dingoes;
         (b)   Any large cat of the family Felidae, such as lions, tigers,
jaguars, leopards, bobcats, lynx, cougars, ocelots or margays;
         (c)   Any skunk, whether captured in the wild, domestically raised,
de-scented or not de-scented, or vaccinated against rabies or not vaccinated
against rabies;
         (d)   Any raccoon;
         (e)   Venomous snakes of the family Viperidae, such as adders, Gabon
vipers and pit vipers. Venomous snakes of the family Elapidae, such as cobras,
coral snakes, and sea snakes. The following three snakes of the family
Colubridae: the African twig snake (Thelotomis Kirtland), the rear fanged
boomslang (Disphoiidustypus), and the Asian tiger snake (Rhabdophisforinus).
Such snakes are wild and
exotic animals whether or not captured in the wild or domestically raised, de-
fanged or not de-fanged, or de-venomed or not de-venomed;
         (f)   Any monkey;
         (g)   Alligators, crocodiles, and caimans.
(Ord. 2014-11, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 2018-03, passed 1-24-2018)
§ 94.02  ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   To enforce this section, the Animal Control Officer or his or her
designee may enter upon private property when there is reasonable cause to
believe that an animal is on the premises and is not licensed as required by
the city, or that there is an animal on the premises which is not being kept,
confined or restrained. An owner shall produce for inspection his or her
license receipt when requested to do so by such officer.
   (B)   Interference with enforcement. No person shall intentionally interfere
with, hinder, or molest any Animal Control Officer or his or her designee in
the performance of his or her duty in the enforcement of this section.
   (C)   Strays. No stray animal shall be permitted within the confines of the
city. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to immediately impound
any stray animal that is not physically bearing a license tag as required in
this section.
   (D)   Confinement. The owner shall confine within a building or secure
enclosure any fierce, dangerous or vicious dog, cat or other animal except when
muzzled and in the control of a competent person. Every dog or cat in heat
shall be confined in a building, secure enclosure, veterinary hospital or
boarding kennel, or shall be controlled on a leash while being exercised,
provided it does not create a public nuisance.
   (E)   Quarantines and animal bites.
      (1)   Any animal that has bitten a person shall immediately be impounded
for at least ten days and kept apart from other animals, under the supervision
of a veterinarian, until it is determined whether such animal had or has a
disease that might have been transmitted by such bite. Such impounding shall be
at the owner's expense. Upon the expiration of ten days, if it is determined
that the animal does not have a disease that might have been transmitted by
such bite, the animal may be released by the pound keeper and reclaimed from
the pound as hereinafter provided. Any animal which has been bitten by a rabid
animal shall be euthanized or impounded and kept in the same manner for a
period of six months; provided that if the animal which has been bitten by a
rabid animal has been vaccinated at least three weeks before such bite and
within one year of such bite and if it is again immediately vaccinated, then
such animal shall be confined or impounded for a period of 40 days before it is
released. The period of time an animal is impounded may be reduced at the
city's discretion and based on a veterinarian's referral.
      (2)   Any dog or other animal that bites a human being shall be
quarantined in the manner provided by this section. The animal control officer
or his designee may determine that an animal or dog which bites a human being
is ferocious and of a vicious character, habit or disposition and the dog or
animal is a public nuisance and request the owner to voluntarily dispose of
said dog or animal. If the owner or person in whose custody the animal resides
refuses to dispose of said dog or animal, the Animal Control Officer or his or
her designee shall declare the keeping of the animal to be a public nuisance
and shall provide written notice directly to the owner or person keeping the
animal to abate the public nuisance, and if the person refuses to do so, they
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (F)   Dog defecation.
      (1)   Any person owning or having charge or control of any dog not
confined to that person's property shall immediately remove any feces deposited
on public or private property. Any such person shall have in their possession a
means to collect and dispose of all fecal matter in a proper manner. A
violation of this division is a petty misdemeanor.
      (2)   A person owning or having charge of any animal shall keep their
premises free from an unreasonable accumulation of fecal matter.
(Ord. 2014-11, passed 7-8-2014)
§ 94.03  IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   The Animal Control Officer or his or her designee shall apprehend and
impound any animal found under circumstances that are in violation of any of
the provisions of this section or upon reasonable belief that the animal is
diseased, rabid, or exposed to rabies. Any animal impounded by the Animal
Control Officer shall be delivered to the animal containment facility
designated by the city as its agent to house and care for confined animals.
   (B)   An Animal Control Officer or his or her designee may enter upon
private property for the purpose of impounding an animal where there is
reasonable cause to believe an animal to be in violation of the terms of this
section.
   (C)   Any owner, when requested by the Animal Control Officer or his or her
designee, shall produce for inspection his or her animal as well as the license
receipt and/or tag for a dog or cat.
   (D)   The Animal Control Officer or his or her designee, upon receiving any
animal, shall make a complete registry thereof by entering the type of animal,
breed, color and sex of such animal and, if required, whether the animal is
licensed. If licensed, the officer shall enter the name and address of the
owner and the number of the license tag.
(Ord. 2014-11, passed 7-8-2014)
§ 94.04  KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS IN LIEU OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   If an animal is diseased, vicious, dangerous, rabid or exposed to rabies and
such animal cannot be impounded after a reasonable effort, or cannot be
impounded without serious risk to the persons attempting it, such animal may be
immediately killed by or under the direction of the Animal Control Officer or
his or her designee. The city shall make reasonable attempts to provide notice
to the owner.
(Ord. 2014-11, passed 7-8-2014)
§ 94.05  NOTICE AND DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   (A)   Notices.
      (1)   At the earliest practical time after an animal is impounded, the
duly designated Animal Control Officer or his or her designee shall notify the
owner personally or by mail, if such owner be known to him or her or can be
ascertained with reasonable effort, of the impoundment of the animal.
      (2)   If the owner is unknown, such notifying agents shall post notices
at the animal containment facility and Police Department, giving a reasonable
description of the animal so impounded and the approximate time when and
location where the animal was picked up for impoundment.
      (3)   The notice shall also state that, if the animal is not claimed
within five regular business days after the animal has come into possession of
the animal containment facility, the facility shall dispose of the animal.
      (4)   The animal containment facility or Police Department may mail a
notice to an owner who fails to claim an impounded animal stating that, if the
owner fails to retrieve the animal within five regular business days from the
date of mailing, the animal shall be deemed abandoned and may be adopted or
euthanized. The owner shall be liable for fees and expenses incurred by the
city in connection with the impoundment.
      (5)   Disposition of unclaimed animals. If the animal is not claimed
within the time specified and all fees and charges paid in connection
therewith, the animal containment facility is authorized to sell or destroy the
animal, and, if destroyed, dispose of the carcass. In disposing of dogs or cats
after the five regular business day period, the animal containment facility
shall comply with all the requirements set forth in M.S. § 35.71.
      (6)   Care of animals. Any animal in the custody of the animal
containment facility shall be housed and fed in a humane manner during its
confinement. Dogs or cats which have been impounded shall be kept in segregated
pens and fed an appropriate commercial dog or cat food.
      (7)   Fees. Impoundment fees for the impoundment of dogs, cats or other
animals, which fees shall include charges for board and shelter for each such
animal impounded, shall be in an amount duly established by the Dayton City
Council and animal control agency from time to time. The impoundment fees may,
at the Council's discretion, increase with each occasion the same animal has
been impounded by the city.
   (B)   Nuisances.
      (1)   No owner shall allow any animal to commit acts defined or described
in this section or Dayton City Code
Chapter 130 as a nuisance.
      (2)   No person shall permit any animal, small animal, large animal,
wild/exotic animal or farm animal which he or she is the owner, keeper, or
custodian to be at large.
      (3)   The owning, keeping, or harboring of any animal which does any of
the following is hereby declared to be an act of nuisance committed by the
person owning, keeping or harboring the animal:
         (a)   Is-found at large;
         (b)   Damages the property of anyone other than its owner;
         (c)   Causes fouling of the air by odor;
         (d)   Causes unsanitary conditions of enclosures or surroundings;
         (e)   By virtue of the number of types of animals maintained, is
offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare;
         (f)   Excessively makes disturbing noises;
         (g)   Molests passersby or passing vehicles;
         (h)   Attacks other domestic animals;
         (i)   Has been designated by the Animal Control Officer to be a public
nuisance animal by virtue of being a menace to the public health, welfare and
safety; or
         (j)   Commits any other act constituting a nuisance as defined by
local, state or federal rules or regulations.
      (4)   An animal that scratches or bites a person is subject to an animal
bite procedure administered by the Dayton Police Department, which procedure
shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council.
      (5)   In addition to punishment of the owner of the animal as prescribed
in this section, the animal committing such act of nuisance shall be subject to
impoundment. The owner shall be advised in writing prior to release of the
animal of the basis for the impoundment and the consequences of further
violations.
      (6)   When an animal commits an act of nuisance and the owner is
convicted or the animal is impounded, and the animal commits a subsequent act
of nuisance, the control officer or his or her designee may do one or more of
the following:
         (a)   Direct the owner to remove the animal from the city within ten
days of receipt of notice by personal service or mail. Failure to comply is a
misdemeanor;
         (b)   Seek a court order for the destruction of the animal; or
         (c)   Declare the animal potentially dangerous or dangerous if it also
meets the criteria in either §§
94.06 or
94.07.
(Ord. 2014-11, passed 7-8-2014)
§ 94.06  POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   The Animal Control Officer or his or her designee may declare an
animal potentially dangerous if one of the following criteria is met:
      (1)   The animal, without provocation, attacks or bites a person or a
domestic animal on public or private property;
      (2)   The animal, without provocation, chases or approaches a person,
including, but not limited to, on a bicycle or upon the street, sidewalk or any
public or private property in an apparent attitude of attack or in a menacing
fashion;
      (3)   The animal has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to
attack without provocation, to cause injury, or to otherwise threaten the
safety of any person or domestic animal; or
      (4)   The animal is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the
purpose of fighting or is trained for fighting.
   (B)   The person making such declaration shall notify the animal's owner in
writing of the declaration and provide information pertaining to the regulation
of dangerous animals. The owner may appeal this designation according to the
procedures in division (D)(1) of this section. Notwithstanding any appeal that
may be requested by the owner, the owner shall comply with the provisions of
this section until and unless the declaration is reversed by the hearing
officer or a court of law.
   (C)   The owner of a potentially dangerous dog must have a microchip
implanted in the dog for identification pursuant to M.S. § 347.515. Proof in
the form of a receipt of the implanted microchip must be provided to the Dayton
Police Department within 14 days of notification under this division. The name
of the microchip manufacturer and identification number must also be provided
to the animal control authority.
   (D)   Potentially dangerous animal appeal.
      (1)   The owner may appeal by delivering a written notice of appeal to
the Dayton Police Department within seven days after receipt of the notice
referred to in division (B) of this section. The notice of appeal must identify
the name, address, and telephone number of the owner, include complete animal
information, and must state the basis for the appeal. Upon receipt of a valid
notice of appeal, a hearing shall be held within 14 days of the request before
an impartial hearing examiner who shall not be a member of the Dayton city
staff. The rules of evidence need not be strictly followed and records of the
Animal Control Officer or law enforcement officer shall be considered without
further foundation. After considering all evidence submitted, the hearing
examiner shall issue a written order setting forth whether the animal is
potentially dangerous pursuant to M.S. §
347.50. The order shall be made within ten business days after the hearing and
shall be served by mail or personal service upon the owner as soon as
practical.
      (2)   The hearing officer shall be appointed by the City Administrator or
his or her designee. The hearing officer shall receive compensation in an
amount to be determined by the City Council. The decision of a hearing officer
is effective the date it is issued, unless a later date is stated in the
decision.
   (E)   The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall keep the dog, while on
the owner's property, in a proper enclosure or on a substantial leash. For the
purpose of this section, the term "substantial leash" shall mean a leash that
properly and completely restrains the potentially dangerous dog's movements.
   (F)   The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall muzzle and restrain the
dog on a substantial leash not to extend more than six feet whenever off of its
own property. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will prevent the dog
from biting any person or animal but will not cause injury to the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration, such as a basket-type muzzle.
   (G)   The owner of a potentially dangerous dog must post a clearly visible
purchased "Beware of Dog" sign. The sign must be at least ten inches by 14
inches in dimension.
   (H)   (1)   The owners of a potentially dangerous dog shall notify the
Dayton Police Department in writing if the potentially dangerous dog:
         (a)   Dies or is sold or transferred;
         (b)   Is to be kept at a location or residence within the city that is
new or different from the owner's property on file with the Dayton Police
Department; or
         (c)   Shall no longer be kept within the city.
      (2)   Such notice shall be provided within 14 days of said event and
shall include, but is not limited to (if applicable), the name, address and
contact information of any new owner and location(s) where the dog is being
kept.
(Ord. 2014-11, passed 7-8-2014)
§ 94.07  DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Compliance with state law. The owner of a dangerous dog must comply
with M.S. §§ 347.50 through 347.565. Any violation of such statutory provisions
is a misdemeanor under this section.
   (B)   Procedure for determination that animal is dangerous. The owner of a
dangerous animal shall be advised in writing of the determination that the
animal is dangerous, and shall be provided a copy of M.S. §§ 347.50 through
347.565. The owner may appeal this designation according to the procedures in
division (C)(1) of this section. Notwithstanding any appeal that may be
requested by the owner, the owner shall comply with the provisions of this
section until and unless the declaration is reversed by the hearing officer or
a court of law.
   (C)   Dangerous animal appeal.
      (1)   The owner may appeal by delivering a written notice of appeal to
the Dayton Police Department within seven days after receipt of the notice
referred to in division (B) of this section. The notice of appeal must identify
the name, address, and telephone number of the owner, include complete animal
information, and must state the basis for the appeal. Upon receipt of a valid
notice of appeal, a hearing shall be held within 14 days of the request before
an impartial hearing examiner who shall not be a member of the Dayton city
staff. The rules of evidence need not be strictly followed and records of the
Animal Control Officer or law enforcement officer shall be considered without
further foundation. After considering all evidence submitted, the hearing
examiner shall issue a written order setting forth whether the animal is
dangerous pursuant to M.S. § 347.50. The order shall be made within ten
business days after the hearing and shall be served by mail or personal service
upon the owner as soon as practical.
      (2)   The hearing officer shall be appointed by the city administrator or
his or her designee. The hearing officer shall receive compensation in an
amount to be determined by the City Council. The decision of a hearing officer
is effective the date it is issued, unless a later date is stated in the
decision.
   (D)   Registration required. No person shall own, keep or harbor a dangerous
animal without first registering with the Dayton Police Department. Said
registration shall expire yearly from the date of the original dangerous dog
declaration. Each registration shall be accompanied with a fee established by
the City Council.
(Ord. 2014-11, passed 7-8-2014)
§ 94.08  APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by any procedure or decision of the Animal Control
Officer or designee, notwithstanding §§
94.06(D) and
94.07(C), may appeal the decision to the City Council in accordance with the
Dayton Zoning Code Section 1001.28.
(Ord. 2014-11, passed 7-8-2014)
TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   BINGO AND OTHER LAWFUL GAMBLING
      
111.   TOBACCO
      
112.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
      
113.   RENTAL DWELLINGS
      
114.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
115.   PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
      
116.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 110:  BINGO AND OTHER LAWFUL GAMBLING
Section
Lawful Gambling
   
110.01   Purpose
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   Lawful gambling
   
110.04   City approval of premises permit or gambling license
   
110.05   Organizations eligible
   
110.06   City Gambling Fund; contributions; administration
   
110.07   Reports
   
110.08   State law adopted by reference
Bingo
   
110.20   Purpose
   
110.21   Definitions
   
110.22   License required; application; suspension or revocation
   
110.23   Conduct
   
110.24   Bingo on leased premises
   
110.25   Prizes
   
110.26   Records
   
110.27   Reports
   
110.28   Inspection and investigation
   
110.29   Use of bingo receipts and profits
   
110.30   Exemptions
 
   
110.99   Penalty
LAWFUL GAMBLING
§ 110.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to closely regulate and control the
conduct of lawful gambling within the city and to ensure that the expenditures
of lawful gambling funds benefit the community and people of the city and
surrounding communities.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 2-26-2002)
§ 110.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLOWABLE EXPENSES. The same meaning as that given by M.S. Ch. 349, as it
may be amended from time to time, and rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   GAMBLING. Any activity or device prohibited by M.S. §§ 609.75, 609.755 and
609.76, as they may be amended from time to time, and shall further include any
activity, event or contrivance that simulates any such activity or device when
in or on any commercial establishment or property, except as otherwise allowed
pursuant to city ordinance or state statutes, or rules adopted pursuant to
authority contained therein. Prohibited GAMBLING simulations include, but are
not limited to, sports bookmaking, poker, blackjack, slot machines and other
similar activities, events and contrivances normally associated with gambling
and gambling locations.
   GAMBLING CONTROL BOARD. The board created by M.S. § 349.151, as it may be
amended from time to time.
   GAMBLING ORGANIZATION or ORGANIZATION. Any fraternal, religious, veterans or
other non-profit organization licensed by the state to conduct lawful gambling
under M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time.
   GROSS PROFITS. The gross receipts collected from lawful gambling, less
reasonable sums necessarily and actually expended for prizes.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. The same meaning as that given by M.S. § 349.12, Subd. 26,
as it may be amended from time to time, and rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   LAWFUL PURPOSE. The same meaning as that given by M.S. § 349.12, Subd. 11,
as it may be amended from time to time, and rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   MAIN PHYSICAL OFFICE LOCATION. The physical site for the organization
headquarters or registered business office of the organization, which is
located within the city and has been located within the city for at least two
years immediately preceding the application, and which is the physical site
where the organization regularly holds its meetings and conducts its
activities, other than lawful gambling and fundraising. Post office box numbers
do not qualify as the MAIN PHYSICAL OFFICE LOCATION.
   NET PROFITS. Gross profit, less amounts expended for allowable expenses.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 2-26-2002; Ord. 2012-08, passed 5-22-2012)
§ 110.03  LAWFUL GAMBLING.
   (A)   There shall be no gambling in the city, except bingo, raffle games,
paddlewheel and pull-tabs duly licensed or otherwise allowed pursuant to city
ordinance, M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.22, inclusive, as they may be amended
from time to time, and rules adopted pursuant to the authority contained in
said statutes.
   (B)   No city permit shall be required for the conduct of gambling exempt
from licensing under M.S. § 349.166, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to be an automatic approval
of a license applied for with the Gambling Control Board. The city reserves the
right to disapprove licenses for individual bingo occasions, raffle games,
paddlewheel games and pull-tab distributions.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 2-26-2002)  Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.04  CITY APPROVAL OF PREMISES PERMIT OR GAMBLING LICENSE.
   No lawful gambling license or premises permit, nor any renewal of either,
will be approved by the City Council for:
   (A)   Any organization that has failed to pay the contributions as stated in
this subchapter or has an outstanding deficiency in such contribution;
   (B)   No bingo or raffle license will be approved for an organization that
also operates another bingo or raffle game in the city. No person who is under
the age of 21 years shall operate or assist in operating a pull-tab
distribution in the city; and
   (C)   Any organization must meet the following:
      (1)   The organization has been in continuous existence holding meetings
for more than one year to the application for the license or permit;
      (2)   Of the gross profits derived from lawful gambling sales in the
city, 50% of the licensee’s or permit holder’s expenditures for lawful purposes
must be on charitable and/or not for profit purposes conducted or located
within one or more of the following cities and townships of Hennepin and Wright
Counties, Minnesota: Dayton, Champlin, Maple Grove, Hassan Township and Otsego;
      (3)   The licensee or permit holder must make the contributions as
required under this subchapter to the City Gambling Fund;
      (4)   The licensee or permit holder must make all reports as required
under this subchapter to the City Gambling Fund; and
      (5)   Must be an eligible organization under §
110.05 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 2-26-2002; Ord. 2012-08, passed 5-22-2012)  Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.05  ORGANIZATIONS ELIGIBLE.
   (A)   Organizations eligible to conduct gambling activities in the city
shall be limited to organizations that have their main physical office location
located in the city. Existing organizations and their premises permit locations
that have been approved by the City Council prior to 5-8-2012 are exempt from
this requirement as long as there is no lapse in their premises permit.
   (B)   Organizations that are not eligible due to the main physical office
location requirement may be granted a waiver from the City Council if, within
30 days from the date of submittal of their premises permit application to the
city, no eligible organization meeting the physical office location requirement
has expressed to the city a desire to operate gambling activities at the
premises applied for by the ineligible organization. The waiver would be
granted only for the specific location set forth in the premises permit
application and would remain in effect for the duration of the original
premises permit license. Upon the need for renewal of a premises permit
location, a non-eligible organization would follow the same process of approval
as stated herein. The priority set by the City Council for granting approval of
a premises permit application and its location shall be as follows:
      (1)   First priority given to organization whose main office location is
within the corporate limits of the city;
      (2)   Second priority given to organizations whose main office location
is located within the boundaries of the three school districts that are within
the city and who is eligible to be granted a waiver from the eligibility
requirements by the City Council. The three school districts are as follows:
Anoka Hennepin Independent School District 11; Elk River School District 728;
and Osseo School District 279;
      (3)   Third priority is given to all other organizations that are
eligible to be granted waiver from the eligibility requirements by the City
Council.
(Ord. 2012-08, passed 5-22-2012)
§ 110.06  CITY GAMBLING FUND; CONTRIBUTIONS; ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Pursuant to M.S. § 349.213, Subd. 1(a), as it may be amended from time
to time, there is hereby created the City Gambling Fund, which shall be
administered and regulated, without cost to the Fund, and held for safekeeping
by the city in an account separate from any city funds. Such funds shall be
deposited in a bank account designated “Dayton Gambling Fund” and no
expenditures shall be made from such Fund, except upon resolution by the City
Council. At the time of adoption of the city’s annual budget, or at the time of
amendments thereto, the City Council shall adopt said resolution listing all
lawful purposes for which the funds may be expended.
   (B)   (1)   Each gambling organization within the city which is licensed by
the state to conduct lawful gambling shall contribute 10% of its yearly net
profits to the City Gambling Fund. Such contribution shall be made on a
quarterly basis and shall be received by the City Administrator on or before
the fifteenth day following the quarter in which the net profits have been
earned.
      (2)    If an organization certifies to the city that at least 10% of its
net profits have been expended in the city for the lawful purposes specified by
the city, the City Council may grant a variance exempting the organization from
the payment required by this section. If such variance is granted, the
organization shall not be exempted from compliance with the reporting
requirements of this section.
   (C)   The City Administrator shall be responsible for the collection of
contributions to the City Gambling Fund. The City Attorney may initiate
appropriate actions to collect a contribution or any deficiency not paid when
due.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 2-26-2002)
§ 110.07  REPORTS.
   A gambling organization required to make contributions to the City Gambling
Fund shall submit, on a quarterly basis, no later than 15 days after the
quarter in which the net profits have been earned, the contribution and the
following information to the City Administrator:
   (A)   The amount of gross receipts and net profits of the licensed
organization for the quarter;
   (B)   The amount of contribution due for the quarter, together with the
method of accounting used to determine such gross receipts and net profits;
   (C)   One copy of all records and reports, with all attached schedules and
worksheets, required to be filed with the Gambling Control Board during that
quarter; and
   (D)   Such other information as the Administrator may require to enable a
determination of compliance with this section.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 2-26-2002)
§ 110.08  STATE LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.22, inclusive, as they may be amended from time
to time, and rules adopted pursuant to the authority contained in said statutes
are hereby adopted be reference and are incorporated in this subchapter as
completely as if set out in full.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 2-26-2002)
BINGO
§ 110.20  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to closely regulate and control the
conduct of the game of bingo and to prohibit commercialization of bingo.
(1978 Code, § 504.01)
§ 110.21  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVE MEMBER. A member of the organization requesting a license whose dues
are paid for the current membership period and who has been a member for at
least six months.
   BINGO. A game where each player has a card or board for which a
consideration has been paid, containing five horizontal rows of spaces, with
each row except the central one containing five figures. The central row has
four figures with the word “free” marked in the center space thereof. A player
wins a game of BINGO by completing any pre-announced combination of spaces or,
in the absence of a pre-announcement of a combination of spaces, any
combination of five spaces in a row, either vertical, horizontal or diagonal.
   BINGO OCCASION. A single gathering or session at which a series of one or
more successive bingo games is played.
   ELIGIBLE ORGANIZATION. Any fraternal, religious, veterans or other non-
profit organization which has been in existence for at least three years and
has at least 30 active members.
   PROFIT. The gross receipts collected from one or more bingo occasions, less
reasonable sums necessarily and actually expended for bingo supplies and
equipment, prizes, rent and utilities used during the bingo occasions, bingo
license fees and compensation to persons lawfully hired to conduct or assist in
conducting a bingo occasion.
(1978 Code, § 504.02)
§ 110.22  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   License required. No bingo occasion shall be conducted, except by an
eligible organization which has secured a license for that purpose, as provided
in this subchapter.
      (1)   Term. A license shall be valid for 12 calendar months from the date
of issuance.
      (2)   Fee. The annual license fee shall be established by Council
resolution.
      (3)   Transferability. No bingo license may be issued to any other person
or organization. No bingo license shall be transferred to any location other
than the location specified in the license, without prior approval by the
Council.
      (4)   Duration. No more than 104 bingo occasions each year or two bingo
occasions each week shall be conducted by any licensed organization. A bingo
occasion shall not continue for more than four consecutive hours.
(1978 Code, § 504.03)
   (B)   License applications. Every application for a bingo license shall be
made to the Clerk on a form supplied by the city and containing such
information as the Council may require. No person shall make a false statement
in an application. Copies of each application shall be referred to the city’s
Fire Chief and Building Inspector and to the County Sheriff for their
recommendations. A license shall be issued only to persons of good moral
character. A license application shall be acted upon by the Council no sooner
than 30 days and no later than 180 days after the date of application.
(1978 Code, § 504.04)
   (C)   Suspension or revocation. The Council may suspend for a period not
exceeding 60 days, or revoke any bingo license for violation of any provision
of M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time, or this section. The
holder of the license shall be granted a hearing upon at least ten days’ notice
if so requested before revocation or suspension is ordered. The notice shall
state the right to a hearing upon demand and the nature of the charges against
the licensee.
(1978 Code, § 504.05)
§ 110.23  CONDUCT.
   (A)   Bingo manager. Each licensed organization shall appoint a bingo
manager to supervise bingo occasions conducted by it. The bingo manager must be
a member of the licensed organization, with dues paid for the current
membership period, and must have been a member of the organization for at least
two years. The bingo manager shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of $10,000
in favor of the organization conditioned on the faithful performance of his or
her duties; except that, the Council may waive the bond requirement upon a
showing by the proposed bingo manager and the licensed organization that bond
is not required to protect the organization and upon unanimous vote of the
Council. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing
to the Council not less than 30 days prior to its cancellation. Each bingo
occasion shall be conducted under the direct supervision of the bingo manager,
who shall be responsible for the conduct of the bingo occasion in compliance
with all applicable laws and ordinances. No person shall act as bingo manager
for more than one organization.
   (B)   Checkers. One or more checkers shall be engaged for each bingo
occasion. The checkers shall be active members of the licensed organization or
spouse of active members of the licensed organization. The checker or checkers
shall record the number of cards purchased and played in each game prior to the
completion of each game and record the prizes awarded to the recorded cards.
Each checker shall certify all figures which he or she has recorded as accurate
and correct to the best of his or her knowledge, on forms prescribed by the
Clerk.
   (C)   Additional persons. Additional persons may be engaged for other duties
in connection with bingo occasions as needed, but no persons shall assist in
the conduct of a bingo occasion who is not an active member of the licensed
organization, or the spouse of an active member of the licensed organization.
(1978 Code, § 504.06)  Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.24  BINGO ON LEASED PREMISES.
   No eligible organization shall conduct bingo on any leased premises without
a written lease for a term at least equal to the remainder of the term of the
bingo license of the lessee organization. Lease payments shall be at a fixed
monthly rate, or rate per bingo occasion, not subject to change during the term
of the lease. No such lease shall provide that rental payments be based on a
percentage of receipts or profits from bingo occasions.
(1978 Code, § 504.07)  Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.25  PRIZES.
   (A)   Amount. Prizes for a single bingo game shall not exceed $100, except
prizes for a game of the type commonly known as “coverall” game. “Coverall”
prizes may exceed $100; provided that, the aggregated value of such prizes for
a bingo occasion shall not exceed $500. The aggregate value of prizes for a
bingo occasion shall not exceed $2,500; except that, in the case of a bingo
occasion during which a “coverall” game is played for a maximum prize of more
than $100, but less than $500, the aggregate value of prizes for the bingo
occasion shall not exceed $3,000. Merchandise prizes shall be valued at fair
market retail value.
   (B)   Delivery of prizes. Each bingo winner shall be determined and every
prize shall be awarded and delivered the same day on which the bingo occasion
is conducted.
(1978 Code, § 504.08)
§ 110.26  RECORDS.
   (A)   Gross receipts. Each licensed organization shall keep records of its
own gross receipts and profits for each bingo occasion. All deductions from
gross receipts from a bingo occasion shall be documented with receipts or other
records. The distribution of profits shall be itemized as to payee, amount and
date of payment. Records required by this subchapter shall be preserved for
three years.
   (B)   Record verification. Gross receipts shall be compared to the checker’s
records for the bingo occasion by a person who did not sell cards for the bingo
occasion. If a discrepancy exceeding $20 is found between the amount of gross
receipts for a bingo occasion as determined by the checker’s records, and the
amount of gross receipts as determined by totaling the cash receipts, the
discrepancy shall be reported to and investigated by the Council.
   (C)   Separate accounts.
      (1)   Bingo gross receipts shall be segregated from other revenues of an
organization and placed in a separate account.
      (2)   Each organization shall maintain separate records of its bingo
operations. The person who accounts for bingo gross receipts and profits shall
not be the same person who accounts for other revenue of the licensed
organization.
(1978 Code, § 504.09)  Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.27  REPORTS.
   (A)   Membership. Each licensed organization shall report monthly to its
membership its gross receipts from bingo, its profits from bingo, and the
distribution of those profits itemized as required by §
110.26(A) of this chapter.
   (B)   Council. At the time of making its first license application under
this subchapter, and on an annual basis thereafter, each licensed organization
shall file with the Council copies of the following:
      (1)   The most recently filed Department of the Treasury, Internal
Revenue Service, Form 990, Form 990T or comparable form if the organization is
required to file the form with the Department of the Treasury;
      (2)   The most recently filed annual report required of charitable
organizations by M.S. § 309.53, as it may be amended from time to time;
provided that, an organization that is licensed to conduct bingo but is exempt
from submitting this report to the Department of Commerce under M.S. § 309.53,
as it may be amended from time to time, shall nevertheless submit such a report
under this division (B)(2);
      (3)   The most recently filed State Department of Commerce “Statement of
Bingo Operations”. All information contained in the statement shall be true,
correct and complete to the best of the knowledge of the person or persons
signing the statement; and
      (4)   Any lease agreements required by this act, executed by the
organization in regard to premises leased for the conduct of bingo.
   (C)   False statements. No person shall knowingly make a false statement in
any report required by this section.
(1978 Code, § 504.10)  Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.28  INSPECTION AND INVESTIGATION.
   Any city official or employee having a duty to perform with reference to a
bingo license and any officer may inspect and examine the bingo records of any
licensed organization upon 24 hours’ notice.
(1978 Code, § 504.11)
§ 110.29  USE OF BINGO RECEIPTS AND PROFITS.
   (A)   No expense shall be incurred or amounts paid in connection with the
conduct of bingo, except those reasonably expended for bingo supplies and
equipment, prizes, rent or utilities used during the bingo occasion, bingo
license fees and compensation to persons lawfully hired to conduct or assist in
conducting a bingo occasion.
(1978 Code, § 504.12)
   (B)   Profits from any bingo occasion shall be expended only as authorized
by a resolution recorded in the official minutes at a regular meeting of the
licensed organization and only for one or more of the following purposes:
      (1)   Public welfare. Benefitting persons by enhancing their opportunity
for religious or education advancement, by relieving or protecting them from
disease, suffering or distress, by contributing to their physical well-being,
by assisting them in establishing themselves in life as worthy and useful
citizens or by increasing their comprehension of and devotion to the principles
upon which this nation was founded;
      (2)   Public works. Initiating, performing or fostering worthy public
works or enabling or furthering the erection or maintenance of public
structures;
      (3)   Governmental service. Lessening the burdens borne by government or
voluntarily supporting, augmenting or supplementing services which government
would normally render to the people; and
      (4)   Real property. The improving, expanding, maintaining or repairing
of real property owned or leased by the licensed organization. Profits from
bingo occasions shall not be expended for the erection or acquisition of any
real property, unless the Council specifically authorizes the expenditures
after finding that the property will be used exclusively for one or more of the
purposes specified in this section.
(1978 Code, § 504.10)
§ 110.30  EXEMPTIONS.
   Bingo may be conducted without complying with the requirements of §§
110.23(E) and
110.24 of this chapter if conducted in connection with the county fair
conducted by the County Agricultural Society or in connection with a civic
celebration recognized by resolution of the Council; provided that, bingo shall
not be conducted for more than 12 days during any one county fair or recognized
civic celebration or by an organization that conducts fewer than five bingo
occasions in any calendar year.
(1978 Code, § 504.10)  Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates a provision of §§
110.01 through
110.08 of this chapter or the statutes or rules adopted by reference herein
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2002-3, passed 2-26-2002)
CHAPTER 111:  TOBACCO
Section
   
111.01   Purpose
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   License required
   
111.04   License denial; basis
   
111.05   License terms and conditions
   
111.06   Prohibited sales
   
111.07   Vending machines
   
111.08   Responsibility
   
111.09   Compliance checks and inspections
   
111.10   Illegal acts
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01  PURPOSE.
   Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 18 purchase
or otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco products and tobacco-related
devices in violation of state law, and because smoking has been shown to be the
cause of several serious health problems which subsequently place a financial
burden on all levels of government, this chapter is intended to regulate the
sale, possession and use of tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco-related
devices for the purpose of enforcing and furthering existing laws, to protect
minors against the serious effects associated with the illegal use of tobacco,
tobacco products and tobacco-related devices, and to further the public policy
of the state in regard to preventing young people from starting to smoke as
stated in M.S. § 144.391, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 3-12-2002)
§ 111.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMPLIANCE CHECK. The system used by the city to investigate and ensure that
those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco-related devices
are following and complying with the requirements of this chapter and state
statutes. COMPLIANCE CHECKS may involve the use of minors as authorized
pursuant to this chapter and state statutes.
   INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED. The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco
product wrapped individually for sale. Individually-wrapped tobacco and tobacco
products shall include, but not be limited to, single cigarette packs, single
bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form and single cans or other packaging of
snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a
single pack or other container as described herein shall not be considered
INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED.
   LOOSIES. The plural form of any single or individually-packaged cigarette.
   MINOR. Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years.
   MOVABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business which does not operate from
a lawfully- constructed building with a permanent address, including, but not
limited to, a truck, van, automobile or other type of vehicle or transportation
shelter without a fixed address.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, association or corporation; the
term may extend and be applied to bodies corporate and politic, and to
partnerships and other unincorporated associations.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any licensed place of business where any tobacco,
tobacco product or tobacco-related device is available for sale to the general
public. RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS include, but are not limited to, grocery stores,
convenience stores and restaurants.
   SALE. Any transfer of any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco-related device
as a free sample, or for money, trade, barter or other consideration.
   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Any open display of any tobacco, tobacco product
or tobacco-related device in any way where any person has access to the product
or tobacco-related device without the assistance or intervention of a licensee
or an employee of the premises maintaining the display. The term does not
include vending machines allowed herein.
   TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any substance or item containing tobacco leaf
including, but not limited to, any cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, snuff, fine-
cut or other chewing tobacco, cheroots, stogies, perique, granulated, plug-cut,
ready rubbed and other smoking tobacco, snuff flowers, cavendish, shorts, plug
and twist tobacco, dipping tobacco, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and
sweepings of tobacco, and other kinds and forms of tobacco leaf prepared in
such a manner as to be suitable for chewing, sniffing or smoking.
   TOBACCO SHOP OR SHOPS. A retail establishment devoted exclusively to the
sale of tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco-related devices.
   TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICE. Any tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling paper
or other device which is used, or can be used, for the chewing, sniffing or
smoking of any tobacco or tobacco product.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electronic or other type of device which
dispenses any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco-related devices upon the
insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment directly into a machine.
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 3-12-2002)
§ 111.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall directly or indirectly keep for retail sale, sell at retail
or offer to sell or give away as free samples any tobacco, tobacco products or
tobacco-related device without first having obtained a license to do so from
the city.
   (A)   An application for a license shall be made to the City Clerk on a form
provided by the city and shall be accompanied by the annual license fee of
$200. Said fee is not returnable and shall not be prorated, except as may
otherwise be provided herein.
   (B)   The application shall contain the full name of the applicant, the
applicant’s residential and business address and telephone numbers, the names
and address of the business for which the license is sought and any additional
information the city deems necessary. If the City Clerk shall determine that an
application is incomplete, he or she shall return the application to the
applicant with notice of the information necessary to make the application
complete.
   (C)   The completed application shall be delivered to the Police Department
for investigation. The Police Department shall conduct investigation of the
applicant and application regarding the fitness of the applicant to hold a
license pursuant to the standards set forth in this section, and report the
results of its investigation to the City Clerk within ten business days of
receipt of the application.
   (D)   Upon receipt of the results of the Police Department’s investigation,
the City Clerk shall forward the application to the City Council for action at
its next regularly scheduled meeting. If the Council shall approve the license,
the Clerk shall issue the license to the applicant, which shall be only for the
location on the application. If the Council denies the license, written notice
of the denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the
applicant’s right to appeal the Council’s decision pursuant to division (E)
below.
   (E)   A person wishing to appeal shall file with the City Clerk a written
request for a hearing within ten days after receipt of notification of the
denial. Said request shall specify the order, decision or condition being
appealed, the date notification was received and the ordinance under which the
appeal is authorized. Said request will thereupon be scheduled on the agenda of
the next regular City Council meeting. The city shall, upon receipt of a
request for a hearing, provide written notice of the time and place of the
hearing to the requesting party. The city shall hear relevant testimony and
receive relevant evidence. At the trial of fact, the City Council shall make
the determination of the relevancy of testimony or evidence. After considering
all such evidence and testimony submitted, the Council may order on the record
such action as it, in its sole discretion, deems appropriate.
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 3-12-2002)  Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.04  LICENSE DENIAL; BASIS.
   The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a
license under this chapter, and such a license shall be immediately and
automatically revoked upon the discovery that the person to whom the license
was issued was ineligible for the license for one of the following reasons:
   (A)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years;
   (B)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any
violation of a federal, state or local law, ordinance or other regulation
relating to tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco-related devices;
   (C)   The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products or
tobacco-related devices revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date of
the application;
   (D)   The applicant fails to provide any information required on the
application or provides false or misleading information;
   (E)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state or local law, ordinance
or other regulation from holding such a license; and/or
   (F)   Any other cause which the Council, in its judgment, finds should
disqualify the applicant from receiving a license, including, but not limited
to, violations of any law regarding liquor sales.
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 3-12-2002)
§ 111.05  LICENSE TERMS AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire December 31.
   (B)   Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended as
provided in §
111.99 of this chapter.
   (C)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid only on the
premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to whom the
license was issued. No transfer of any license to another location or person
shall be valid without prior approval of the City Council.
   (D)   No license shall be issued for a movable place of business. Only fixed
location businesses shall be eligible to be licensed under this chapter.
   (E)   All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of the
general public on the licensed premises and shall be exhibited to any person
upon request.
   (F)   (1)   The renewal of a license issued under this chapter shall be
treated in the same manner as the original application for the license. An
application for renewal, accompanied by a license fee required by this chapter,
shall be filed with the City Clerk during the month of November.
      (2)   A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be considered a
privilege, and not a right, and shall not entitle the holder to an automatic
renewal of the license.
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 3-12-2002)
§ 111.06  PROHIBITED SALES.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or offer to
sell, with or without a license required by this chapter, directly or
indirectly, any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco-related device as follows:
   (A)   To any person under the age of 18 years;
   (B)   By means of any type of vending machine, except as allowed in §
111.07 of this chapter;
   (C)   Except for tobacco shops, all tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco-
related devices shall be stored behind the counter or other area not freely
accessible to customers and no sales shall be made by means of self-service
merchandising. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted in a
tobacco shop unless accompanied by a parent or guardian;
   (D)   By means of loosies;
   (E)   Containing opium, morphine, jimsonweed, belladonna, strychnia,
cocaine, marijuana or other type of deleterious, hallucinogenic or toxic or
controlled substance, except nicotine, and not naturally found in tobacco or
tobacco products; and/or
   (F)   (1)   By any other means, or to any other person, prohibited by
federal, state or local law, ordinance provision or other regulation.
      (2)   If there is a conflict between regulations, the more restrictive
shall apply.
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 3-12-2002)  Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.07  VENDING MACHINES.
   No person shall sell tobacco products from vending machines. This section
does not apply to vending machines in facilities that cannot be entered at
anytime by person younger than 18 years.
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 3-12-2002)  Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.08  RESPONSIBILITY.
   All licensees under this chapter shall be responsible for the actions of
their employees with regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products or
tobacco-related devices on the licensed premises, and the sale of such an item
by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder, for the
purposes of license revocation or non-issuance.
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 3-12-2002)
§ 111.09  COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the city and its
Police Department during regular business hours. From time to time, the city
shall conduct compliance checks by engaging minors, between 15 and 18 years of
age, to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco
products or tobacco-related devices.
   (B)   Minors used for the purposes of compliance check shall not be guilty
of unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco-related devices
when such items are obtained as a part of the compliance check.
   (C)   No minor used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false
identification misrepresenting the minor’s age, and all minors lawfully engaged
in a compliance check shall answer all questions about the minor’s age asked by
the licensee or his or her employee and shall produce any identification for
which he or she is asked.
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 3-12-2002)
§ 111.10  ILLEGAL ACTS.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years shall possess any tobacco, tobacco
product or tobacco- related device or enter the premises of a tobacco shop
unless accompanied by their parent or guardian. This division (A) shall not
apply when the person is in the household of his or her guardian, and shall not
apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check on behalf of the city.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to smoke, chew,
sniff or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco-related device.
   (C)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to purchase or
attempt to purchase, or otherwise obtain any tobacco, tobacco product or
tobacco-related device. It shall also be a violation of this chapter for any
person to purchase or otherwise obtain such items on behalf of a minor, or for
any person to coerce, or attempt to coerce a minor, to illegally purchase or
otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco-related
device. This division (B) shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a
compliance check on behalf of the city.
   (D)   No minor shall attempt to disguise his or her age by use of a false
form of identification, whether the identification is that of another person or
one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to
represent an age older then the actual age of the person.
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 3-12-2002)  Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Penalty to sell.
      (1)   Whoever sells tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco-related devices
to a person under the age of 18 years in violation of this chapter is guilty of
a misdemeanor for the first violation. Whoever violates this division (A) a
subsequent time within five years of a previous conviction under this division
(A) is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this division (A) if
the defendant proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant
reasonably and in good faith relied on proof of age as described in M.S. §
340A.503, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Other offenses.
      (1)   Whoever furnishes tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco-related
devices to a person under the age of 18 years in violation of this chapter is
guilty of a misdemeanor for the first violation. Whoever violates this division
(B) a subsequent time is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.
      (2)   A person under the age of 18 years who purchases or attempts to
purchase tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco-related devices and who uses a
driver’s license, permit, state identification card or any type of false
identification to misrepresent the person’s age in violation of this chapter is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (3)   Except as otherwise set forth in this section, any violation of
this chapter shall be a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Petty misdemeanor. Except as otherwise provided in division (B) above,
whoever possesses, smokes, chews or otherwise ingests, purchases or attempts to
purchase tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco-related devices and is under the
age of 18 years is guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
   (D)   Suspension or revocation of license. In addition to any fine or other
penalty, whether administrative, civil or criminal, a violation of this chapter
shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of any license issued
thereunder. The penalties set forth in M.S. § 461.12, as it may be amended from
time to time, shall be deemed the minimum administrative penalties to be
imposed for violation of this chapter. No suspension, revocation or other
penalty, except as provided in divisions (A), (B) or (C) above, may take effect
until the licensee has received notice, served personally or by mail, of the
alleged violation and had an opportunity for a hearing. The City Council, at
its discretion, may designate an independent hearing officer to:
      (1)   Issue notice of hearing, request the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and production of evidence relevant to said matter;
      (2)   Take evidence; and
      (3)   Transmit findings and a report of the evidence and hearing,
together with recommendations to the City Council for action thereon.
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 3-12-2002)
CHAPTER 112:  PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Purpose
   
112.02   Definitions
   
112.03   Exemptions
   
112.04   Designation of building as “no solicitation” area
   
112.05   Practices prohibited
   
112.06   High traffic, danger zone
   
112.07   False endorsement prohibited
   
112.08   Conduct of activity
Permits and Registration
   
112.20   Permit and registration
   
112.21   Permit transfer prohibited
   
112.22   Revocation of permit
   
112.23   Appeal
 
   
112.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is not to interfere with the legitimate business
interests of peddlers, solicitors or transient merchants, as those terms are
defined herein, but, for the protection of the interests and safety of
residents, including privacy interests and interests against crime, to regulate
all illegitimate operators and to regulate and control those who would use
their property presence within the city, or their proximity to its residents,
for purposes of harassment, nuisance, theft or other unlawful activities which
compromise the safety and/or privacy rights of the residents of the city.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 3-22-2011)
§ 112.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. Any person or entity, including officers, directors, employees or
agents thereof, whether or not a city resident, who goes from dwelling to
dwelling, business to business, place to place or street to street carrying or
transporting goods, wares, services or merchandise and offering or exposing
them for sale. This definition shall not include vendors of milk, bakery
products, groceries or other such items regularly distributed on established
routes, those selling products of the farm or garden that they themselves
occupy or cultivate, or those selling newspapers.
   SOLICITOR. Any person or entity, including officers, directors, employees or
agents thereof, whether or not a city resident, who goes from dwelling to
dwelling, business to business, place to place or street to street soliciting
donations or attempting to take orders for any goods, wares, services or
merchandise for future delivery.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person or entity, including officers, directors,
employees or agents thereof, whether or not a city resident, who engages
temporarily in the business of selling and delivering goods, wares, services or
merchandise within the city and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires,
leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, vacant lot, parking lot,
motor vehicle or trailer, or is located in a public place or private place.
This shall not include any person or entity who sells such items from within
the confines of a lawfully established and operating permanent retail sales
operation.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 3-22-2011; Ord. 2011-08, passed 5-24-2011)
§ 112.03  EXEMPTIONS.
   This section does not apply to the following:
   (A)   Acts of merchants or employees in delivering goods or services, where
the city resident authorized the contact via contract, invitation or request;
   (B)   Children, age 18 years or younger, soliciting for school-sponsored
activities or for such organizations as the scouts or little league, where the
children are members of the organization and where the proceeds of the sale are
mainly devoted to the benefit of children;
   (C)   Solicitations for donations, money or financial assistance for an
organization that is philanthropic, religious, political, non-profit or
educational in nature, or selling or distributing literature or merchandise for
which a fee is charged or solicited on behalf of such an organization; or
   (D)   City-approved festivals, community celebrations, farmers markets or
fairs.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 3-22-2011)
§ 112.04  DESIGNATION OF BUILDING AS “NO SOLICITATION” AREA.
   (A)   (1)   For purposes of this section, a building owner or manager, firm
or a corporation has the right to designate the building and premises as a “no
solicitation” area.
      (2)   This designation would include the entire premises and curtilage of
the building including individual apartments and individual business tenants,
whether the building is residential or commercial in nature, including whatever
other areas the building includes.
   (B)   The city finds that the interest in keeping people from grounds and
common areas to avoid crime, traffic and to protect privacy of residents
requires that the designation would control the entire building and premises.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 3-22-2011)
§ 112.05  PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   (1)   No peddler or solicitor shall enter, or attempt to enter, into
or upon any premises wherein a sign or placard bearing a notice stating “No
Solicitors” or “Peddlers or Solicitors Prohibited”, or any similar words
prohibiting entry, is located, notwithstanding that said peddler or solicitor
has a valid permit issued by the city.
      (2)   In addition, no peddler or solicitor shall enter, or attempt to
enter, into or upon any premises where said peddler or solicitor has previously
been informed by the resident that his or her presence is not welcome or
permitted in the future.
      (2)   Any sign prohibiting peddlers or solicitors shall serve to prohibit
all such actions.
   (B)   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall call attention to
his or her business or merchandise by crying out, blowing a horn, ringing a
bell or any loud or unusual noise; nor shall any person engage in business
after the hour of 8:00 p.m. or before 9:00 a.m. unless a previous appointment
has been made; nor shall any person furnish false information on the
application required in this section; nor shall any such person sell
merchandise or services by means of statements which the person making them
knows or should know are false or misleading.
   (C)   (1)   Placard. Any resident of the city who wishes to exclude peddlers
from the resident’s premises may place near the usual entrance to the premises
a printed placard or sign bearing the following notice: “Peddlers prohibited”.
The placard will be at least three and three-fourths inches long and three and
three-fourths inches wide and the printing will not be smaller than 48-point
type.
      (2)   Exclusion list. Any resident of the city who wishes to exclude
peddlers from the resident’s premises may request to be placed on a list
maintained by the city that would prohibit peddlers from entering onto the
resident’s premises.
      (3)   Peddler prohibited. No peddler may enter upon any premises where
such a placard or sign is placed or enter upon any premises of any resident
whose name and address is listed on the exclusion list.
      (4)   Placard removal. No person other than the person occupying the
premises may remove, injure or deface such a placard or sign.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 3-22-2011)  Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.06  HIGH TRAFFIC, DANGER ZONE.
   (A)   No transient merchant shall engage in business in a zone designated by
the City Council as “high traffic, danger”.
   (B)   The City Council shall determine annually those areas within the city
deemed to be high traffic and dangerous and a map of all such zones shall be
made available to the public.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 3-22-2011)  Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.07  FALSE ENDORSEMENT PROHIBITED.
   A permit holder may not make statements to the people contacted implying or
indicating that the city identification or permit constitutes an endorsement of
his or her activities or products by the city.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 3-22-2011)  Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.08  CONDUCT OF ACTIVITY.
   Any permit holder must do the following:
   (A)   Conduct the regulated activities in a reasonably courteous manner at
all times;
   (B)   Immediately leave private property when requested to do so by the
occupant or owner;
   (C)   Refrain from engaging in offensive, obscene or abusive language;
   (D)   Refrain from making untrue statements to the people contacted
regarding the purpose of the contact or the goods and services offered; and
   (E)   Abide by all applicable federal, state and local laws.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 3-22-2011)  Penalty, see §
112.99
PERMITS AND REGISTRATION
§ 112.20  PERMIT AND REGISTRATION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or transient merchant to
engage in any business within the city without first registering with the City
Clerk and obtaining a permit in compliance with the provisions of this section.
      (1)   Persons registering for a permit under this section shall first
file an application with the city available on a form to be furnished by the
city stating the following, without limitation:
         (a)   Name and driver’s license number or other acceptable
identification of the person registering;
         (b)   Name and addresses of all persons working for or assisting the
registrant, as well as authorization for background checks of the registrant
and all persons assisting the registrant;
         (c)   Permanent home address of the applicant and the address of the
place of business of the firm or corporation that the applicant represents;
         (d)   Description of the nature of the business and goods to be sold;
         (e)   Length of time for which right to do business is requested;
         (f)   Dates and hours when the activity will be conducted;
         (g)   Make, model, year, color and state license number of each motor
vehicle to be used in connection with the proposed activity;
         (h)   A list of the three previous municipalities through which the
applicant has obtained a permit, license or registration for the proposed
activity; and
         (i)   In cases of transient merchant sales, the applicant must also
provide:
            1.   Proof of appropriate permission to operate on proposed site;
and
            2.   Copy of the firm or individual’s sales tax permit that must be
posted at the site.
      (2)   Persons registering shall also be required to pay a registration
fee to cover the administrative costs of processing and investigation as
determined by the City Council by resolution. The fee shall be for each
individual who is registered under the permit.
      (3)   All registered solicitors, peddlers and transient merchants shall
display a registration permit issued by the city.
      (4)   All registrations shall be valid for the calendar year expiring on
December 31 after their issue. No proration of permit fees shall be allowed.
      (5)   Investigation. Upon receipt of each application for registration
with the required information and fee, the Chief of Police or his or her
designee shall immediately institute an investigation of the applicant
including criminal history and wanted persons check for the protection of the
public.
      (6)   Except as provided in M.S. § 364.05, as it may be amended from time
to time, any applicant may be found to be unsatisfactory, and the application
rejected, for reasons in the city’s determination, including:
         (a)   Fraud, misrepresentation, omission or incorrect statement in the
application form;
         (b)   Past fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement in the
course of business as a solicitor, peddler or transient merchant;
         (c)   Past conviction of any crime including fraud, theft or moral
turpitude, or any crime of violence deemed qualified by the Chief of Police
given the age of offense, nature of offense and explanation of any mitigating
circumstances;
         (d)   Conducting the business in an unlawful manner so as to
constitute breach of peace or menace to health, safety or general welfare; or
         (e)   Any other circumstances indicating that the intended recipient
may not honestly, lawfully and safely conduct the proposed activity.
   (B)   The reasons for rejection shall be noted and the applicant notified of
the disapproval of the permit. The applicant shall be informed of approval of
any application for registration and the Police Department shall promptly
communicate said decision to the applicant.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 3-22-2011)  Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.21  PERMIT TRANSFER PROHIBITED.
   A permit may not be transferred. Each peddler, solicitor or transient
merchant must separately register and submit an application under the
provisions described in this section. An application to register an additional
person to assist, under a previously granted permit, must be made to and
approved by the city before any additional person may conduct business in the
city.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 3-22-2011)  Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.22  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The City Administrator or his or her designee may revoke permits issued
under this section upon grounds of a violation of this section or any same or
similar ordinance of another city or on grounds identical to those for which
the initial registration may be disapproved. Written notice of the revocation
shall describe the factual basis for and grounds to support the revocation;
shall be mailed to the address shown on the permit applicant; and shall become
effective seven business days from the date of mailing, unless the party
requests a hearing on the proposed revocation within those seven days. If the
applicant requests a hearing within the seven days, a date shall be set for the
hearing and the aggrieved party shall have the right to be heard before the
City Administrator or his or her designee. The City Administrator or his or her
designee shall render a decision and issue written findings which shall be
personally delivered or mailed to the address shown on the permit application.
The applicant may appeal to the City Council within five business days of the
date of delivery or mailing of the decision and findings. Failure to request
either a hearing before the City Administrator or his or her designee or appeal
from the City Administrator’s or his or her designee’s decision shall
constitute waiver of all appeal rights.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 3-22-2011)
§ 112.23  APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by the action of the City Clerk or Chief of Police in
denial of a permit or the action of the City Administrator or his or her
designee in proposed or actual revocation of a permit may appeal to the City
Council by filing within seven days of notice of the action complained of a
written statement stating the grounds for the appeal. The City Council shall
set a date and time for the hearing on the appeal and notify the aggrieved
person as provided in §
112.22 of this chapter for notice of revocation and right to set hearing. No
individual may conduct any business regulated hereunder while an appeal is
pending.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 3-22-2011)  Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.99  PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Each day on which such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 2011-03, passed 3-22-2011)
CHAPTER 113:  RENTAL DWELLINGS
Section
General Provisions
   
113.001   Title
   
113.002   Scope and purpose
   
113.003   Definitions
Rental Housing License
   
113.020   Application
   
113.021   Issuance
   
113.022   Renewals
   
113.023   Revocation
   
113.024   Fees
   
113.025   Additional fees
   
113.026   Transfer of rental property
   
113.027   Complaint inspections
   
113.028   License posting
   
113.029   Licensing period deadline
   
113.030   Disorderly behavior at licensed dwelling units
   
113.031   Enforcement
Space and Occupancy Standards
   
113.040   Room dimensions
   
113.041   Kitchen
   
113.042   Lighting
   
113.043   Ventilation
   
113.044   Sanitation
   
113.045   Bathroom accessibility
   
113.046   Room separations
   
113.047   Floor coverings
Structural Requirements
   
113.055   Structural requirements
Mechanical, Electrical and Plumbing Requirements
   
113.060   Heating
   
113.061   Electrical
   
113.062   Plumbing
Means of Egress
   
113.070   General
   
113.071   Means of egress system
   
113.072   Obstruction of egress
   
113.073   Escape windows
Life Safety
   
113.080   General
   
113.081   Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors
   
113.082   Fire extinguishers
   
113.083   Fire sprinkler systems and fire alarm systems
   
113.084   Inadequate fire-protection or  fire-fighters’ equipment
General Building Requirements
   
113.090   Building identification
   
113.091   Handrails
   
113.092   Guardrails
   
113.093   Refuse
   
113.094   Unused or discarded items
   
113.095   Storage of items
   
113.096   Fuel storage
   
113.097   Barbecues and open flames
   
113.098   Excessive clutter
Exterior Building Requirements
   
113.105   General
   
113.106   Sanitation
   
113.107   Sidewalks and driveways
   
113.108   Weeds
   
113.109   Rodent harborage
   
113.110   Accessory structures
   
113.111   Motor vehicles
   
113.112   Defacement of property
   
113.113   Faulty weather protection
   
113.114   Fire hazard
   
113.115   Faulty materials of construction
Notice and Orders of the Code Official
   
113.125   Compliance order
   
113.126   Substandard occupancy
   
113.127   Notice to vacate
Appeal
   
113.135   Appeal
   
113.136   Time allotted for appeal
   
113.137   Scheduling and noticing appeal for hearing
   
113.138   Authority
   
113.139   Right of entry
   
113.140   Responsibilities defined
   
113.141   Substandard buildings
   
113.142   Substandard property condition
   
113.143   Appeals
   
113.144   Prohibited acts
 
   
113.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.001  TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as the “Rental Housing Code of the City of
Dayton”.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.002 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Scope.
      (1)   Exempt from rental license. Rest homes, convalescent homes, nursing
homes, hotels, motels, single family homes which are occupied by the homeowner
with one dwelling unit, and units rented, let or leased to direct family
members of the property owner.
      (2)   Required rental license. The provision of this chapter shall apply
to all buildings or portions thereof used, or designed or intended to be
rented, leased, or let for human habitation. All provisions of this chapter
shall apply to dwellings in existence at the time of adoption of this chapter.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards
to safeguard life or limb, health, and public welfare by regulating and
controlling the use and occupancy, maintenance and repair of all buildings and
structures within the city used for the purpose of rental housing. The purpose
of this chapter is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any
particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected
or benefitted by the terms of this chapter.
   (C)   Application to existing buildings. Additions, alterations or repairs,
shall be done in compliance with the building, fire, plumbing and mechanical
codes. Applicable permits shall apply as required by these codes.
   (D)   Certification. Properties not existing as rental property at the time
of adoption of this chapter and afterward becoming rental property shall,
before being certified, comply with all terms of this chapter. Properties pre-
existing as rental property at the adoption of this chapter shall be allowed a
reasonable time to comply. Reasonable time being defined as 60 days from
adoption. Extensions of the 60 days can be requested by written explanation to
the city or city designee.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.003  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APARTMENT BUILDING. Any building or portion thereof that contains five or
more dwelling units.
   BUILDING CODE. The Minnesota State Building Code.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this chapter, or any duly authorized representative.
   CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
   CONGREGATE RESIDENCE. Any building or portion thereof that contains
facilities for living, sleeping and sanitation, as required by this chapter,
and may include facilities for eating and cooking and for occupancy by other
than a family. A CONGREGATE RESIDENCE may be a shelter, convent, monastery,
dormitory, and fraternity or sorority house but does not include jails,
hospitals, nursing homes, hotels or lodging houses.
   DORMITORY. A building, as at a college, containing a number of private or
semi-private rooms for residents, usually along with common bathroom facilities
and recreation areas. A room containing a number of beds and serving as a
communal sleeping quarters, as in an institution, fraternity house, or
passenger ship.
   DWELLING. A building wholly or partly used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes by human occupants; but not
including hotels and motels.
   DWELLING UNIT. A room or a group of rooms located within a dwelling forming
a single habitable unit with facilities, which are used or intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking and eating purposes.
   EFFICIENCY DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling unit containing only one habitable room
and meeting the requirements of §§
113.040 and
113.041.
   EGRESS. An arrangement of exit facilities to assure a safe means of exit
from a building.
   ELECTRICAL CODE. The Minnesota State Electrical Code.
   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination method approved
by the code official; and to remove all signs of extermination thereafter.
   FAMILY MEMBER. Includes parents, spouses, siblings, children, or an
individual related by blood whose close association is an equivalent of a
family relationship. It can contain others connected by birth, adoption,
marriage, civil partnership, or cohabitation, such as grandparents, great-
grandparents, grandchildren, great-grandchildren, aunts, uncles, siblings-in-
law, half-siblings, cousins, adopted children and step-parents/step-children,
and cohabitating partners.
   FIRE CODE. The Minnesota State Fire Code.
   FLOOR AREA. The net floor area within the enclosed walls of a room in which
the ceiling height is not less than five feet, excluding areas used for closets
and built-in equipment, such as cabinets, kitchen units, fixtures and
appliances.
   HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space, used or intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water
closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or communicating corridors,
closets and storage spaces.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The legally designated health officer or official of the
state, county and/or city.
   HEARING OFFICER. The hearing shall be before any member of City Council
acting as the hearing officer, or an individual designated by the City Council
to act as hearing officer. The hearing officer is authorized to hear and decide
any controversy relating to administrative offenses covered by this chapter.
   HOT WATER. Water supplied to plumbing fixtures at a temperature of not less
than 120°F (49°C).
   INFESTATION. The presence of insects, rodents, or other pests within or
around the dwelling on the premises.
   KITCHEN. A room or an area equipped for preparing and cooking food.
   LET. To give the use of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit by an
owner or manager to a tenant in return for rent.
   MANAGER. A person or firm who has charge, care or control of a building or
part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
   MECHANICAL CODE. The Minnesota State Mechanical Code.
   NUISANCE. The following shall be defined as NUISANCES.
      (1)   Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence;
      (2)   Any attractive nuisance that may prove detrimental to children
whether in a building, on the premises of a building or on an unoccupied lot.
This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations; abandoned
refrigerators and motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fences or
structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation that may prove a
hazard for inquisitive minors;
      (3)   Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, as
determined by the code official or health officer;
      (4)   Overcrowding a room with occupants;
      (5)   Insufficient ventilation or illumination;
      (6)   Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities;
      (7)   Un-cleanliness, as determined by the health officer; and
      (8)   Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to
the health of human beings, as determined by the health officer.
   OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized
or occupied.
   OCCUPANT. A person living alone, or two or more persons all related by
blood, marriage or adoption, including foster children, occupying and
maintaining a common household in a single dwelling unit, or a group of not
more than five persons, any two of whom are not related by blood, marriage or
adoption, including foster children, occupying and maintaining a common
household in a single dwelling unit.
   OWNER. A person, firm or corporation who, alone, jointly or severally with
others, owns or has an ownership interest in a dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit within the city.
   PLUMBING CODE. The State of Minnesota Plumbing Code.
   PLUMBING SYSTEM. All potable water supplies and distribution pipes, all
plumbing fixtures and traps and all drainage and vent pipes.
   PREMISES. The dwelling and its land and all buildings thereon and areas
thereof.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and non-putrescible waste solids including garbage
and rubbish. Refuse is liable to undergo bacterial decomposition when in
contact with air and moisture at normal temperatures.
   RENT. A stated return or payment for the temporary possession of a dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit. The return or payment may be money or service or
property.
   ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without
meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling.
   ROOMING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used
or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking purposes,
along with private or shared sanitation facilities.
   SAFETY. The condition of being reasonably free from danger and hazards,
which may cause injury or illness.
   SUBSTANDARD BUILDING. Any building where any condition exists that endangers
the life, limb, health, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants
thereof.
   SUBSTANDARD PROPERTY CONDITION CITATION. Shall be issued in the event of a
substandard building and shall, upon posting of the citation, prohibit the
occupancy of the building until such time as corrections are made and verified
by inspection.
   TENANT. Can be a person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not
the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
   VARIANCE. A difference between that which is required or specified and that
which is permitted.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
RENTAL HOUSING LICENSE
§ 113.020  APPLICATION.
   The owner or manager of a structure, in which one or more dwelling units or
rooming units are let or intended to be let, shall make application for a
rental housing license prior to letting the unit, unless such unit is currently
certified. An owner or manager of such structure shall not allow occupancy of
such unit until the certification-inspection fee has been paid and a rental
housing license has been issued. The code official or housing inspector may
issue a temporary rental housing license not exceeding three months in duration
in order to bring the unit into compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.021  ISSUANCE.
   The city shall issue a rental housing license for each dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming unit, when upon inspection finds such unit meets or exceeds the
minimum requirements set forth by this chapter; also a rental housing license
shall be issued for each dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, when a
variance has been granted by the Board of Appeals; provided, however, it is
found that no condition exists, in a shared or public area of the building or
in any other part of the unit, which could endanger the health or safety of the
occupants of such unit or of the public. Such license shall show the number of
occupants for which the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit is approved and
once issued shall remain valid until it expires or such time as the code
official or housing inspector determines that the dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit does not meet the minimum requirements set by this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.022  RENEWALS.
   A rental housing license shall expire June 30 of the second year after
issuance. Re-inspection of all dwellings, dwelling units or rooming units shall
be required prior to issuance of a new certificate. Applications for licenses
shall be made in writing on forms provided by the city and accompanied by the
fee amounts as established by the City Council. Such application shall be
submitted at least 60 days prior to the expiration date of the license.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.023  REVOCATION.
   A rental housing license may be suspended or revoked as prescribed in this
chapter.
   (A)   Every license or permit issued under this chapter is subject to the
right, which is hereby expressly reserved, to suspend or revoke the same should
the license holder or their agents, employees, representatives, or lessees
directly or indirectly operate or maintain rental dwellings contrary to the
provisions of this chapter or any other city code provisions, or any permit
issued by the city or the laws of the State of Minnesota.
   (B)   The license may be suspended or revoked by the City Council after
written notice is sent to the license holder specifying the ordinance or law
violations with which they are charged. This notice shall also specify the date
for hearing before the City Council, which shall not be less than ten days from
the date of the notice.
   (C)   At such hearing before the City Council, the license holder or their
attorneys may submit information on their behalf that is relevant to the
grounds for suspension or revocation.
   (D)   After a hearing, the City Council may suspend or revoke the license if
the Council deems it necessary to protect public health, safety or general
welfare.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.024  FEES.
   A rental housing license-inspection fee as established by the City Council.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.025  ADDITIONAL FEES.
   The city shall have the right to bill or to assess the responsible party for
additional costs associated with:
   (A)   Required additional follow up rental inspections, beyond the
prescribed number allowed, for a single rental inspection cycle.
   (B)   Failure of the responsible party to appear for a scheduled inspection
without prior notification of the inspector.
   (C)   After hour, weekend or holiday inspections.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.026  TRANSFER OF RENTAL PROPERTY.
   Upon the sale and transfer of title of housing rental property, a re-
inspection of the property shall automatically be required for the issuance of
a rental property permit to the new owner for the stated property. It shall be
the responsibility of the purchasing party to notify the city within 30 days of
the closing of the transaction and to request an inspection.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.027  COMPLAINT INSPECTIONS.
   The code official or housing inspector shall inspect a unit upon receiving a
legitimate complaint. Complainant's name shall be kept confidential pursuant to
the Minnesota Data Practices Act. Upon inspection and finding a violation the
inspector shall notify the owner, manager or tenant in writing to correct the
violation. The owner or manager may request an advisory inspection of a unit.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.028  LICENSE POSTING.
   Every registrant of a rental dwelling shall post the annual license issued
by the City Manager. The annual license shall be conspicuously posted (in a
frame with a glass covering) by the registrant, in a public corridor, hallway,
or lobby of the rental dwelling for which they are issued. In a single-family
home, the license should be posted in a way that doesn't take away from the
general appearance of the residence but should be accessible to view by city
designee and renters.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.029  LICENSING PERIOD DEADLINE.
   The licensing period deadline shall be June 30. All properties required to
be licensed by this chapter shall have applied for licensing with the city
office, shall have paid the required fee or fees, and shall have satisfactorily
completed the required rental housing inspection by the deadline date. Failure
to comply with this chapter could result in fines and/or denial of a rental
housing license for the property in violation.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.030  DISORDERLY BEHAVIOR AT LICENSED DWELLING UNITS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, disorderly behavior includes, but is not
limited to, the following:
   (A)   Illegal drug-related activity.ILLEGAL DRUG-RELATED ACTIVITY means the
illegal possession, manufacture, sale, distribution, purchase, use or
possession with intent to manufacture, sell or distribute a controlled
substance (as defined in the Controlled Substance Act, 21 U.S.C. 802, as
amended) or possession of drug paraphernalia (as defined in M.S. § 152.092, as
it may be amended from time to time). For purposes of this chapter, an occupant
shall be deemed to be in possession of a controlled substance if any amount is
located in the licensed dwelling unit even if the occupant claims not to know
the controlled substance was present;
   (B)   Acts of violence or threats of violence by occupants or guests of
occupants, including without limitation discharge of firearms, prostitution,
intimidation or any other acts that threaten or jeopardize the health, safety
or welfare of others or create a reasonable belief in others that their health,
safety or welfare is being threatened or jeopardized;
   (C)   Violation of M.S. § 609.72, as it may be amended from time to time
(disorderly conduct);
   (D)   Violation of M.S. §§ 609.74 and 609.745, as they may be amended from
time to time (public nuisance);
   (E)   Violation of M.S. §§ 609.66, Subd. 1a, 609.67 or 624.713, as they may
be amended from time to time (unlawful use or possession of a firearm or
weapon);
   (F)   Violation of M.S. § 609.50, as it may be amended from time to time
(obstructing legal process);
   (G)   Violation of §
130.04 of this code of ordinances (public nuisance);
   (H)   Violation of
Ch. 131 of this code of ordinances (firearms);
   (I)   Violation of §
130.08 of this code of ordinances (noise);
   (J)   Violation of M.S. § 609.53, as it may be amended from time to time
(receiving or selling stolen property); and
   (K)   Violation of §
130.10 of this code of ordinances (fire code relating to fireworks).
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.031  ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   First instance. The code official shall, upon receiving notice of the
first occurrence of disorderly behavior, notify in writing by certified and
first class mail the licensee and tenant of the violation and direct the
licensee to take steps to prevent further disorderly behavior.
   (B)   Second instance. If, after notification, but less than one year from
the date of first notice, a second instance of disorderly behavior occurs at a
dwelling unit covered by the same license, the code official shall notify in
writing by certified and first class mail to the licensee and the tenant of the
violation and direct the licensee to submit to the code official, within ten
days of the date of the notice, a written report of all actions taken by the
licensee since the first violation notice and actions the licensee intends to
take to prevent further disorderly behavior.
   (C)   Third instance. If, after notification, but less than one year from
date of second notice, a third instance of disorderly behavior occurs at a
dwelling unit covered by the same license, the rental license may, following an
opportunity for the licensee to be heard by the City Council, be revoked,
suspended or not renewed by the City Council upon the recommendation of the
code official. In buildings containing more than one dwelling unit, the
revocation, suspension, denial or non-renewal may apply to one or more dwelling
units at the discretion of the City Council. The code official shall submit his
or her written recommendation for action to the City Council and licensee by
certified and first class mail within 20 days of receiving notice of the third
instance of disorderly behavior.
   (D)   Postponing license action.
      (1)   An action to suspend or revoke a rental license may be stayed
during the period in which a licensee is actively, diligently, in good faith
and without delay pursuing an unlawful detainer action against tenants of the
licensed dwelling unit if the removal of those tenants, in the opinion of the
code official, will cure the violations for which action to revoke or suspend
the rental license has been recommended to the City Council.
      (2)   In such cases, the licensee may be allowed a reasonable time to
complete the eviction process, but not more than 60 days from the date of the
third instance of disorderly behavior.
   (E)   Determining disorderly behavior. A determination that the licensed
dwelling unit has been the location of disorderly behavior shall be made by the
code official after review of the evidence. It shall not be necessary that
criminal charges be brought in order to support a determination of disorderly
behavior, nor shall the fact of dismissal or acquittals of such criminal
charges operate as a bar to adverse license action under this chapter.
   (F)   Remedies not exclusive. The criminal and civil remedies provided in
this chapter are not exclusive, and the City Council may take any action with
respect to a licensee, tenant, occupant or the licensed premises as is
authorized by this code of ordinances or laws of the state.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
SPACE AND OCCUPANCY STANDARDS
§ 113.040  ROOM DIMENSIONS.
   Room dimensions shall comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   Ceiling heights. Habitable space shall have a ceiling height of not
less than seven feet measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling. Where
exposed beam ceiling members are spaced at less than 48 inches on center,
ceiling height shall be measured to the bottom of these members. If any room in
a building has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height for the room
measuring less than five feet from the finished floor to the finished ceiling
shall be included in any computation of the minimum area thereof.
   (B)   Floor area. Dwelling units and congregate residences shall have at
least one room for common living area that shall have not less than 120 square
feet of floor area. Rooms used for sleeping purposes by one person shall have
an area of not less than 70 square feet. Where more than one person occupies a
room used for sleeping purposes, the required floor area shall be 50 square
feet for each occupant.
   (C)   Width. No habitable room other than a kitchen shall be less than seven
feet in any dimension.
All room dimensions will follow building code at the time of construction; if
no codes were in effect, it will follow general construction practice at the
time of construction.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.041  KITCHEN.
   Every dwelling unit shall have a room or portion of a room in which food may
be prepared and/or cooked, which shall have adequate circulation area, and
which shall be equipped with the following:
   (A)   A kitchen sink that is in good working condition and properly
connected to a water supply system which is approved by the appropriate
authority and which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and
unheated running water under pressure, and which is connected to a sewer system
approved by the city. Sinks shall be of nonabsorbent materials.
   (B)   A stove, or similar device, for cooking food, and a refrigerator, or
similar device, for the safe storage of food at temperatures less than 45°F but
more than 32°F under ordinary maximum summer conditions, which are properly
installed with all necessary connections for safe, sanitary and efficient
operation; provided that such stove, refrigerator, and/or similar devices need
not be installed when a dwelling unit is not occupied and when the occupant is
expected to provide same on occupancy, and that sufficient space and adequate
connections for the safe and efficient installation and operation of said
stove, refrigerator and/or similar devices are provided.
   (C)   Cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit,
and a cooking facility or cooking appliance shall not be permitted to be
present in a rooming unit or dormitory unit. All kitchen requirements will
follow building code at the time of construction; if no codes were in effect,
it will follow general construction practice at the time of construction.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.042  LIGHTING.
   (A)   All enclosed portions of the dwelling unit customarily occupied by
human beings shall be provided with natural light by means of exterior glazed
openings with an area not less than 1/8 of the total floor area, or shall be
provided with artificial light. Such openings shall open directly onto a public
way or a yard or court.
   (B)   Public hallways, corridors, stairways and other exit facilities shall
be adequately lighted. All lighting will follow building code at the time of
construction; if no codes were in effect, it will follow general construction
practice at the time of construction.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.043  VENTILATION.
   Guestrooms and habitable rooms within a dwelling unit shall be provided with
natural ventilation by means of openable exterior openings with an area of not
less than 4% of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of four square
feet. Exterior openings for natural ventilation shall be provided with tight
fitting insect screens. Bathrooms, water closet compartments and similar rooms
shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior
openings with an area not less than 4% of the floor area of such rooms with a
minimum of 1-1/2 square feet. In lieu of required exterior openings for natural
ventilation in bathrooms containing a bathtub, shower or combination thereof;
and similar rooms, a working mechanical ventilation system connected directly
to the outside. All ventilation will follow building code at the time of
construction; if no codes were in effect, it will follow general construction
practice at the time of construction.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.044  SANITATION.
   All sanitary facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe and
sanitary condition and in accordance with applicable requirements of the
plumbing code.
   (A)   Dwelling unit. Dwelling units shall be provided with a bathroom
equipped with facilities consisting of a water closet, lavatory, and either a
bathtub or shower.
   (B)   Rooming units. Where private water closets are not provided, there
shall be provided at least one bathroom accessible from a shared hallway.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.045  BATHROOM ACCESSIBILITY.
   Where bathrooms are shared by rooming units by occupants of a dwelling unit,
the bathroom shall be located so that tenants of one rental unit do not have to
pass through another rental unit to use the facility.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.046  ROOM SEPARATIONS.
   Every water closet, bathtub or shower required by this chapter shall be
installed in a room that will afford privacy to the occupant. Bathrooms shall
be separated from food-preparation areas by a tight fitting door.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.047  FLOOR COVERINGS.
   Bathroom floors shall have a smooth, hard nonabsorbent surface such as vinyl
tile, vinyl sheet goods, ceramic tile or concrete. Floor surfaces shall be
maintained in good condition so the floor can be maintained in a sanitary
condition.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 113.055  STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All existing structural components in roofs, floors, walls and foundations
are deemed acceptable provided that in the opinion of the code official such
components have been properly maintained and do not make the building hazardous
as defined by M.S. § 463.15, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
MECHANICAL, ELECTRICAL AND PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS
§ 113.060  HEATING.
   (A)   Dwelling units and guestrooms shall be provided with heating
appliances capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F at a point three
feet above the floor in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet
compartments. Owners shall turn on the heating appliances when the outside
temperature falls to 64°F or below. Such facilities shall be installed and
maintained in a safe condition and in accordance with their listings. Un-vented
fuel-burning appliances are not permitted. All heating will follow building
code at the time of construction; if no codes were in effect, it will follow
general construction practice at the time of construction.
   (B)   All heating devices or appliances shall be of an approved type.
      (1)   Chimneys and vents. Every fuel-burning appliance shall discharge
the products of combustion to a vent, factory-built chimney, masonry chimney or
a chimney or vent that is approved by the appliance manufacturer. Chimneys or
vents shall be designed for the type of appliance being vented.
      (2)   Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not
discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous
or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private
property or that of another tenant.
      (3)   Hazardous mechanical equipment. Mechanical equipment that was
installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of
installation or mechanical equipment not installed in accordance with generally
accepted construction practices in areas where no codes were in effect or that
has not been maintained in good and safe condition shall be considered
substandard.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.061  ELECTRICAL.
   The electrical service, lines, switches, outlets, fixtures and fixture
coverings, and support in every building or structure shall be in good repair.
Broken, loose, frayed, inoperative, defective or missing portions shall be
repaired or replaced. All unsafe conditions shall be corrected.
   (A)   Electrical equipment.
      (1)   All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly
installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner. All electrical
equipment shall be of an approved type. All electrical will follow building
code at the time of construction; if no codes were in effect it will follow
general construction practice at the time of construction.
      (2)   Extension cords shall be used only with portable appliances and
shall not be used as a substitute for permanent wiring. Extension cords shall
be plugged directly into an approved outlet, power tap or multi-plug adapter
and shall, except for approved multi-plug extension cords, serve only one
portable appliance. The amp capacity of the extension cord shall not be less
than the rated capacity of the portable appliance supplied by the cord and
shall be grounded when serving a grounded appliance. Extension cords shall be
maintained in good condition without splices, deterioration or damage.
Extension cords and flexible cords shall not be attached to the structure,
extend through walls, ceilings, and floors or under doors or floor coverings,
or be subject to environmental or physical damage.
   (B)   Switches and outlets. Every habitable room shall be provided with at
least one switched ceiling or wall light and one dual outlet.
      (1)   Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room and furnace
room shall contain at least one electrical light fixture and one convenience
outlet.
      (2)   Outlets within six feet of a sink or bathtub shall be ground fault
interrupted (GFI) outlets.
   (C)   Hazardous electrical wiring. Electrical wiring that was installed in
violation of ordinance requirements in effect at the time of installation or
electrical wiring not installed in accordance with generally accepted
construction practices in areas where no codes were in effect or that has been
maintained in good condition or that is not being used in a safe manner shall
be considered substandard.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.062  PLUMBING.
   All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working
order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be
capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are
designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and
functional condition.
   (A)   Fixtures. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to a sanitary sewer
or to an approved private sewage disposal system. All plumbing fixtures shall
be connected to an approved system of water supply and provided with hot and
cold running water necessary for its normal operation. All plumbing fixtures
shall be of an approved glazed earthenware type or of a similarly nonabsorbent
material. All plumbing will follow building code at time of construction; if no
codes were in effect it will follow general construction practice at time of
construction.
   (B)   Plumbing system leaks. Leaking drain or supply lines shall be repaired
or replaced. All unsafe conditions shall be corrected.
   (C)   Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a
structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or to the structure by reason
of inadequate service, inadequate venting, improper installation, deterioration
or damage or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects
to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
   (D)   Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from
contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located
above the flood-level rim of the fixture as required by the Minnesota State
Plumbing Code. Hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in
place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an
approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.
   (E)   Hazardous plumbing. Plumbing that was installed in violation of code
requirements in effect at the time of installation or plumbing not installed in
accordance with generally accepted construction practices in areas where no
codes were in effect or that has not been maintained in good condition or that
is not free of cross-connections or siphonage between fixtures shall be
considered substandard.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
MEANS OF EGRESS
§ 113.070  GENERAL.
   Dwelling units or rooming units shall have access directly to the outside or
to a common hallway or public corridor with egress to the outside. An exit
shall not pass through a hazardous area such as a furnace room, boiler room,
storage room, garage or similar areas. All general requirements will follow
building code at the time of construction; if no codes were in effect, it will
follow general construction practice at the time of construction.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.071  MEANS OF EGRESS SYSTEM.
   Means of egress system shall be deemed as meeting the intent of this
chapter, provided that the means of egress system or systems is evaluated by
the code official and judged to be equivalent to the exit means of egress
system that was required by the code under which the building was constructed
or equivalent provisions of the currently adopted fire code. This includes, but
is not limited to, number of exits, separation of exits, egress illumination,
emergency egress illumination, emergency exit signage and illumination,
corridors, corridor doors, and egress travel distance.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.072  OBSTRUCTION OF EGRESS.
   Means of egress shall not be obstructed in any manner and shall remain free
of any material or matter where its presence would obstruct or render the means
of egress hazardous. All egress routes shall be properly maintained in a safe
manner. A clear and unobstructed means of access with a minimum width of 30
inches and a minimum height of 78 inches shall be maintained from the operating
face of an electrical service panel, meter or switchboard. Tenants shall at all
times have free access to the service panel for their dwelling unit. All
obstruction of egress requirements will follow building code at the time of
construction; if no codes were in effect, it will follow general construction
practice at the time of construction.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.073  ESCAPE WINDOWS.
   Sleeping rooms below the fourth story shall have at least one operable
window or exterior door approved for emergency escape or rescue. The units
shall be operable from the inside to provide a full clear opening without the
use of separate tools or special knowledge and shall open directly onto a
public way or a yard or court located on the same lot as the building.
   (A)   Escape window requirements. An escape window from a sleeping room
shall have a minimum net clear opening of five square feet. The minimum net
clear opening height shall be 24 inches and the minimum net clear opening width
shall be 20 inches. The finished sill shall not be more than 48 inches above
the floor. If necessary to add a window, the new window shall meet the
requirements of the building code for a new escape window.
   (B)   Replacement escape windows. When replacing an existing escape window,
the replacement window shall meet the minimum requirements of an escape window
as defined in this chapter.
   (C)   Security locks. When an exit door from a dwelling unit is required to
provide security from unlawful entry, the door shall be provided with a dead-
bolt lock or approved device, which is operable from the inside without the use
of a key, special knowledge, or extraordinary effort.
   (D)   Inadequate exits.
      (1)   Except for those buildings or portions thereof that have been
provided with adequate exit facilities conforming to the provisions of this
chapter, buildings or portions thereof whose exit facilities were installed in
violation of ordinance requirements in effect at the time of their construction
or whose exit facilities have not been increased in number of width in relation
to any increase in occupant load due to alterations, additions or change in use
or occupancy subsequent to the time of construction shall be considered
substandard.
      (2)   Notwithstanding compliance with code requirements in effect at the
time of their construction, buildings or portions thereof shall be considered
substandard when the code official finds that an unsafe condition exists
through an improper location of exits, a lack of an adequate number or width of
exits, or when other conditions exist that are dangerous to human life. All
escape windows will follow building code at the time of construction; if no
codes were in effect, it will follow general construction practice at the time
of construction.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
LIFE SAFETY
§ 113.080  GENERAL.
   All buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with the degree of fire
resistive construction, fire warning devices and fire extinguishing devices as
provided by this chapter and the fire code.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.081  SMOKE DETECTORS AND CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTORS.
   (A)   Installation and location of smoke detectors. Single station smoke
detectors shall be installed on each floor and basement. A detector shall also
be located in each bedroom. The inspector may require additional smoke
detectors where additional protection may be required.
   (B)   Installation and location of carbon monoxide detectors. Carbon
monoxide detectors shall be installed within ten feet of all bedrooms.
   (C)   Power supply. The power supply can be either by battery operation or
by the building wiring with battery backup.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.082  FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.
   (A)   All rental units shall be equipped with a fire extinguisher with a
minimum rating of 2A 10BC. The extinguisher shall be located within the
individual dwelling unit or in a common hallway or corridor within 50 feet of
the dwelling unit door.
   (B)   Fire extinguishers shall be serviced at least annually or as required
by the code official. A tag with the name of the servicing company and the
service date shall be affixed to the extinguisher and shall remain affixed
until the next servicing.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.083  FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS.
   All existing fire sprinkler systems and fire alarm systems shall be
maintained in accordance with the current fire code.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.084  INADEQUATE FIRE-PROTECTION OR FIRE-FIGHTERS' EQUIPMENT.
   Buildings or portions thereof shall be considered substandard when they are
not provided with the fire-resistive construction or fire-extinguishing systems
or equipment required by this chapter, except those buildings or portions
thereof that conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their
construction and whose fire-resistive integrity and fire-extinguishing systems
or equipment have been adequately maintained and improved in relation to any
increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
GENERAL BUILDING REQUIREMENTS
§ 113.090  BUILDING IDENTIFICATION.
   Every building shall have the assigned street numbers displayed on the
building in such a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the
street or road fronting the property. Said numbers shall be no less than four
inches in height and shall contrast with the background on which they are
displayed.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.091  HANDRAILS.
   (A)   Stairways having four or more risers shall have a continuous full-
length handrail on at least one side. The handrail shall be mounted no less
than 34 inches nor more than 38 inches above the nosing of the stair treas.
   (B)   The handgrip potion of the handrail shall not be less than 1-1/
2 inches and no more than two inches in cross-sectional dimension. The ends of
the handrails shall be returned to the walls.
   (C)   Stairways that are 66 inches in width or more require handrails on
both sides.
   (D)   Existing handrails that are not deemed to be hazardous by the code
official or housing inspector are allowed to remain as they are.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.092  GUARDRAILS.
   (A)   Unenclosed floor and roof openings, open sides of stairways, landings,
decks, balconies, porches or occupied roofs which are more than 30 inches above
the grade or floor below shall be protected by a guardrail.
   (B)   Guardrails shall be a minimum of 36 inches high.
   (C)   Open railings shall have intermediate rails, spindles or an ornamental
pattern such that a four-inch sphere cannot pass through. When approved by the
code official, the spacing between intermediate railings or openings in
existing ornamental patterns may be accepted.
   (D)   Existing guardrails that are not deemed to be hazardous by the code
official are allowed to remain as they are.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.093  REFUSE.
   The property owner, tenant (through lease agreement), or property manager
shall provide an adequate number of refuse containers to contain the amount of
refuse produced on the property or as required by a local sanitation ordinance.
Containers shall be rodent and animal proof plastic, fiberglass or rust
resistant metal with a tight-fitting cover. Containers shall have a maximum
capacity of 35 gallons with two handles or a container of any size supplied by
the waste removal company that can be mechanically lifted. It shall be the
tenant's responsibility to place their garbage and refuse in the approved
refuse containers provided by the owner. The owner, tenant thru lease
agreement, or manager shall be responsible for ensuring that the garbage and
refuse is removed from the property at least once every seven days. Refuse
containers shall not be stored in a front yard. Containers with a capacity of
1.5 cubic yards or more shall not be stored in a building or within five feet
of combustible walls, openings or combustible roof eaves.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.094  UNUSED OR DISCARDED ITEMS.
   Discarded, unused and junk appliances, furniture, mattresses and other items
shall be removed from the property.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.095  STORAGE OF ITEMS.
   Large amounts of combustible items and materials shall not be stored in
attics or basements. Storage shall be maintained two feet or more below
ceilings and floor joists. Combustible materials and items shall not be stored
within one foot of any fuel burning appliances. Storage of items shall be
orderly and shall not block or obstruct exits. A minimum three-foot aisle shall
be maintained to all exits, furnaces, water heaters, water meters, gas meters
or other building service equipment.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.096  FUEL STORAGE.
   LP tanks, gasoline containers and fueled equipment, including but not
limited to motorcycles, mopeds, lawn-care equipment and portable cooking
equipment, shall not be stored or repaired in an apartment building or dwelling
unit.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.097  BARBECUES AND OPEN FLAMES.
   In any structure containing two or more dwelling units, no person shall
kindle, maintain, or cause any fire or open flame on any balcony above ground
level, on any roof, or on any ground floor patio within 15 feet of any
structure. No person shall store or use any fuel, barbecue, torch, or similar
heating or lighting chemicals or device in such locations.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.098  EXCESSIVE CLUTTER.
   Buildings, occupancies or rooms where the state of order or clutter is such
that a health, safety, fire or egress issue exists, shall be deemed substandard
as defined by this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
EXTERIOR BUILDING REQUIREMENTS
§ 113.105  GENERAL.
   (A)   Any building or portion thereof that is determined to be an unsafe
building in accordance with this chapter, or any building or portion thereof,
including any dwelling unit, guest room or suite of rooms, or the premises on
which the same is located, in which there exists any of the conditions
referenced in this section to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health,
property, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof, shall be
deemed and hereby are declared to be substandard buildings.
   (B)   The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair,
structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to public health,
safety or welfare.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.106  SANITATION.
   All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and
sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property
which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.107  SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas
shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous
conditions.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.108  WEEDS.
   All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or
plant growth in excess of eight inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited.
WEEDS shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than
trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated
flowers and gardens.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.109  RODENT HARBORAGE.
   All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent
harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly
exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health.
After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent
harborage and prevent re-infestation.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.110  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls,
shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.111  MOTOR VEHICLES.
   Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed
motor vehicle shall be parked or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall
at any time in a state of major assembly, disrepair, or in the process of being
stripped or dismantled be parked or stored outside of a fully enclosed garage
or approved outbuilding. Painting vehicles is prohibited unless conducted
inside an approved spray booth.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.112  DEFACEMENT OF PROPERTY.
   Should the exterior surface of any rental property subject to this section
be defaced, it shall be the responsibility of the building owner to restore the
surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair. (Ord. 2018-18, passed
2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.113  FAULTY WEATHER PROTECTION.
   Buildings or portions thereof shall be considered substandard when they have
faulty weather protection which shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
   (A)   Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster.
   (B)   Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof,
foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors.
   (C)   Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings,
including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved
protective covering.
   (D)   Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof
coverings.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.114  FIRE HAZARD.
   Any building or portion thereof, device, apparatus, equipment, combustible
waste, or vegetation that, in the opinion of the Chief of the Fire Department,
is in such a condition as to cause a fire or explosion or provide a ready fuel
to augment the spread and intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause
shall be considered substandard.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.115  FAULTY MATERIALS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The use of materials of construction, except those that are specifically
allowed or approved by this code and the building code, and that have been
adequately maintained in good and safe condition, shall cause a building to be
substandard.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
NOTICE AND ORDERS OF THE CODE OFFICIAL
§ 113.125  COMPLIANCE ORDER.
   (A)   General. The code official shall prepare a compliance order, listing
all violations and the date or dates when such violations shall be corrected.
The property owner shall have the responsibility to correct all violations
within the time limit set forth by the code official. Any questions regarding
the compliance of said violations, the property owner may contact the code
official.
   (B)   Sequence of enforcement and penalty criteria. Upon completion of an
initial rental housing inspection and subsequent re-inspection, with
appropriate and documented notification of the property owner or agent, a
property is found to remain in a state of non-compliance, the property owner or
agent shall be given written notification of the remaining infraction(s) and
shall be informed of the following:
      (1)   The exact date and time of the second follow up inspection not to
exceed 14 days from the first inspection.
      (2)   Upon completion of the second follow up inspection:
         (a)   If the infraction(s) have been satisfactorily addressed or
corrected the city will, at their discretion, levy a re-inspection fee to cover
the cost of the second follow up inspection. The fee will be set by resolution
of the City Council.
         (b)   If the infractions remain, a fine under §
113.999 (B)(3)(a) may be imposed resulting in required re-inspection at a fee
set in §
35.02 of this code.
         (c)   The re-inspection fee must be paid in full to the city and
satisfactory re-inspection must be completed within 14 days or, pursuant to §
113.020, the city shall have the right to revoke or deny licensing the property
as rental housing property.
         (d)   The property owner or agent shall be notified in writing under §
113.135 indicating his or her right of appeal.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.126  SUBSTANDARD OCCUPANCY.
   No occupancy shall be permitted for any dwelling or rental unit when, in the
opinion of the code official, there exists inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, physical damage, unsanitary condition or abandonment which
constitutes a fire hazard or a hazard to public safety or health.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.127  NOTICE TO VACATE.
   The code official shall have the authority to issue a notice to vacate order
on any building that is, in the opinion of the code official and as defined in
this chapter, deemed substandard.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
APPEAL
§ 113.135  APPEAL.
   Any person may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the code
official under this chapter by filing an appeal to the city. A written appeal
to the city shall include a brief statement in ordinary and concise language of
that specific order or action protested, together with any material facts
claimed to support the contentions of the appellant.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.136  TIME ALLOTTED FOR APPEAL.
   The appeal shall be filed within ten days or within the time of correction
as allowed by the code official, whichever is shorter, from the date of the
service of such order or action of the code official.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.137  SCHEDULING AND NOTICING APPEAL FOR HEARING.
   The City Council shall establish a hearing officer. The hearing officer
shall establish policies and procedures as to when and where, and how appeals
will be heard per §
10.98 of the zoning code. The hearing officer shall not have the authority to
override any section or provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.138  AUTHORITY.
   The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce or cause
the enforcement of all of the provisions of this chapter. For such purposes,
the building official or his or her designated representative shall have the
posers of a code official. The code official shall have the power to render
interpretations of this chapter. Such interpretations shall be in conformity
with the intent and purpose of this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.139  RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this
chapter, or when the code official or housing inspector has reasonable cause to
believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition that is
contrary to or in violation of this chapter, the code official or housing
inspector may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or
to perform the duties imposed by this chapter, provided that if such building
or premises are occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and
entry requested. If such building or premises is unoccupied, the code official
shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having
charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is
refused, the code official or housing inspector shall have recourse to the
remedies provided by law to secure entry.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.140  RESPONSIBILITIES DEFINED.
   Owners remain liable for violations of duties imposed by this chapter even
though an obligation is also imposed on the occupants of the building, and even
though the owner has, by agreement, imposed on the occupant the duty of
furnishing required equipment or of complying with this chapter.
   (A)   Buildings and structures and parts thereof shall be maintained in a
safe and sanitary condition. The owner or the owner's designated agent shall be
responsible for such maintenance. To determine compliance with this division,
the building may be re-inspected.
   (B)   Owners, in addition to being responsible for maintaining buildings in
a sound structural condition, shall be responsible for keeping that part of the
building or premises which the owner occupies or controls in a clean, sanitary
and safe condition, including the shared or public areas in a building
containing two or more dwelling units.
   (C)   Owners shall, when required by this chapter, health laws or the health
officer, furnish and maintain such approved sanitary facilities as required,
and shall furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or facilities for
the prevention of insect and rodent infestation, and when infestation has taken
place, shall be responsible for any insects, rodents or other pests when such
extermination is not specifically made the responsibility of the occupant by
law or ruling.
   (D)   Occupants of a dwelling unit, in addition to being responsible for
keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling of
dwelling unit or premises which they occupy and control, shall properly dispose
of their recyclables, rubbish, garbage and other organic waste.
   (E)   Occupants shall, when required by this chapter or city ordinance
furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or facilities necessary to
keep their premises safe and sanitary.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.141  SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS.
   Buildings or portions thereof that are determined to be substandard as
defined in this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be
abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.142  SUBSTANDARD PROPERTY CONDITION.
   (A)   When, during the course of a rental housing inspection or complaint
investigation, the inspector encounters or observes a condition or conditions
that are considered dangerous to life, safety, health, or the welfare of the
occupants, the inspector shall, if the situation warrants, issue a substandard
property condition citation.
   (B)   Prior to, or immediately after, the issuance of the substandard
property condition citation, the inspector will be required to notify the city
of the posting and the reason for the posting.
   (C)   The inspector shall have the authority to require immediate evacuation
of the premises in the event of immediate danger to life or safety.
   (D)   The removal or defacing of, or tampering with, a substandard property
condition citation posting shall be punishable as a criminal offense and
subject to the provisions of state statutes regulating misdemeanors and as
outlined in this chapter.
   (E)   The property shall remain unoccupied until such time as the condition
is, or conditions are, corrected and satisfactorily re-inspected.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.143  APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by an order, requirement, decision or determination
made by the code official or housing inspector pursuant to this chapter may,
within ten days of the decision, appeal to the City Administrator designee in
accordance with §§
113.135 et seq.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
§ 113.144  PROHIBITED ACTS.
   At the discretion of the city, property owners and/or tenants found to be in
violation of any of the following provisions may be subject to both civil and/
or misdemeanor criminal charges.
   (A)   No license. Allowing the occupancy of a dwelling unit or rooming unit
prior to the issuance of a rental housing license and payment of the license
inspection fee.
   (B)   Over occupancy. Permitting a dwelling unit or rooming unit that is
occupied by more persons than the dwelling unit or rooming unit is certified
for.
   (C)   Improper occupancy. All buildings or portions thereof occupied for
living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes that were not designed or intended
to be used for such occupancies shall be considered substandard.
   (D)   Occupying vacated unit. Occupies or allows occupancy of a unit that
was posted and ordered vacated.
   (E)   Occupying uncertified bedrooms. Occupies or allows occupancy of a room
as a bedroom that is not certified as a bedroom and does not qualify as a
bedroom.
   (F)   Tampering or non-functioning smoke detector.
      (1)   Disabling smoke detector. Any occupant, owner or manager of a
dwelling or rooming unit who willfully disables a smoke detector or causes it
to be non-functioning is guilty of a misdemeanor. If the unit is occupied by
more than one tenant, each tenant shall be held accountable.
      (2)   Notification. The occupant of a dwelling or rooming unit must
notify the owner or manager of the unit within 24 hours of discovering that a
detector is not functioning. The owner or manager shall take immediate action
to render the detector operational or replace it.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)  Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.999  PENALTY.
   (A)   Criminal. A violation of any provision of this chapter is a
misdemeanor. The maximum penalty is 90 days jail and/or $1,000 fine. Each day
the property is in violation is a separate violation.
   (B)   Civil. Whenever it is determined by the code official that any
property upon inspection there is found alleged violations, a correction notice
shall be issued to the owner or designated representative. Such alleged
violations must be corrected, re-inspected and verified by the code official
for compliance with this chapter within the time period as set forth:
      (1)   Smoke detector violations. Corrections must be completed
immediately and re-inspected within three working days.
      (2)   All other violations. Preparations for the actual work for
correcting the alleged violations shall be commenced immediately and work re-
inspected within 25 working days or within the time period as specified by the
code official.
      (3)   (a)   Penalties. The following penalties shall be imposed upon the
property owner(s) if the alleged violations are not corrected and verified by
the code official within the time period allowed by this chapter:
         (b)   Fine. Fifty dollar fine. An additional charge of $50 per day
commencing on the day that the alleged violation or violations continue after
the expiration of the specified reasonable consideration period as established
by this chapter and extending thereafter until the violation or violations are
verified by the code official.
      (4)   Extensions. Extensions may be granted by the code official. The
request shall be made in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated for the
requested extension. All requests shall be made and delivered to the code
official prior to the expiration date of the violation or violations.
      (5)   Orders after an appeal. After any order of the code official or the
housing appeals board made pursuant to this chapter becomes final, no person to
whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such
order. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order is guilty of a
misdemeanor and is subject to fines as stated in this code or as specified by
the Appeals Board.
(Ord. 2018-18, passed 2-28-2018)
CHAPTER 114:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
114.001   Nudity in liquor and 3.2% malt liquor establishments
Liquor Licensing
   
114.015   State law adopted
   
114.016   Definitions
   
114.017   License required
   
114.018   License application
   
114.019   License fees
   
114.020   Granting license
   
114.021   Persons ineligible for license
   
114.022   Places ineligible for license
   
114.023   Conditions of license
   
114.024   Purchase and consumption restrictions
   
114.025   Revocation of license
3.2% Malt Liquor Licensing
   
114.040   Definitions
   
114.041   License required
   
114.042   License application
   
114.043   License fees
   
114.044   Granting license
   
114.045   Persons ineligible for license
   
114.046   Places ineligible for license
   
114.047   Conditions of license
   
114.048   Closing hours
   
114.049   Purchase and consumption restrictions
   
114.050   Revocation of license
Consumption and Display Permits
   
114.065   State law adopted
   
114.066   Definitions
   
114.067   Consumption limitation; display; furnishing set-ups
   
114.068   Approving permits; restrictions
   
114.069   Conditions of permit issuance
   
114.070   Permit conditions
   
114.071   Temporary permits
   
114.072   Fee
   
114.073   Report of violations
   
114.074   Permit revocation
Cross-reference:
   Conduct or events constituting a public nuisance, see §
130.12
   Improper display of sexually-oriented material, see §
130.14
   Public consumption of alcoholic beverages, see §
130.19
   Public indecency, see §
130.13
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.001  NUDITY IN LIQUOR AND 3.2% MALT LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      LICENSE. Includes the following:
         (a)   Any on-sale, Sunday on-sale or club intoxicating liquor license;
         (b)   Any on-sale or temporary on-sale beer license; and
         (c)   Any consumption and display permit.
      LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment having a license, as defined
herein.
(1978 Code, § 604.01)
   (B)   Nudity prohibited. The following acts or conduct in licensed
establishments are deemed contrary to the public welfare and morals and are
therefore prohibited:
      (1)   To employ or use any person in the sale or service of any
commodities or products in or upon any establishment serving alcoholic
beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing
as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the
areola or any portion of such person’s pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks
or genitals;
      (2)   To employ or use the services of any host or hostess while such
host or hostess is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as
described in division (B)(1) above;
      (3)   To encourage or permit any person on the premises of any such
establishment to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or
genitals of any other person;
      (4)   To permit any employee or person to wear or use any device or
covering exposed to view, which simulates the breast, genitals, anus, pubic
hair or any portion thereof;
      (5)   To permit any employee or other person to remain in or upon the
premises who exposes to public view the post-pubertal human male or female
genitals, pubic hair, anus, buttocks or post-pubertal female breast below the
top of the areola with less than a fully opaque covering;
      (6)   To permit any person to perform acts of or acts which simulate any
of the following:
         (a)   Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral
copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law;
         (b)   The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks,
anus or genitals; and/or
         (c)   The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva, genitals or the
nipple or areola of the female breast.
      (7)   To permit any person to use artificial devices or inanimate objects
to depict any of the acts listed in division (B)(6) above;
      (8)   To permit the showing of any film, still picture, electronic
reproduction or other visual reproduction depicting any of the acts listed in
division (B)(6) above, or depicting the simulation of such acts;
      (9)   To permit any employee or other person under contract to perform on
the premises, to dance on any table, bar or other elevated platform, except on
a duly designated stage designed exclusively for the entertainment of patrons
of the premises, said stage to be located at least three feet from any patron;
and/or
      (10)   To permit any prostitute to loiter on the premises with intent to
solicit.
(1978 Code, § 604.02)
   (C)   Loss of license. Any violation of this section shall constitute
grounds for suspension or revocation of any and all licenses held for the
premises in addition to all other penalties imposed by this code.
(1978 Code, § 604.03)
Penalty, see §
10.99
LIQUOR LICENSING
§ 114.015  STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340, as it may be amended from time to time, with
reference to the definition of terms, applications for license, granting of
license, conditions of license, restrictions on consumption, provisions on
sales, conditions of bonds of licenses, hours of sale and all other matters
pertaining to the retail sale, distribution and consumption of intoxicating
liquor are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out
herein.
(1978 Code, § 601.01)
§ 114.016  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. This list
supplements the list of definitions as prescribed by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may
be amended from time to time.
   RESTAURANT. Any establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of a
proprietor or manager, having appropriate facilities for the serving of meals
and where, in consideration of payment therefor, meals are regularly served at
tables to the general public, and which employs an adequate staff to provide
the usual and suitable service to its guests. There shall be appropriate
facilities for serving of not less than 30 guests at one time.
   SUNDAY ON-SALE. The sale of liquor by the glass to persons who are seated at
tables for consumption on the premises, in conjunction with the serving of food
by the licensee, pursuant to a special license therefor issued by the city as
authorized by state law.
(1978 Code, § 601.01)  (Ord. 86-5, passed 5-5-1986)
§ 114.017  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Sale prohibited. No person, except wholesalers or manufacturers to the
extent authorized under state license, shall directly or indirectly deal in,
sell or keep for sale any intoxicating liquor or wine without first having
received a license to do so as provided in this chapter. Licensees shall be of
five kinds: on-sale, off-sale, “club licenses”, Sunday on-sale and on-sale
wine.
   (B)   Time of issue. No more than one new on-sale license shall be issued in
any 30-day period. This provision shall not apply to renewals of licenses for
existing establishments.
   (C)   Combined on- and off-sale. On- and off-sale licenses may be issued to
the same applicant for use in same building only.
   (D)   Club licenses. Special club licenses shall be issued only to duly
incorporated clubs which have been in existence for 15 years or more or to
congressionally charged veterans’ organizations which have been in existence
for ten years, and shall permit on-sales of liquor to members and bona fide
guests only.
   (E)   Sunday license.
      (1)   No person shall sell intoxicating liquor on Sunday, unless they
have applied for and received a special license from the City Council
authorizing such sale. Such Sunday on-sale license may be issued by the Council
to hotels and restaurants holding on-sale licenses from the city. Applications
for a Sunday on-sale license shall be made to the Council in the same manner as
applications for an on-sale license to sell intoxicating liquor. The license
application shall clearly indicate whether the applicant is applying for an on-
sale liquor license or for a Sunday on-sale license. A Sunday on-sale license
may be suspended or revoked independently of the on-sale license, as provided
in §
114.025 of this chapter. No Sunday liquor license shall be valid unless a valid
on-sale license is also in effect for the premises.
      (2)   As a condition to the granting of a Sunday on-sale license to a
restaurant, the Council may by resolution restrict the sale and consumption of
liquor at any place so licensed to tables where food is served to patrons
purchasing and consuming said liquor, and may prohibit or limit the sale or
consumption of liquor at a bar, and may prohibit the maintenance of a bar on
the premises where liquor is displayed or dispensed. Violation of any such
condition shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license.
   (F)   On-sale wine. No person shall sell wine on-sale without an on-sale
wine license or on-sale liquor license. Said license shall not be issued,
except in accordance with the provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended
from time to time, and shall not be issued to any establishment other than a
restaurant.
   (G)   Licensed area. No license shall be effective beyond the compact and
contiguous space named in the license granted.
(1978 Code, § 601.02)  (Ord. 86-5, passed 5-5-1986)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.018  LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application form. Every application for a license to sell liquor or
wine shall be verified and filed with the Clerk. It shall state the name of the
applicant, his or her age, representations as to his or her character, with
such reference as may be required, his or her citizenship, whether the
application is for on-sale or off-sale, the business in connection with which
the proposed license will operate and its location, whether applicant is owner
and operator of the business, how long he or she has been in that business in
that place, and such other information as the Council may require from time to
time. In addition, to containing such information, each application for a
license shall be in the form prescribed by the Liquor Control Department. No
person shall make a false statement in any application.
   (B)   Insurance.
      (1)   Every applicant for the issuance or renewal of an on-sale or on-
sale wine or off-sale license shall demonstrate proof of financial
responsibility in accordance with the provisions of M.S. § 340A.409, as it may
be amended from time to time. Every licensee shall further demonstrate proof of
financial responsibility by filing the insurance certificate, surety bond or
State Treasurer’s certificate with the Commissioner of Public Safety after 3-1-
1983, in compliance with M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to
time.
      (2)   The liability insurance policy as required above shall provide that
it may not be cancelled for any cause by the insured or the insurer without
first giving ten days’ written notice to the city, addressed section shall be
approved as to form by the City Attorney.
   (C)   Filing violation. The operation of an on-sale, on-sale wine or off-
sale liquor business without having on file at all times the insurance bond or
other security required by division (B) above shall be grounds for immediate
revocation of the license.
(1978 Code, § 601.03)  (Ord. 86-5, passed 5-5-1986; Ord. 90-12, passed 5-21-
1990)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.019  LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Fee to accompany applications. Each application for a license shall be
accompanied by payment in full of the required fee for the license. All fees
shall be paid into the General Fund of the city. Upon rejection of any
application for a license, the city shall refund the amount paid.
   (B)   Expiration date. All licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year.
Each license shall be issued for a period of one year; except that, if a
portion of the license year has elapsed when the application is made, a license
may be issued for the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee. In computing
such fee, any unexpired fraction of a month shall be counted as one month.
   (C)   Amount of fees. The annual fee for an on-sale license shall be $3,000.
The annual fee for an off- sale license shall be $100. The annual fee for a
special club license shall be $100. The annual fee for a Sunday on-sale license
shall be $200. The annual fee for an on-sale wine license shall be $200.
   (D)   Refunds. No refund of any fee upon an issued license shall be
permitted, except as authorized under M.S. § 340A.408, as it may be amended
from time to time.
(1978 Code, § 601.04)  (Ord. 86-5, passed 5-5-1986)
§ 114.020  GRANTING LICENSE.
   (A)   Investigation. The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the
application. Opportunity may be given to any person to be heard for or against
the granting of the license. After such investigation and hearing, the Council
shall grant or refuse the application in its discretion. No off-sale license
shall become effective until it, together with the bond furnished by the
applicant, has been approved by the Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (B)   To whom issued. Each license shall be issued to the applicant only.
Each license shall be issued only for the premises described in the
application. No license may be transferred to another person or to another
place without the approval of the Council.
(1978 Code, § 601.05)
§ 114.021  PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   No license shall be granted to or held by any person made ineligible for
such a license by state law. No license shall be issued to or held by an
individual who is not  a resident  of  the  seven-county metropolitan area or
of Sherburne or Wright Counties; in the case of a corporate licensee, the
registered office of the corporation shall be within the city.
(1978 Code, § 601.06)  (Ord. 81-1, passed 3-16-1981)
§ 114.022  PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   State law applicable. No license shall be issued for any place of or
for any business ineligible for such a license under state law.
   (B)   Delinquent taxes. No license shall be granted for operation on any
premises on which taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city are
delinquent and unpaid.
   (C)   School zone. No license shall be granted within 100 feet of any school
or within 100 feet of any church.
(1978 Code, § 601.07)
§ 114.023  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions in divisions (A),
(B) and (C) below and all other provisions of this chapter and of any other
applicable ordinance of the city or state law.
   (A)   Licensee responsible. Every licensee shall be responsible for the
conduct of his or her place of business and the conditions of sobriety and
order in it.
   (B)   Inspections. Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health
officer or other properly designated officer or employee of the city to enter,
inspect and search the premises of the licensee during business hours without a
warrant.
   (C)   Corporate licensee. It shall be a condition of every license
heretofore or hereafter issued hereunder to a corporation that the Clerk be
furnished by the licensee with a correct list of all stockholders of the
corporation to whom the license is issued and the number of shares held by
each, either individually or beneficially for others; and it shall be the
continuing duty of each corporate licensee to promptly notify the Clerk of any
change in ownership or beneficial interest of shares of stock entitled to be
voted at any meeting of the stockholders of such corporation which results in
change in voting control of the corporation by the persons owning shares of
stock therein shall be deemed equivalent to a transfer of the license issued to
such corporation, and any such licenses shall be revoked 30 days after any such
change in ownership or beneficial interest of shares, unless the Council shall
have been notified of such change in writing and shall have approved thereof.
The metropolitan area or of Sherburne or Wright Counties: in the case of a
corporate licensee, the registered office of the corporation shall be within
the city.
(1978 Code, § 601.08)  (Ord. 81-1, passed 3-16-1981)
§ 114.024  PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Misrepresenting age. No minor shall misrepresent his or her age for
the purpose of obtaining intoxicating liquor or wine, nor shall any person
consume wine or liquor when prohibited from doing so by state law.
   (B)   Inducing minors. No person shall induce a minor to purchase or procure
liquor, unless authorized by law.
   (C)   Unlicensed on-sale. No person shall mix or prepare liquor for
consumption in any public place or place of business unless he or she has a
license to sell liquor on-sale or a permit from the Liquor Control Director
under M.S. § 340A.414, as it may be amended from time to time, and no person
shall consume liquor in any such place.
   (D)   Hours of operation.
      (1)   No sale of intoxicating liquor shall be made on any Sunday between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon. No sale shall be made between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any other day. No licensee may sell intoxicating
liquor between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. unless the licensee has
obtained a permit from the State Commissioner of Public Safety and has been
issued a special license by the city.
      (2)   The annual application fee for the special license shall set forth
by resolution of the City Council.
   (E)   Sales of liquor by persons under 18 years of age. No person under 18
years of age shall be permitted to sell intoxicating liquor on premises
licensed for the retail on-sale or off-sale of intoxicating liquor.
(1978 Code, § 601.09)  (Ord. 83-3, passed 4-4-1983; Ord. 86-5, passed 5-5-1986;
Ord. 90-4, passed 2-5-1990; Ord. 2003-13, passed 10-14-2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.025  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The Council may suspend for not to exceed 60 days or revoke any liquor
license for violation of any provision or condition of this chapter or any
state law regulating the sale of intoxicating liquor and shall revoke such
license if the licensee willfully violates any provision of M.S. Chapter 340A,
as it may be amended from time to time. Except in the case of a suspension
pending a hearing on revocation, revocation or suspension by the Council shall
be preceded by written notice to the licensee and a public hearing. The notice
shall give at least ten days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing and
shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee. The Council, may,
without any advance notice, suspend any license pending a hearing on revocation
for a period of not exceeding 30 days.
(1978 Code, § 601.10)
3.2% MALT LIQUOR LICENSING
§ 114.040  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEER or 3.2% MALT LIQUOR. Any malt beverage with an alcoholic content of
more than 0.5% by volume and not more than 3.2% by weight.
   BONA FIDE CLUB. An organization organized for social purposes, business
purposes, for intellectual improvement or for the promotion of sports; provided
that:
      (1)   The sale of beer is incidental to and not the main purpose of the
club;
      (2)   The club is not organized for profit; and
      (3)   No part of the profits of the club’s operations inure to the
benefit of individual members.
   RESTAURANT. Any establishment having appropriate facilities for the
preparation and serving of food at tables to not less than 30 persons at one
time, which employs an adequate staff to provide the usual and suitable service
to its customers, and which has as the principle part of its business, the
selling and serving of food for consumption on the premises.
(1978 Code, § 602.01)  (Ord. 2003-13, passed 10-14-2003)
§ 114.041  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Licenses. No person, except wholesalers and manufacturers to the
extent authorized by law, shall deal in or dispose of by gift, sale or
otherwise, or keep or offer for sale, any beer within the city without first
having received a license as hereinafter provided. Licenses shall be of four
kinds: 
      (1)   Regular on-sale;
      (2)   Club on-sale;
      (3)   Temporary on-sale; and
      (4)   Off-sale.
   (B)   Regular on-sale. Regular on-sale licenses shall be granted only to
bona fide clubs, drug stores, restaurants and hotels where food is prepared and
served for consumption on the premises. On-sale licenses shall permit the sale
of beer for consumption on the premises only.
   (C)   Club on-sale. Club on-sale licenses shall be granted only to bona fide
clubs and shall permit the sale of beer, for consumption on the premises, to
members and guests in the company of members only.
   (D)   Temporary on-sale. Temporary on-sale licenses shall be granted only to
bona fide clubs and charitable, religious and non-profit organizations for the
sale of beer on the premises only.
   (E)   Off-sale. Off-sale licenses shall permit the sale of beer at retail,
in the original package for consumption off the premises only.
(1978 Code, § 602.02)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.042  LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application form. Every application form for a license to sell beer
shall be made to the Clerk on a form supplied by the city and shall contain the
following information: the name of the applicant, his or her age,
representations as to his or her character, with such references as the Council
may require, his or her citizenship, the type of license applied for, the
business in connection with which the proposed licensee will operate and its
location, whether the applicant is owner and operator of the business, how long
the applicant has been in that business at that place and such other
information as the Council may require from time to time. It shall be unlawful
to make any false statement in an application, and any false statement shall be
grounds for rejection of the application.
   (B)   Insurance.
      (1)   Every applicant for the issuance or renewal of a retail on-sale or
off-sale beer license shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility in
accordance with the provisions of M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from
time to time.
      (2)   Every licensee shall further demonstrate proof of financial
responsibility by filing the insurance certificate, surety bond or State
Treasurer’s certificate with the Commissioner of Public Safety after 3-1-1983,
in compliance with M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (3)   The liability insurance policy as required above shall provide that
it may not be canceled for any cause by the insured or the insurer without
first giving ten days’ written notice to the city, addressed to the City Clerk.
      (4)   The operation of an off-sale or on-sale business without having on
file at all times with the city the liability insurance policy or other
security herein referred to shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the
license.
      (5)   The insurance certificate required by this section shall be
approved as to form by the City Attorney.
(1978 Code, § 602.03)  (Ord. 91-7, passed 6-17-1991)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.043  LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Payment required. Each application for a license shall be accompanied
by a receipt from the Finance Director for payment in full of the required fee
for the license. All fees shall be paid into the General Fund of the city. Upon
rejection of any application for a license, the Finance Director shall refund
the amount paid.
   (B)   Expiration; pro rata fees. Every license, except a temporary license,
shall expire on June 30 in each year. Each license, except a temporary license,
shall be issued for a period of one year; except that, if a portion of the
license year has elapsed when the license is granted, the license shall be
issued for the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee. In computing such fee,
any unexpired fraction of a month shall be counted as one month.
   (C)   Fees. The annual fee for a regular on-sale license, the annual fee for
a club on-sale license, the annual fee for an off-sale license, and the fee for
a temporary on-sale shall be as listed in the fee schedule §
35.02.
   (D)   Refunds. No part of the fee paid for any license issued under this
subchapter shall be refunded, except in the following instances upon
application to the Council within 30 days from the happening of the event.
There shall be refunded a pro rata portion of the fee for the unexpired period
of the license, computed on a monthly basis, when operation of the licensed
business ceases not less than one month before expiration of the license
because of:
      (1)   Destruction or damage of the licensed premises by fire or other
catastrophe;
      (2)   The licensee’s illness;
      (3)   The licensee’s death; or
      (4)   A change in the legal status of the municipality making it unlawful
for the licensed business to continue.
(1978 Code, § 602.04)
§ 114.044  GRANTING LICENSE.
   (A)   Investigation and hearing. The Council shall investigate all facts set
out in the application. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard
for or against the granting of the license. After such investigation and
hearing, the Council shall grant or refuse the application in its discretion.
   (B)   Transfers. Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and
shall not be transferable to another holder. Each license shall be issued only
for the premises described in the application. No license may be transferred to
another place without the approval of the Council.
(1978 Code, § 602.05)
§ 114.045  PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   No license shall be granted to or held by any person who:
   (A)   Is under 21 years of age;
   (B)   Has, within five years prior to the application for such license, been
convicted of a felony or of violating any law of the state or local ordinance
relating to the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession for sale or
distribution of intoxicating liquors, and cannot show competent evidence under
M.S. § 364.03, as it may be amended from time to time, of sufficient
rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a beer licensee;
   (C)   Is a manufacturer of beer or is interested in the control of any place
where beer is manufactured;
   (D)   Is an alien;
   (E)   Is not of good moral character;
   (F)   Is or during the period of this license becomes the holder of a
federal retail liquor dealer’s special tax stamp for the sale of intoxicating
liquor at any place unless there has also been issued to him or her a local
license to sell intoxicating liquor at such place; and
   (G)   Is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license is
issued.
(1978 Code, § 602.06)  (Ord. 2003-13, passed 10-14-2003)
§ 114.046  PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Conviction or revocation. No license shall be granted for sale on any
premises where a licensee has been convicted of the violation of this
subchapter, or of the state beer or liquor law, or where any license hereunder
has been revoked for cause until one year has elapsed after such conviction or
revocation.
   (B)   Six months prior eligibility. No regular on-sale license shall be
granted for a club which has not been in operation and eligible to receive a
license for at least six months immediately preceding the application for a
license.
(1978 Code, § 602.07)
§ 114.047  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions in divisions (A)
through (G) below and all other provisions of this subchapter and of any other
applicable ordinance of the city or state law.
   (A)   Sales to persons under 21 years of age or intoxicated persons. No beer
shall be sold or served to any intoxicated person or to any person under 21
years of age.
   (B)   Consumption by persons under 21 years of age. No person under 21 years
of age shall be permitted to consume beer on the licensed premises.
   (C)   Gambling. No gambling or any gambling device shall be permitted on any
licensed premises.
   (D)   Interest of manufacturers or wholesalers. No manufacturer or
wholesaler of beer shall have any ownership of or interest in an establishment
licensed to sell at retail contrary to the provisions of M.S. § 340A.308, as it
may be amended from time to time. No retail licensee and manufacturer or
wholesaler of beer shall be parties to any exclusive purchase contract. No
retail licensee shall receive any benefits contrary to law from a manufacturer
or wholesaler of beer and no such manufacturer or wholesaler shall confer any
benefits contrary to law upon a retail licensee.
   (E)   Liquor dealer’s stamp. No licensee shall sell beer while holding or
exhibiting in the licensed premises a federal retail liquor dealer’s special
tax stamp unless he or she is licensed under the laws of the state to sell
intoxicating liquors.
   (F)   Searches and seizures. Every licensee shall allow any peace officer,
health officer or properly designated officer or employee of the city to enter,
inspect and search the premises of the licensee without a warrant.
   (G)   Licensee responsibility. Every licensee shall be responsible for the
conduct of his or her place of business and shall maintain conditions of
sobriety and order.
(1978 Code, § 602.08)  (Ord. 83-3, passed 4-4-1983; Ord. 2003-13, passed 10-14-
2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.048  CLOSING HOURS.
   No sale of beer shall be made on any Sunday between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 12:00 noon. No sale shall be made between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00
a.m. on any other day. No licensee may sell beer between the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 2:00 a.m. unless the licensee has obtained a permit from the State
Commissioner of Public Safety and has been issued a special license by the
city. The annual application fee for the special license shall be set forth by
resolution of the City Council.
(1978 Code, § 602.09)  (Ord. 2003-13, passed 10-14-2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.049  PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Age misrepresentation. No person shall misrepresent his or her age for
the purpose of obtaining beer.
   (B)   Inducing purchase. No person shall induce a person under 21 years of
age to purchase or procure beer, unless authorized by law.
   (C)   Procurement. No person other than the parent or guardian shall procure
beer for any person under 21 years of age on the condition that the beer was
furnished or given solely for consumption in the household of the parent or
guardian.
   (D)   Possession. No person under 21 years of age shall have beer in his or
her possession with the intent to consume it at a place other than the
household of his parent or guardian and in the presence of said parent or
guardian.
   (E)   Consumption. No person under 21 years of age shall consume beer unless
in the household of his or her parent or guardian and with consent of his or
her parent or guardian.
   (F)   Consumption prohibited, where. No beer shall be consumed in any
unlicensed theater, recreation hall or center, dance hall or other place of
public gathering used for the purpose of entertainment, amusement or playing of
games.
(1978 Code, § 602.10)  (Ord. 2003-13, passed 10-14-2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.050  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The violation of any provision or conditions of this subchapter by a beer
licensee or his or her agent is ground for revocation or suspension of the
license. The license of any person who holds a federal retail liquor dealer’s
special tax stamp without a license to sell intoxicating liquors at such place
shall be revoked without notice and without hearing. In all other cases, a
license granted under this subchapter may be revoked or suspended by the
Council after written notice to the licensee and a public hearing. The notice
shall give at least ten days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing and
shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee. The Council may
suspend any license pending a hearing on revocation or suspension. No
suspension shall exceed 60 days.
(1978 Code, § 602.11)
CONSUMPTION AND DISPLAY PERMITS
§ 114.065  STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   The provisions of M.S. § 340A.414, as it may be amended from time to time,
are hereby adopted and shall be in full force and effect in the city as if
completely set out here in full.
(1978 Code, § 603.01)
§ 114.066  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEER. Any malt beverage with an alcoholic content of more than 0.5% by
volume and not more than 3.2% by weight.
   FURNISH. To sell, give or in any other manner provide.
   LIQUOR. Distilled, fermented, spiritous, vinous and malt beverages
containing in excess of 3.2% of alcohol by weight.
   PERMIT. A permit granted by the State Liquor Control Department pursuant to
M.S. § 340A.414, as it may be amended from time to time.
   PRIVATE CLUB. A club as defined by M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be amended
from time to time, or any unincorporated society as described in M.S. §
340A.414, as it may be amended from time to time.
   PUBLIC PLACES. Any place open to the public or to which the public is
invited, but does not include a private residence.
   RESTAURANT. Any establishment having appropriate facilities for the
preparation and serving of food at tables to not less than 30 persons at one
time, which employs an adequate staff to provide the usual and suitable service
to its customers, and which has as the principal part of its business the
selling and serving of food for consumption on the premises.
   SET-UP. Any liquid or ice used for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating
liquor.
   TEMPORARY PERMIT. A permit issued by the city and approved by the
Commissioner of Public Safety to a non-profit organization allowing the
consumption and display of liquor for a one-day period for a social event
occurring within the city pursuant to M.S. § 340A.414, Subd. 9, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(1978 Code, § 603.02)  (Ord. 84-2, passed 1-16-1984)
§ 114.067  CONSUMPTION LIMITATION; DISPLAY; FURNISHING SET-UPS.
   (A)   Where permitted. No person shall consume or display or allow the
consumption or display of liquor or furnish set-ups or allow the furnishing of
set-ups at any place within the city, except:
      (1)   A private residence;
      (2)   An establishment having an intoxicating liquor on-sale license;
      (3)   An establishment having a permit and maintaining the conditions set
forth in §
114.069 of this chapter; or
      (4)   On the premises occupied by a non-profit organization which has a
temporary permit applicable to the premises and the time of the consumption and
display, and which complies with the conditions of §
114.071(C) of this chapter
   (B)   Regulations. The furnishing of set-ups and the consumption and display
of liquor at an establishment having a permit shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter and other applicable law.
   (C)   Hours. No person shall consume or display, or allow the consumption or
display of intoxicating liquor or furnish set-ups or allow the furnishing of
set-ups at an establishment having a permit between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
8:00 a.m.
(1978 Code, § 603.03)  (Ord. 84-2, passed 1-16-1984; Ord. 2003-13, passed 10-
14-2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.068  APPROVING PERMITS; RESTRICTIONS.
   No officer or employee of the city shall sign any letter or other document
expressing local approval of an application for a state consumption and display
permit, or in any other manner expressing or conveying the impression that such
approval has been given, until he or she has been authorized by resolution of
the Council.
(1978 Code, § 603.04)
§ 114.069  CONDITIONS OF PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   No permit shall be approved unless the applicant meets the following
conditions:
   (A)   Other regulations. The use of the premises for the consumption and
display of intoxicating liquor conforms with applicable zoning, building code
and subdivision regulations;
   (B)   Location. Such premises are not within 100 feet of any church or
school;
   (C)   Beer license. An on-sale beer license has been issued for the
premises;
   (D)   Restaurant. The establishment is a restaurant or has a restaurant as
part of its facilities;
   (E)   Clubs. If a private club, the club has no members who are persons
under 21 years of age;
   (F)   Fee. City’s fee required by §
114.072 of this chapter has been tendered to the city;
   (G)   Character. The person seeking the permit, has not been convicted of a
felony, nor convicted of willfully violating the ordinances of the city
relating to the sale, consumption or display of liquor;
   (H)   Manufacturers and wholesalers. The person having or seeking the permit
is not a manufacturer or wholesaler of beer or liquor and has no interest in
any place where beer or liquor is manufactured, or where liquor is sold;
   (I)   Facilities. The premises have sinks and other suitable equipment, and
hot and cold running water, for the maintenance of sanitary conditions for
persons eating or drinking on the premises. Additionally, that the premises
have adequate separate toilets, which are conveniently located so that they can
be reached from the restaurant area without going outside or through building
areas not occupied by the applicant, which are equipped with hot and cold
running water, towels and soap, and which are readily cleanable, and are
adequately heated, lighted and ventilated;
   (J)   Hazards. The premises are so located that no unusual safety hazards
are presented to persons going to and from or being on the premises by reason
of lighting or the design or location of stairways, windows, steps, doors,
sidewalks, streets or parking facilities;
   (K)   Safety standards. The premises are in complete compliance with all
federal, state and local laws and regulations pertaining to health and safety
standards;
   (L)   Fire precautions. The premises have adequate emergency fire exit
facilities and no unusual fire hazard exists on the premises; and
   (M)   Parking. There are adequate parking facilities for the premises.
(1978 Code, § 603.05)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.070  PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   The following regulations shall be complied with by permittees.
   (A)   No person who has brought liquor to a public place having a permit
shall keep or leave such liquor at such place during his or her absence.
   (B)   No person at an establishment having a permit shall furnish liquor to
any person other than his or her bona fide guest.
   (C)   No person at a private club having a permit shall furnish a set-up to
any person there who is not the bona fide guest of a member who is then
present.
   (D)   No person shall furnish liquor or set-ups to a minor at an
establishment having a permit.
   (E)   No minor shall remain or be allowed to remain at a public place or
private club having a permit unless accompanied by his or her parent or
guardian.
   (F)   No member of a private club having a permit shall keep liquor at the
club unless the bottle, container or other receptacle containing the liquor has
attached to it a label signed by the member. Any liquor on the premises of the
club not being actually used or consumed by the owner thereof shall be kept in
a locker designated to the use of such member.
   (G)   No minor shall be assigned a locker for the storage of liquor at any
private club, nor shall any minor consume or display or be permitted to consume
or display liquor on any premises owned or controlled by any such club.
   (H)   Every permit holder shall allow any peace officer, health officer or
other properly designated officer or employee of the city to enter, inspect and
search the premises of the licensee during business hours without a warrant.
(1978 Code, § 603.06)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.071  TEMPORARY PERMITS.
   (A)   Conditions of issuing a temporary permit. A temporary permit shall not
be approved unless the following conditions have been met:
      (1)   The application has been completed on a form provided by the city;
      (2)   The application is made by a bona-fide non-profit organization and
the event for which the temporary permit is sought is a social activity to be
held within the city;
      (3)   That the premises where the activity is to be held will be adequate
for the number of people expected in terms of size, sanitary facilities and
parking;
      (4)   The applicant has not had more than two temporary permits within
the past 12 months;
      (5)   Neither the applicant nor any of its members has been convicted of
violating any laws relating to the sale of liquor, 3.2% malt liquor or the
consumption and display of liquor, nor has the applicant violated any
conditions of a prior temporary permit or any temporary license issued under §§
114.040 through
114.050 of this chapter; and
      (6)   The fees required by §
114.072 of this chapter have been paid to the city.
   (B)   Temporary permit approval. If a temporary permit is approved by the
City Council, the Clerk or Finance Director shall forward the same to the
Commissioner of Public Safety for approval. No temporary permit is valid until
it has been approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety and no temporary
permit will be issued until such approval is received by the city.
   (C)   Temporary permit conditions. The temporary permit holder shall comply
with the following.
      (1)   No person who has brought liquor to the premises for which the
temporary permit is issued shall keep or leave such liquor at the premises
during his or her absence.
      (2)   No person shall furnish liquor or set-ups to a minor.
      (3)   No minor shall remain or be allowed to remain at a premises for
which a permit has been issued unless accompanied by his or her parent or adult
guardian.
(1978 Code, § 603.06)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.072  FEE.
   (A)   The city’s fee for the operation of a private club or public place
having a consumption and display permit shall be as listed in the fee schedule
in §
35.02.
   (B)   The fee for a temporary permit shall be as listed in the fee schedule
in §
35.02.
(1978 Code, § 603.07)  (Ord. 84-2, passed 1-16-1984)
§ 114.073  REPORT OF VIOLATIONS.
   The Clerk shall notify the Liquor Control Department of any violation of the
provisions of this subchapter.
(1978 Code, § 603.08)
§ 114.074  PERMIT REVOCATION.
   A permit under this subchapter for violations of this code, state law or
other applicable regulation pursuant to the provisions of §
114.025 of this chapter.
(1978 Code, § 603.09)
CHAPTER 115:  PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
Section
General Provisions
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   Exemptions
   
115.03   Records
   
115.04   Daily reports
   
115.05   Stolen goods
   
115.06   Holding items
   
115.07   Receipts
   
115.08   Police orders
   
115.09   Weapons
   
115.10   Hours of operation
   
115.11   Prohibited acts
   
115.12   Redemption of items
   
115.13   Payments by check
   
115.14   Inspections
Licensing Procedures and Conditions
   
115.25   License required
   
115.26   Multiple dealers
   
115.27   License fee
   
115.28   Application
   
115.29   Bond
   
115.30   Site plan
   
115.31   Investigations
   
115.32   Public hearing
   
115.33   Granting license
   
115.34   Persons ineligible for license
   
115.35   Places ineligible for license
   
115.36   License limitations
   
115.37   Terms; expiration; pro rata fee
   
115.38   License refund
   
115.39   Death of licensee
   
115.40   License denial, suspension or revocation
   
115.41   County license
 
   
115.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PAWNBROKER. A person who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal
property, or other valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal
property or other valuable things on condition of selling the same back again
at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage on
personal property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so
mortgaged.
   SECONDHAND GOODS DEALER. A person whose regular business includes selling or
receiving tangible personal property (excluding motor vehicles) previously
used, rented, owned or leased.
(1978 Code, § 511.01)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.02  EXEMPTIONS.
   Sections 115.25 and 115.26 of this chapter shall not apply to or include the
following:
   (A)   The sale of secondhand goods where all the following are present:
      (1)   The sale is held on property occupied as a dwelling by the seller
or owned, rented or leased by a charitable or political organization;
      (2)   The items offered for sale are owned by the occupant;
      (3)   No sale exceeds a sale of 72 consecutive hours;
      (4)   No more than four sales are held in any 12-month period; and
      (5)   None of the items offered for sale shall have been purchased for
resale or received on consignment for the purpose of resale.
   (B)   The sale of goods at an auction held by an auctioneer;
   (C)   The business of buying or selling only those secondhand goods taken as
part or full payment for new goods and where such business is incident to and
not the primary business of a person;
   (D)   A bulk sale of property from a merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler
having an established place of business or goods sold at open sale from
bankrupt stock;
   (E)   Goods sold at an exhibition, providing the exhibition does not last
longer than ten days in any 12-month period;
   (F)   Sales by a licensed automobile dealer;
   (G)   Firearms, including antique firearms, sold by firearms dealers,
dealing exclusively in firearms, holding current valid federal firearms dealer
licenses permitting them to deal in such sales;
   (H)   Sales made by the Sheriff or other public officials in the discharge
of their official duties; and
   (I)   Sales made by assignees or receivers appointed in this state to make
sales for the benefit of creditors.
(1978 Code, § 511.02)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.03  RECORDS.
   A licensed secondhand goods dealer and pawnbroker, at the time of receipt of
an item, must immediately record, in ink or other indelible medium, in the
English language, in a bound book, the following information:
   (A)   An accurate description of the item including, but not limited to, any
trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name and/
or other identifying marks on such item;
   (B)   The purchase price;
   (C)   Date, time and place of receipt;
   (D)   Name, address, phone number and date of birth of the person from whom
the item was received;
   (E)   The identification number from any of the following forms of
identification of the seller:
      (1)   Valid picture driver’s license; and
      (2)   Official state photo identification,  passport or military I.D.
   (F)   The books, as well as the goods received, must be open for inspection
by the Police Department during business hours. The records required by this
division (F) must be stored and maintained by the licensee for a period of at
least three years.
(1978 Code, § 511.18)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.04  DAILY REPORTS.
   For the following items, regardless of resale price, a secondhand goods
dealer or pawnbroker must make out, on forms approved by the Police Department,
and send daily by mail or courier to the Police Department, a legible
description of the goods received during the preceding day, together with the
time received and a description of the individual from whom the goods were
received:
   (A)   Items with a serial number, or other personal identification number or
symbol or items from which such number or symbol has been, or may have been,
removed, altered or obliterated;
   (B)   Cameras;
   (C)   Electronic audio or video equipment;
   (D)   Precious jewelry or gems, and precious metals;
   (E)   Artist signed or artist attributed works of art;
   (F)   Guns and firearms; and/or
   (G)   Items not included in the above, except furniture and kitchen or
laundry appliances, which the secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker intends to
sell for more than $200.
(1978 Code, § 511.19)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.05  STOLEN GOODS.
   A licensed pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer must report to the police
any article pledged or received, or sought to be pledged or received, if the
licensee has reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost.
(1978 Code, § 511.20)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.06  HOLDING ITEMS.
   An item received by a secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker for which a
report to the police is required may not be sold or otherwise transferred for a
period of 12 days after the date of such report to the police. However, an
individual may redeem an item pawned 72 hours after the item was received on
deposit, excluding Sundays and legal holidays.
(1978 Code, § 511.21)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.07  RECEIPTS.
   A licensed secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker must provide a receipt to
the seller or consignor of any item which includes:
   (A)   The address and telephone number of the business;
   (B)   The date;
   (C)   A description of the items purchased; and
   (D)   The purchaser’s or co-signee’s signature.
(1978 Code, § 511.22)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.08  POLICE ORDERS.
   (A)   If a city police officer or other law enforcement officer notifies a
dealer not to sell an item, the item may not be sold or removed from the
licensed premises until authorized to be released by the police or court order.
   (B)   Said notification, if verbal, should be followed by a written order
within 72 hours setting forth the item to be held and the reasons therefore.
(1978 Code, § 511.23)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.09  WEAPONS.
   (A)   A licensed pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer may not receive, as a
pledge or otherwise accept for consignment or sale, any revolver, pistol, rifle
or shotgun unless said dealer also maintains a federal firearms dealer’s
license and a weapons vault, approved by the Chief of Police, in which such
items are secured when not being sold or reclaimed.
   (B)   A licensed pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer may not receive, as
pledge or otherwise, accept for consignment or sale, any sawed-off shotgun,
automatic rifle, blackjack, switchblade, knife or other similar weapons or
firearms.
(1978 Code, § 511.24)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)  Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.10  HOURS OF OPERATION.
   From 9:00 p.m. Saturday to 7:00 a.m. Monday, no property shall be received
as a pledge, on consignment or purchased by a pawnbroker or secondhand goods
dealer; nor shall any property be sold during said hours by any pawnbroker or
secondhand goods dealer, nor any other day before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
Further, no pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer shall be open for business on
Christmas Day or Thanksgiving Day.
(1978 Code, § 511.25)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)  Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.11  PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   Minors. A minor may not sell or consign, or attempt to sell or
consign, goods with a secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker. A secondhand goods
dealer or pawnbroker may not receive goods from a minor.
   (B)   Others. A secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker may not receive any
goods from a person of unsound mind or an intoxicated person.
   (C)   Identification. A secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker may not
receive goods, unless the seller presents identification in the form of a valid
picture driver’s license or official state photo identification, United States
passport or military ID.
(1978 Code, § 511.26)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)  Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.12  REDEMPTION OF ITEMS.
   A person who pawns an item shall have at least 120 days to redeem the item
before it may be sold.
(1978 Code, § 511.28)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.13  PAYMENTS BY CHECK.
   When a secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker makes payment for an item
pledged or received at the licensed place of business, payment must be made by
check, made payable to the named payee, who is actually the intended seller.
(1978 Code, § 511.29)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.14  INSPECTIONS.
   Any peace officer or a properly designated employee of the city of the state
may enter, inspect and search business premises licensed under this section,
during normal business hours, without a warrant.
(1978 Code, § 511.30)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
LICENSING PROCEDURES AND CONDITIONS
§ 115.25  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person may engage in the business of a secondhand goods dealer or
pawnbroker without first having obtained a license.
   (B)   A pawnbroker may not conduct, operate or engage in the business of
secondhand goods dealer without having obtained a secondhand goods dealer
license in addition to a pawnbroker license. A secondhand goods dealer may not
conduct, operate or engage in the business of a pawnbroker without having
obtained a pawnbroker license in addition to a secondhand goods dealer license.
(1978 Code, § 511.03)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)  Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.26  MULTIPLE DEALERS.
   (A)   Multiple dealer’s license. The owners of a business, at which two or
more secondhand goods dealers are engaged in business by maintaining separate
sales and identifying themselves to the public as individual dealers, may
obtain a multiple secondhand goods dealer license for that location. A multiple
license may not be issued unless the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The business must have a single name and address;
      (2)   The business must operate in a compact and continuous space as
specified in the license;
      (3)   The business must be under the unified control and supervision of
the one person who holds the license; and
      (4)   Sales must be consummated at a central point of register operated
by the owner of the business, and the owner must maintain a comprehensive
account of all sales.
   (B)   Compliance.
      (1)   The holder of a secondhand goods dealer license under this section
for a business with more than one dealer at the same location must comply with
all of the requirements of this section, including the responsibility for
police reporting and record keeping in the same manner as any other dealer
licensed under this section.
      (2)   A dealer licensed under this section is responsible to its
customers for stolen or misrepresented goods sold at its place of business in
the same manner as any other dealer licensed under this section.
(1978 Code, § 511.04)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.27  LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   Pawnbroker. The annual fee for a pawnbroker shall be set by the City
Council by resolution.
   (B)   Secondhand goods dealer. The annual license fee for a secondhand goods
dealer, not a pawnbroker, shall be set by the Council by resolution.
   (C)   Multiple sales. The annual license fee for a secondhand goods dealer
for a location where more than one secondhand goods dealer is engaged in
business shall be set by the Council by resolution.
   (D)   Investigation fee. In addition to the annual fee, the City Council may
establish, by resolution, an investigation fee to be paid upon initial
application and upon any change in ownership. Change in ownership shall
include, in the case of a partnership, a change in identity of any partner and
in the case of a corporation, a change in ownership of more than 5% of shares.
(1978 Code, § 511.05)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.28  APPLICATION.
   (A)   Contents. A license applicant must complete an application, in a form,
and requesting information of the applicant, as provided and determined by the
Chief of Police.
   (B)   Execution. If the applicant is a natural person, the application must
be signed and sworn by the person; if a corporation, by an agent authorized to
sign; if a partnership, by a partner.
   (C)   Fees. The application must be accompanied by the required license fee
and the established fee for investigation. The annual license fee, but not the
investigation fee, will be returned to the applicant if the application is
rejected or denied.
   (D)   False statements. It is unlawful to knowingly make a false statement
in the license application. In addition to all other penalties, the license may
be subsequently revoked by the City Council for violation of this section.
(1978 Code, § 511.06)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)  Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.29  BOND.
   (A)   Bond required.
      (1)   A pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license will not be issued
unless the applicant files with the City Clerk a bond with corporate surety,
cash or a United States government bond in the amount of:
         (a)   Five thousand dollars for a pawnbroker or secondhand goods
dealer not a licensed firearms dealer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §§ 921 et seq.; or
         (b)   Twenty thousand dollars for a pawnbroker or secondhand goods
dealer who is a licensed firearms dealer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §§ 921 et seq.
      (2)   The bond shall be for the purpose of indemnifying the city for all
costs incurred in enforcing this chapter.
   (B)   Forfeiture. The bond shall be conditioned on the licensee obeying the
laws and ordinances governing the licensed business and paying all fees, taxes,
penalties and other charges associated with the business. The bond shall be
forfeited to the city upon violation of law or ordinance, or to indemnify the
city in the event that license suspension or revocation proceedings are
initiated by the city. The balance of the bond remaining after indemnification
of the city, if any, shall be returned to the licensee.
(1978 Code, § 511.07)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.30  SITE PLAN.
   (A)   The application for a pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license
must be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale.
   (B)   The site plan must contain:
      (1)   A legal description of the property upon which the proposed
licensed premises is situated;
      (2)   A survey;
      (3)   The exact location of the licensed premises on the property,
customer and employee parking areas, access onto the property and entrances
into the premises;
      (4)   The location of and distance from the nearest church, school,
hospital and residence; and
      (5)   A floor plan of the license premises.
(1978 Code, § 511.08)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.31  INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   The city, prior to granting an initial or renewed pawnbroker or
secondhand goods dealer license, shall conduct a background and financial
investigation of the applicant. Any person having a beneficial interest in the
license shall be investigated. The Chief of Police shall cause to be made such
investigation of the information requested in this chapter and shall make a
written recommendation and report to the City Council. The Chief of Police
shall verify the facts stated in the application and shall  report all
convicted violations of state, federal or municipal law involving the
applicant, interested persons or the unlicensed premises while under the
applicant’s proprietorship.
   (B)   At the time of each original application for a license, the applicant
shall pay in full an investigation fee in an amount set by City Council
resolution. All investigation fees are non-refundable.
   (C)   At any time that an additional investigation is required because of a
license renewal, a change in ownership or control of the license or because of
an enlargement, alteration or extension of premises previously licensed, the
licensee shall pay an investigation fee in an amount set by City Council
resolution. All investigation fees are non-refundable. The investigation fee
shall accompany the application.
(1978 Code, § 511.09)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.32  PUBLIC HEARING.
   A pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license will not be issued without a
public hearing. Any person having an interest in or who will be affected by the
proposed license will be permitted to testify at the hearing. The public
hearing must be preceded by a ten-day published notice specifying the location
of the proposed licensed business premises.
(1978 Code, § 511.10)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.33  GRANTING LICENSE.
   After review of the license application, investigation report and public
hearing, the City Council may grant or refuse, for one or more of the reasons
set forth in §
115.40 of this chapter, the application for a new or renewed pawnbroker or
secondhand goods dealer license. A license will not be effective unless the
application fee and bond have been filed with the Chief of Police.
(1978 Code, § 511.11)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.34  PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   A pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license will not be issued to:
   (A)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States or a resident
alien, or upon whom it is impractical to conduct a background and financial
investigation due to the unavailability of information;
   (B)   A person under 18 years of age;
   (C)   Subject to the provision of law, a person has been convicted of any
state or federal law relating to receiving stolen property, sale of stolen
property or controlled substance, burglary, robbery, theft, damage or trespass
to property, operation of a business or any law or ordinance regulating the
business of pawnbrokers or secondhand goods dealers;
   (D)   A person who, within five years of the license application date, had a
pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license revoked;
   (E)   A person who the City Council determines not to be of sufficient good
moral character or repute; and/or
   (F)   If the City Council determines, after investigation and public
hearing, that the issuance of or the renewal of the license would adversely
affect public health, safety or welfare.
(1978 Code, § 511.12)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.35  PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSES.
   A license will not be issued or renewed under this section for any place or
for any business:
   (A)   If taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city or the
state on the licensee’s business premises are delinquent and unpaid;
   (B)   If the premises is located within 1,000 feet of a school, church or
residence;
   (C)   Where operation of a licensed premises would violate zoning
ordinances; and/or
   (D)   Where the applicant’s present license was issued conditioned upon the
applicant making specified improvements to the licensed premises or the
property of the licensed premises which improvements have not been completed.
(1978 Code, § 511.13)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.36  LICENSE LIMITATIONS.
   A license will be issued to the applicant only and only for the business
premises as described in the application. The license is effective only for the
premises specified in the approved license application.
(1978 Code, § 511.14)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.37  TERMS; EXPIRATION; PRO RATA FEE.
   The license is issued for a period of one year beginning on January 1;
except that, if the application is made during the license year, a license may
be issued for the remainder of the license year for a monthly pro rata fee. The
unexpired fraction of a month will be counted as a complete month. The license
expires on December 31.
(1978 Code, § 511.15)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.38  LICENSE REFUND.
   The City Council may, in its judgment, refund a pro rata share of the
license to the licensee or the licensee’s estate if:
   (A)   The business ceases to operate because of destruction or damage;
   (B)   The licensee dies;
   (C)   The business ceases to be lawful for a reason other than license
revocation; and
   (D)   The licensee ceases to carry the licensed business under the license.
(1978 Code, § 511.16)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.39  DEATH OF LICENSEE.
   In the case of the death of a licensee, the personal representative of the
licensee may continue operation of the business for not more than 90 days after
the licensee’s death.
(1978 Code, § 511.17)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.40  LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   A license under this section may be denied, suspended or revoked by the City
Council after a public hearing where the licensee is granted the opportunity to
be heard, for one or more of the following reasons:
   (A)   The operation of the business is in conflict with any provision of
this chapter;
   (B)   The operation of the business is in conflict with any health,
building, maintenance, zoning or other provision of this chapter or law;
   (C)   The licensee or the business premises fails to conform with the
standards for license application contained in this section;
   (D)   The licensee has failed to comply with one or more provisions of this
section or any statute, rule or ordinance pertaining to the business of
pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer;
   (E)   Fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in securing a license;
   (F)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the course of the
applicant’s business; or
   (G)   Subject to the provisions of law, the licensee has been convicted of
any state or federal law relating to receiving stolen property, sale of stolen
property or controlled substances, burglary, robbery, theft, damage or trespass
to property, operation of a business or any law or ordinance regulating the
business of pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer.
(1978 Code, § 511.27)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
§ 115.41  COUNTY LICENSE.
   Secondhand goods dealers and pawnbrokers dealing in precious metals and gems
must be licensed by Hennepin County, in addition to the city license.
(1978 Code, § 511.31)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)  Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.99  PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(M.S. § 325J.11)  (1978 Code, § 511.33)  (Ord. 92-4, passed 2-18-1992)
CHAPTER 116:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
116.01   Purpose
   
116.02   Findings
   
116.03   Definitions
   
116.04   Exceptions
   
116.05   License required
   
116.06   Person ineligible
   
116.07   Places ineligible
   
116.08   License application
   
116.09   Fees
   
116.10   Granting of licenses
   
116.11   Conditions of license
   
116.12   Restrictions and regulations
   
116.13   Suspensions and revocation of license
 
   
116.99   Penalty
   
Appendix I:   Resolution adopting the findings of the Report of the Attorney
General’s Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses
§ 116.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe licensing requirements for
sexually oriented businesses to protect the public health, safety, and welfare
and to prevent criminal activity and the spread of sexually-transmitted
diseases.  This chapter is intended to supercede the provisions of M.S. §
617.242, as it may be amended from time to time, and render M.S. § 617.242
inapplicable as authorized by the statute.
§ 116.02  FINDINGS.
   The City Council makes the following findings regarding the effect sexually
oriented businesses have on the character of the city’s neighborhoods. In
making these findings, the City Council accepts the recommendations and
conclusions of the Report of the Attorney General’s Working Group on the
Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses dated June 6, 1989, a copy of which
is referenced and included in
Appendix I  of this chapter.  This chapter shall have no force and effect until
the City Council accepts these recommendations by resolution of a majority of
its members, using the model resolution contained in
Appendix I  of this chapter.
   (A)   Sexually oriented businesses can contribute to an increase in criminal
activity in the area in which such businesses are located, increasing the
demands on city crime-prevention programs and law enforcement services.
   (B)   Sexually oriented businesses can be used as fronts for prostitution
and other criminal activity. The experience of other cities indicates that
proper management and operation of such businesses can minimize this risk.
   (C)   Sexually oriented businesses can increase the risk of exposure to
communicable diseases, including Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS),
for which there is currently no cure. Experiences of other cities indicate that
such businesses can facilitate the spread of communicable diseases by virtue of
the design and use of the premises, endangering not only the patrons of such
establishments but also the general public.
   (D)   Sexually oriented businesses can cause or contribute to public health
problems by the presence of live adult entertainment in conjunction with food
and/or drink on the same premises.
   (E)   A licensing and regulatory scheme as prescribed in this chapter can
facilitate the enforcement of the city’s “anti-blight” regulations, and can aid
in monitoring sexually oriented businesses for adverse secondary effects on the
community.
   (F)   The risk of criminal activity and/or public health problems can be
minimized through a licensing and regulatory scheme as prescribed in this
chapter.
§ 116.03  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.  Shall include the following:
      (1)   A business that meets any of the following criteria, measured on a
daily, weekly, monthly or yearly basis:
         (a)   Has more than 25% of its inventory, stock-in-trade, or publicly
displayed merchandise in sexually oriented materials;
         (b)   Devotes more than 25% of its floor area (not including
storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any portion of the business
not open to the public) to sexually oriented materials; or
         (c)   Derives more than 25% of its gross revenues from sexually
oriented materials; or
      (2)   A business that engages for any length of time in a sexually
oriented use as defined in this section or any other use that has an emphasis
on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATERIALS.  Visual, printed, or aural materials, and other
objects or devices, that:
      (1)   Contain, depict, simulate or describe specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas;
      (2)   Are marketed for use in conjunction with, or are primarily used
only with or during specified sexual activities; or
      (3)   Are designed for sexual stimulation.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE.  Any of the following activities and businesses, even
if the activity exists for only a short-time:
      (1)   ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO.  An establishment or business that
provides the service of applying paint, ink, or other substance, whether
transparent or non-transparent, to the body of a patron when the person is
nude.
      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE.  An establishment or business used for the barter,
rental, or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides,
records, audiotape, videotape, movies, or motion picture film if it meets the
criteria established in the definition of “sexually oriented business,” as
defined in this section.
      (3)   ADULT CABARET.  A business or establishment that provides dancing
or other live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on:
         (a)   The depiction of nudity, specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; or
         (b)   The presentation, display, or depiction of matter that seeks to
evoke, arouse, or excite sexual or erotic feelings or desire.
      (4)   ADULT COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT.  A business or establishment
that provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or
discussion distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (5)   ADULT CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR.  A business or establishment that
provides the services of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or
discussion distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (6)   ADULT HEALTH/SPORT CLUB.  A health/sport club that is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (7)   ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL.  A hotel or motel that presents material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (8)   ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR/HEALTH CLUB.  A massage parlor or health club
that provides massage services distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (9)   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A business or establishment
with a capacity of less than 50 persons that, as a prevailing practice,
presents on-premises viewing of movies, motion pictures, or other material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (10)   ADULT MODELING STUDIO.  A business or establishment that provides
live models who, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification, engage in specified sexual activities or display specified
anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn,
sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted.
      (11)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE.  Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited where coin or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture
machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are used to show images
to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (12)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A motion picture theater with a
capacity of 50 or more persons that, as a prevailing practice, presents
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.
      (13)   ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS.  An establishment or business that has a
variety of items for sale if it meets the criteria established in division (1)
of the definition of “sexually oriented business” defined in this section.
      (14)   ADULT SAUNA.  A sauna that excludes minors by reason of age, and
that provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of
bathing, relaxation, or reducing, if the service provided by the sauna is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      (15)   ADULT STEAM ROOM/BATHHOUSE FACILITY.  A building or portion of a
building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the
purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, if the building or
portion of a building restricts minors by reason of age and if the service
provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Shall include the following:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
area, buttocks, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top
of the areola; and
      (2)   Human male genitals in a state of sexual arousal, whether or not
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Shall include the following:
      (1)   Actual or simulated: sexual intercourse; oral copulation; anal
intercourse; oral-anal copulation; bestiality; direct physical stimulation of
unclothed genitals; flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship; the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual
relationship; anilingus; coprophagy; coprophilia; cunnilingus; fellatio;
necrophilia; pedophilia; piquerism or zooerastia;
      (2)   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation,
arousal or tumescence;
      (3)   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus
or masturbation;
      (4)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks, or female breasts;
      (5)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, who
are clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes and engaged in the
flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any
person;
      (6)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented
contact with an animal by a human being; or
      (7)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation or vaginal or anal
irrigation.
§ 116.04  EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter does not regulate the following:
   (A)   Material with significant literary content or social commentary;
   (B)   A business where sexually oriented materials are sold, bartered,
distributed, leased, furnished, or otherwise provided for off-site use or
entertainment, if the sexually oriented material on each item is blocked from
view by an opaque cover as required under M.S. § 617.293, as it may be amended
from time to time, and each item is in an area accessible only by an employee
of the business;
   (C)   A person or organization exempted under M.S. § 617.295, as it may be
amended from time to time;
   (D)   Activity regulated under M.S. § 617.202, as it may be amended from
time to time;
   (E)   Displaying works of art showing specified anatomical areas, so long as
no sexually oriented materials are for sale, and the business does not have a
liquor license; and
   (F)   Movies rated G, PG, PG-13, NC-17 or R.
§ 116.05  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person may own or operate a sexually oriented business within the city
unless the person is currently licensed under this chapter.
Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.06  PERSONS INELIGIBLE.
   No license may be issued to a person who:
   (A)   Is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien;
   (B)   Is a minor at the time the application is filed;
   (C)   Has been convicted of a crime directly related to the licensed
occupation and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation
and present fitness to perform the duties of the owner, operator or manager of
a sexually oriented business under M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 3, as it may be amended
from time to time, or a person not of good moral character and repute;
   (D)   Holds a liquor license;
   (E)   In the judgment of the licensing authority, is not the real party in
interest or beneficial owner of the business operated under the license; or
   (F)   Has had a license for a sexually oriented business or similar business
revoked anywhere within five years of the license application.
Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.07  PLACES INELIGIBLE.
   No license may be issued for:
   (A)   A place or a business ineligible for a license under city ordinance or
state law;
   (B)   Operation in a zoning district where the business is not allowed;
   (C)   A place or business that is currently licensed as a tattoo
establishment, pawnshop, massage business or establishment that sells alcoholic
beverages; or
   (D)   Operation on a premises on which taxes, assessments or other financial
claims of the city or other government agency are delinquent and unpaid, unless
the non-payment is not under the control of the applicant.
Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.08  LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   The application for a sexually oriented business license under this
chapter must be made on a form supplied by the city and must provide the
following information:
      (1)   The business in connection with which the proposed license will
operate;
      (2)   The location of the business premises;
      (3)   The legal description of the premises to be licensed, including a
map of the area for which the license is sought, showing dimensions, locations
of buildings, street access and parking facilities;
      (4)   Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due
and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid,
the years and amounts that are unpaid;
      (5)   Whether the applicant is the owner and operator of the business and
if not, who is;
      (6)   Whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a name other
than his or her true name, and if so, what was the name or names, and
information concerning dates and places where used;
      (7)   Whether the applicant is married or single. If married, the true
name, place and date of birth and street address of applicant’s spouse;
      (8)   Street address at which the applicant and spouse have lived during
the preceding ten years;
      (9)   Kind, name and location of every business or occupation the
applicant and spouse have been engaged in during the preceding ten years;
      (10)   Names and addresses of the applicant’s and spouse’s employers and
partners, if any, for the preceding ten years;
      (11)   Whether the applicant or spouse has ever been convicted of a
violation of a state law or local ordinance, other than a non-alcohol related
traffic offense. If so, the applicant must furnish information as to the time,
place and offense for which convictions were had;
      (12)   Whether the applicant or spouse has ever been engaged as an
employee or in operating a sexually oriented business, massage business, or
other business of a similar nature.  If so, the applicant must furnish
information as to the time, place and length of time;
      (13)   Whether the applicant has ever been in military service. If so,
the applicant must, upon request, exhibit all discharges;
      (14)   If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of all
partners and all information concerning each partner as is required of a single
applicant as above. A managing partner or partners must be designated.  The
interest of each partner or partners in the business must be submitted with the
application and, if the partnership is required to file a certificate as to
trade name under the provisions of M.S. Ch. 333, as it may be amended from time
to time, a copy of the certificate must be attached to the application;
      (15)   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization, the
applicant must submit the following:
         (a)   Name, and if incorporated, the state of incorporation;
         (b)   Names and addresses of all officers;
         (c)   The name of the manager or proprietor or other agent in charge
of, or to be in charge of the premises to be licensed, giving all information
about said person as is required in the case of a single applicant; and
         (d)   A list of all persons who, single or together with their spouse,
own or control an interest in said corporation or association in excess of 5%
or who are officers of said corporation or association, together with their
addresses and all information as is required for a single applicant.
      (16)   The amount of the investment that the applicant has in the
business, land, building, premises, fixtures, furniture or stock-in-trade, and
proof of the source of the money;
      (17)   A list of responsible persons, including the names of owners,
managers and assistant managers, who may be notified or contacted by state or
city employees in case of emergency. These persons must be residents of the
state;
      (18)   Whether the applicant holds a current license for a sexually
oriented business or similar business from another governmental unit;
      (19)   Whether the applicant has ever been denied a license for a
sexually oriented business or similar business from another governmental unit;
and
      (20)   Other information that the city deems appropriate.
   (B)   No person may make a false statement or material omission in a license
application or investigation. A false statement or material omission is grounds
for denial, suspension or revocation of a license.
   (C)   Each licensee has the continuing duty to properly notify the Director
of Community Development of a change in the information or facts required to be
furnished on the application for a license. This duty continues throughout the
period of the license.  Failure to comply with this section will constitute
cause for revocation or suspension of the license.
   (D)   The application for the renewal of an existing license must be made at
least 90 days prior to the date of the expiration of the license and must be
made on the form which the city provides.
Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.09  FEES.
   (A)   An applicant for a license must pay to the city the investigation
fee.  This fee will be for the purpose of conducting a preliminary background
and financial investigation of the applicant.  If the city believes that the
public interest so warrants, it may require a similar investigation at the time
of renewal of a license.  If an investigation is ordered at the time of license
renewal, the applicant must pay the fee specified above, except that the fee
will be the smaller of the stated dollar amount or the actual cost of the
investigation.  There will be no refund of the investigation fee after the
investigation has begun.
   (B)   Each license expires on December 31 of the year in which it is
issued.  Fees for licenses issued during the license year will be prorated
according to the number of months remaining in the year.  For this purpose an
unexpired fraction of a month will be counted as a whole month having elapsed.
   (C)   No refund of a fee will be made except as authorized by ordinance.
§ 116.10  GRANTING OF LICENSES.
   (A)   No license may be issued until the Police Department, or the county
Sheriff, if the city has no Police Department, has conducted an investigation
of the representations set forth in the application, the applicant’s moral
character, and the applicant's financial status. All applicants must cooperate
this investigation.
   (B)   No license, except for a renewed license, may be issued for a sexually
oriented business until the Council has held a public hearing.  Notice of the
hearing must be made in the same manner for a zoning ordinance amendment
affecting district boundaries. The Council must grant the license unless the
applicant or the location does not meet the requirements of the city code, the
application was incomplete, or the application contained false information or a
material omission. If the application is denied, the city must notify the
applicant with the reason(s) stated for denial.  Notification must be sent
certified, United States mail, return receipt requested, to the address
provided on the license application. If the Council fails to act on the
application within 45 days after receipt of a complete application, the
application will be deemed approved. An applicant wishing to appeal the action
of the City Council may seek a writ of certiorari before the Minnesota Court of
Appeals.
   (C)   (1)   The City Council may issue a license before an investigation,
notice and public hearing for an applicant who:
         (a)   Had a license within the previous five years for the
establishment that is specified in the application and that is continuing to
operate under a license;
         (b)   Wishes to resume operation of the business without sufficient
time, through no fault of his or her own, to meet the normal procedural
requirements;
         (c)   Had no criminal license convictions, or license suspensions or
revocations during the prior licensed period; and
         (d)   Otherwise qualifies and meets the requirements for a license.
      (2)   In this situation, the City Council may immediately issue an
interim license to the applicant for a period of no longer than 90 days. The
applicant must then proceed through the specified requirements for an
investigation, notice, and public hearing.  At the public hearing the Council
will decide whether the license should continue in effect or be revoked. The
applicant has no greater right to continuation of the license than he or she
would have had to issuance of a new license following the normal procedure
without the interim license.
   (D)   A license will be issued only to the applicant and for the premises
described in the application. No license may be transferred to another person
or place without application in the same manner as an application for a new
license. Transfer of 25% or more of the stock of a corporation or of a
controlling interest of it, whichever is less, will be deemed a transfer of the
license. If the licensee is a corporation that is wholly owned by another
corporation, the same provisions about the transfer of a stock or a controlling
interest will apply to that parent corporation, any second parent corporation
that wholly owns the parent corporation, and all other similarly situated
parent corporations up through the chain of ownership. Transfer of this amount
of stock without prior Council approval is a ground for revocation or
suspension of the license.  In addition, each day the licensee operates under
the license after a transfer has taken place without obtaining Council approval
will be a separate violation of this chapter.
   (E)   In the case of the death of a licensee, the personal representative of
a licensee may continue operation of the business for not more than 90 days
after the licensee’s death.
§ 116.11  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A license is subject to the conditions in this section, all other
provisions of this chapter, and of other applicable regulations, ordinances or
state laws.
   (B)   A licensee is responsible for the conduct of his or her place of
business and the conditions of order in it. The act of an employee of the
licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee
is liable for all penalties provided by this chapter equally with the employee,
except criminal penalties.
   (C)   The license must be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises for
which it is used.
Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.12  RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.
   A sexually oriented business is subject to the following restrictions and
regulations:
   (A)   No owner, manager or employee may allow sexually oriented materials or
entertainment to be visible or perceivable in any manner, including aurally, at
any time from outside of the business.
   (B)   No owner, manager or employee may allow a person under the age of 18
to enter the business.
   (C)   No owner, manager or employee may allow a person under the age of 18
to have access to sexually oriented materials, whether by sight, purchase,
touch or other means.
   (D)   No owner or manager may employ a person under the age of 18 on the
licensed premises.
   (E)   No owner, manager, or employee may have been convicted of a sex crime,
as identified in M.S. §§ 609.293 to 609.352, 609.746 to 609.749, 609.79 or
518B.01, as they may be amended from time to time, or related statute dealing
with sexual assault, sexual conduct, harassment, obscenity, or domestic abuse
within the past five years.
   (F)   No business may exceed 10,000 square feet in gross floor area.
   (G)   No owner, manager or employee may allow a patron, employee, or other
person on the premises to physically contact, in public view, a specified
anatomical area of himself or herself or of another person, except that a live
performer may touch himself or herself.
   (H)   A live performer must remain at all times a minimum distance of ten
feet from members of the audience, and must perform on a platform intended for
that purpose, that must be raised at least two feet from the level of the floor
on which the audience is located.  No performer may solicit or accept money, a
tip or other item from a member of the audience.
   (I)   No business may have booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room,
or individual rooms, except as follows:
      (1)   Restrooms are allowed as long as they are no larger than reasonably
necessary to serve the purposes of a restroom, no other activities are provided
or allowed in the rooms, and there are no chairs, benches, or reclining
surfaces in the rooms; and
      (2)   Storage rooms and private offices are allowed, if the storage rooms
and offices are used solely for running the business and no person other than
the owner, manager and employees is allowed in them.
   (J)   A licensee must not be open for business to the public:
      (1)   Between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through
Saturday; and
      (2)   Between 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays.
Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.13  SUSPENSIONS AND REVOCATIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Delinquent taxes.  The City Council may suspend or revoke a license
issued under this chapter for operation on a premises on which real estate
taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city or of the state are
due, delinquent, or unpaid, unless the non-payment is not under the control of
the licensee.  If an action has been commenced under M.S. Ch. 278, as it may be
amended from time to time, questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the
Council may on application by the licensee waive strict compliance with this
provision; no waiver may be granted, however, for taxes, or a portion of them,
that remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming due, unless
the one-year period is extended through no fault of the licensee.
   (B)   Violations.
      (1)   The Council may either suspend for up to 60 days or revoke a
license for a violation upon a finding that the licensee or an agent or
employee of the licensee has failed to comply with an applicable statute,
regulation or ordinance relating to the subject matter of this chapter or
violated the statutes in division (B)(2) of this section.  No suspension or
revocation will take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity
for a hearing pursuant to M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.69, as they may be amended from
time to time, with the exception of the suspension provided for in division (B)
(2) of this section.
      (2)   Conviction of a sex crime, as identified in M.S. §§ 609.293 to
609.352, 609.746 to 609.749, 609.79 or 518B.01, as they may be amended from
time to time, or related statute dealing with sexual assault, sexual conduct,
harassment, obscenity or domestic abuse by the licensee will result in the
immediate suspension pending a hearing on revocation of a license issued under
this chapter.
   (C)   Prompt judicial review.  Prompt and final judicial review shall be
provided to any applicant or licensee when a license is denied, suspended or
revoked.
§ 116.99  PENALTY.
   Except as otherwise provided by state law, a person violating a provision of
this chapter is subject to the penalties established in §
10.99.  A fine or sentence imposed does not affect the right of the city to
suspend or revoke the license of the licensee as the Council deems appropriate.
APPENDIX I
RESOLUTION ADOPTING THE FINDINGS OF THE REPORT OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL’S
WORKING GROUP ON THE REGULATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
   WHEREAS because of its small size, the city lacks the resources to
investigate and research the impact sexually oriented businesses would have on
the character of the city’s neighborhoods; and
   WHEREAS the city intends to rely on the Report of the Attorney General’s
Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, dated June 6,
1989, as a basis for regulating sexually oriented businesses in this city; and
   WHEREAS the members of the City Council have reviewed this Report;
   NOW THEREFORE, the City Council of this City hereby accepts the
recommendations and conclusions of this Report and adopts the recommendations
and conclusions by reference of the Report of the Attorney General's Working
Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, dated June 6, 1989;
and by passage of this resolution implements this chapter.
Signed:                                                
      Mayor
Attest:                                                
      City Clerk
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY CODE
      
131.   WEAPONS
CHAPTER 130:  PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY CODE
Section
   
130.01   Findings and purpose
   
130.02   Definitions
   
130.03   Declaration and notice of public nuisance
   
130.04   Enforcement
   
130.05   Public nuisances
   
130.06   Abandoned junk property
   
130.07   Garbage and refuse
   
130.08   Noise control
   
130.09   Recycling
   
130.10   Fireworks
   
130.11   Trespassing
   
130.12   Conduct or events constituting a public nuisance
   
130.13   Public indecency
   
130.14   Improper display of sexually-oriented material
   
130.15   Juvenile curfew
   
130.16   Vandalism of public property
   
130.17   Drug paraphernalia
   
130.18   Controlled substances
   
130.19   Public consumption of alcoholic beverages
   
130.20   Graffiti
   
130.21   Sexual offenders and sexual predators
 
   
130.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic Beverages, see
Ch. 114
   Fire Prevention and Protection, see
Ch. 92
   Health and Sanitation; Nuisances, see
Ch. 90
   Public Works, see Title V
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter of the city code is to prohibit certain conduct
that is harmful to the health, safety and welfare of the community and to
prevent and abate nuisance conduct, events, characteristics or conditions and
their deleterious effects on city neighborhoods by maximizing the means and
methods by which public officers can efficiently and effectively enforce the
law and by imposing and collecting service call fees from the owner or
occupant, or both, of real property to which public officers are repeatedly
called to respond to nuisance violations as set forth in this chapter of the
city code. The City Council finds that excessive noise, disruption and other
public nuisance activities are injurious to the public health, safety and
welfare and interfere with the quiet enjoyment of life and property and that
excessive nuisance service calls unduly divert law enforcement resources from
general crime prevention and law enforcement. The excessive nuisance service
call fee is intended as a cost recovery mechanism for excessive law enforcement
services, over and above the cost of normal law enforcement services to the
public, attributable to unabated nuisance conduct, conditions or
characteristics occurring, maintained or permitted to exist on the private
property. It is not intended to constitute punishment separate from or in
addition to any criminal prosecution for the conduct underlying the nuisance or
excessive nuisance service calls. Nothing herein is meant to limit
constitutional rights under the federal or state constitution.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015)
§ 130.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED PROPERTY.  Deteriorated, wrecked or derelict property in unusable
condition, which has no apparent value other that nominal scrap or junk value,
if any, and which has been left unprotected from the elements, and shall
include, without being so restricted, deteriorated, wrecked, inoperative or
partially dismantled motor vehicles, trailers, boats, machinery, household
appliances, furniture, cut trees, branches, building materials, general
rubbish, tools, benches or any other similar articles in such condition.
   ABATEMENT NOTICE. Notice served upon property owner and/or interested party
by the City Administrator or designee of law enforcement responses to two or
more nuisance service calls within a 365-day period on property in which they
have an interest pursuant to §
130.13 of this chapter.
   ADMINISTRATOR.  The City Administrator.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any beverage containing more than 0.5% alcohol by
volume.
   APPROVED.  Acceptable to the health authority following the determination as
to compliance with established public health practices and standards.
   CLANDESTINE LAB SITE. Any structure of conveyance or outdoor location
occupied or affected by conditions or chemicals typically associated with the
manufacture of methamphetamine or any other unlawful manufacture of a
controlled substance.
   COMPOST.  Product of biological decomposition of organic matter accomplished
by mixing and piling. COMPOST also means physical structure in which the
composting process takes place. Plant material outside of such structure and
unmaintained is not compost.
   DISORDERLY HOUSE. Any residential property which due to the following
nuisance conduct, events, characteristics or conditions is likely to disturb,
injure or endanger the peace, comforts, health, welfare, safety or character of
the neighborhood or community:
      (1)   The unlawful sale, furnishing, use or possession of intoxicating
liquor or non-intoxicating malt liquor in violation of state law;
      (2)   The possession or use of gambling devices or the conduct of any
gambling in violation of state law;
      (3)   Prostitution in violation of state law or acts relating to
prostitution, or the conduct of unlicensed escort services, sexually-oriented
business or massage or massage services, in violation of state law;
      (4)   The unlawful sale, use or possession of controlled substances as
defined in M.S. § 152.02, as it may be amended from time to time; or
      (5)   Three or more verified incidents or unlawful gatherings, as set
forth herein within a 365-day period.
   DUMPSTER.  Four-sided steel container designated for temporary storage of
refuse.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  Police officer, Building Inspector or member of city
staff authorized by the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   FALSE REPORT TO PUBLIC OFFICER. A report to any public officer that a
violation of the city code or state law has been committed, knowing that the
conduct or conditions reported do not constitute a crime or that the report is
false and intending that the public officer act in reliance upon the report.
   GARBAGE.  All putrescible animal, vegetable or other matter that attends the
preparation, consumption, display, dealing in or storage of meat, fish, fowl,
birds, fruit or vegetables, including the cans, containers or wrappers wasted
along with such materials.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY.  The environmental health specialist or designated
official public health sanitarian.
   INCIDENT. Single behavioral incident as defined by M.S. § 609.035, as it may
be amended from time to time. In the case of property conditions or
characteristics constituting a nuisance, a single behavioral INCIDENT
constitutes those violations, the existence of which is the result of a single
illegal objective or coincident errors of judgment.
   INTERESTED PARTY. Any known lessee or tenant of the residential property or
affected portion of the residential property; any known agent of an owner,
lessee or tenant; any known mortgage holder or holder of any secured interest
in the residential property; any known person holding an unrecorded contract
for deed; being a mortgagee or vendee in physical possession of the residential
property; insurer of the property; or any other person who maintains or permits
a nuisance on the residential property and is known to the city.
   NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks, anuses or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
   NUISANCE INCIDENT NOTICE. Notice served upon property owner and/or
interested party by the City Administrator or designee of a law enforcement
response to a nuisance service call to property in which they have an interest
pursuant to §
130.13 of this chapter.
   NUISANCE SERVICE CALL. Public officer response to a verified incident of any
activity, conduct or condition occurring on private property that is likely to
unreasonably interfere with the quiet enjoyment of neighboring properties or
the safety, health, morals, welfare, comfort or repose of the residents
therein, including without limitation:
      (1)   Disorderly conduct, as defined by M.S. § 609.72, as it may be
amended from time to time;
      (2)   Assault, as defined by M.S. §§ 609.221, 609.222, 609.223, 609.2231
and 609.224, as they may be amended from time to time, excluding domestic
assaults;
      (3)   Public nuisance, as defined by M.S. §§ 609.74 through 609.745, as
they may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   Noise;
      (5)   Unlawful consumption of alcoholic beverages;
      (6)   The unlawful furnishing, sale, use or possession of intoxicating
liquor or non-intoxicating malt liquor in violation of state law;
      (7)   The possession or use of gambling devices or the conduct of any
gambling in violation of state law;
      (8)   Prostitution in violation of state law or acts relating to
prostitution, or the conduct of unlicensed escort services, sexually-oriented
business or massage or massage services, in violation of state law;
      (9)   The unlawful sale, use or possession of controlled substances as
defined in M.S. § 152.02, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (10)   Indecent exposure in violation of M.S. § 617.23, as it may be
amended from time to time;
      (11)   Unlawful use or possession of a firearm in violation of state law;
      (12)   Failure to comply with dangerous dog requirements in violation of
M.S. Ch. 347, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (13)   Failure to comply with animal noise regulations;
      (14)   Failure to restrain a domestic animal;
      (15)   Cruelty to animals;
      (16)   Excess number of domestic animals;
      (17)   Illegal possession of a wild animal;
      (18)   Unlicensed dog;
      (19)   Illegal open burning;
      (20)   Illegal refuse;
      (21)   Illegal litter;
      (22)   Abandoned or junk vehicles, as defined by statute;
      (23)   Illegal exterior storage;
      (24)   Illegal parking or storage of recreational vehicles;
      (25)   Illegal parking or storage of vehicles;
      (26)   False report to public officer; and
      (27)   Illegal home occupation.
   OWNER.  Any person, firm, corporation, or other partnership or organization
who alone, jointly, or severally with others may be in ownership of, or have
charge, care, or control of, any premises or business within the city as owner,
employee or agent of the owner, or as trustee or guardian of the estate or
person of the title holder.
   PESTS.  Any insects, vermin, rodents, birds or any other living agent
capable of reproducing itself that causes or may potentially cause harm to the
public health or significant economic damage.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any real property, the legal ownership of which, as
officially recorded by Hennepin or Wright Counties, is held by one or more
natural persons, a partnership, including a limited partnership, a corporation,
including a foreign, domestic or non-profit corporation, a trust or any other
organization, but not including the state or any of its political subdivisions,
the federal government or any other governmental agency or entity. The
existence of any public easement, right-of-way or other limited right of access
on the property not, for the purpose of this chapter, shall be deemed to
transform private property to public property.
   PROPERTY. A parcel or contiguous parcels of real property, including
buildings and other structures thereon owned by the same legal entity and under
common management. In the case of multi-unit residential or commercial
property, the term shall apply to the entire complex.
   PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE.  Any activity or failure to act that adversely
affects the public health.
   PUBLIC OFFICER. A police officer, fire marshal or inspector, animal control
officer, building inspector or environmental health inspector, each of whom,
for the purposes of this chapter, shall be considered law enforcement officers.
   PUBLIC PLACE. An area generally visible to public view, including streets,
sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles
(whether moving or not) and buildings open to the general public, including
those buildings in which food or drink is served or entertainment or lodging is
provided.
   RECYCLING.  The process of collecting and preparing recyclable materials and
reusing the materials in their original form or using them in manufacturing
processes that do not cause the destruction of recyclable materials in a manner
that precludes further use.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.  Materials that are separated from mixed municipal
solid waste for the purpose of recycling, including paper, glass, plastics,
metals, automobile oil and batteries.  Refuse-derived fuel or other material
that is destroyed by incineration is not a recyclable material.
   REFUSE.  All putrescible and non-putrescible solid waste (except body waste)
including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings,
abandoned automobiles, automobile parts, tires, demolition and construction
debris, and market and industrial solid waste.
   REFUSE ENCLOSURE.  An enclosure capable of containing all refuse and garbage
stored by an establishment between pickups. All refuse enclosure construction
plans shall be approved by the Building Official.
   REFUSE ENCLOSURE: FOOD SERVICE.  An enclosure constructed for sanitary
temporary storage of refuse generated by food establishments. Food service
refuse enclosure construction plans shall be approved by the health authority.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any real property containing a structure suitable for
affording shelter for human beings, including any appurtenant or connected
structure, including trailers, mobile homes, multiple-family dwellings,
buildings containing multiple dwelling units and any property situated within a
residential zoning district, as defined by this city code.
   RUBBISH.  Non-putrescible solid wastes such as wood, leaves, trimmings from
shrubs, dead trees or branches thereof, shavings, sawdust, excelsior, wooden
waste, printed matter, paper, paper board, paste board, grass, rags, straw,
boots, shoes, hats and all other combustibles not included under the term
garbage.
   SWILL.  Garbage which is wholly or nearly edible and usable as a food and
has food value for animals or fowl, accumulating from animal, vegetable, or
other matter wasted from clubs, hotels, hospitals, restaurants, and public
eating places.
   UNLAWFUL GATHERING. Any party or gathering where there is any of the
following conduct or behavior:
      (1)   The unlawful sale, furnishing, use or possession of intoxicating
liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in violation of state law and this code;
      (2)   The unlawful sale, use or possession of controlled substances, as
defined in M.S. § 152.02, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (3)   The unlawful sale, use or possession of tobacco-related products in
violation of state law or this city code;
      (4)   Any conduct, activity or condition constituting a violation of
state laws or this city code prohibiting or regulating prostitution, gambling,
firearms, disorderly conduct, public nuisance or permitting a public nuisance;
and/or
      (5)   Any conduct or activities likely to disturb non-participating
persons by:
         (a)   Noise of sufficient volume, or of such nature by virtue of its
type, persistence, time of day or location, to disturb the peace, quiet or
repose of non-participating persons nearby in the manner and according to the
standards set forth in §
130.08 of this chapter;
         (b)   Assaultive behavior;
         (c)   Unlawful consumption of alcoholic beverages in violation of this
code;
         (d)   Urinating in public;
         (e)   Public indecency, as defined in §
130.13 of this chapter, or indecent exposure in violation of M.S. § 617.23, as
it may be amended from time to time; and/or
         (f)   Excessive pedestrian or vehicular traffic and parking problems
or congestion.
   VEHICLE.  Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a thoroughfare including devices used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
   VERIFIED INCIDENT. An incident where there is a law enforcement response and
a public officer, having completed a timely investigation, is able to find
evidence of nuisance conduct, conditions or characteristics as set forth in
this city code. It shall not be necessary that criminal charges be brought or
convictions obtained relative to the incident. Multiple offenses verified
during a single response shall count as one response for the purpose of
imposing an excessive nuisance call service fee. VERIFIED INCIDENTS shall be
attributable separately to the source of the nuisance conduct, condition or
activity, as follows:
      (1)   The same tenant or lessee or persons acting in conjunction with, or
with the acquiescence of, or under the control of, the same tenant or lessee;
      (2)   The same rental unit while occupied by the same tenant or lessee or
within two or more rental units by the same tenant or lessee; and
      (3)   The property owner or persons acting in conjunction with or under
the control of the property owner who either actively participated in the
creation of the nuisance conduct, condition or characteristic or who knew or
should have known of the on-going nuisance conduct, condition or characteristic
and failed to take reasonable steps to abate it.
   VERIFIED INCIDENT FOLLOW-UP. Where there has been a prior verified incident
of property conditions or characteristics constituting a nuisance, each
subsequent response to those same conditions or characteristics initiated by
the city as follow-up during a course of remediation shall not constitute an
additional verified incident unless additional nuisance conditions or
characteristics constituting additional incidents are found to exist.
   WASTE MATTER.  Non-putrescible solid waste such as soil, earth, sand, clay,
gravel, loam, stone, brick, plaster, crockery, glass, glassware, ashes,
cinders, shells, metal and all other noncombustible material which has been or
is to be discarded.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015)
§ 130.03  DECLARATION AND NOTICE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   City officials may apply and enforce any provision of this chapter relating
to public nuisances within this jurisdiction. The City Administrator or other
designated city official shall have the power to inspect private premises and
take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of
public nuisances. Except in emergency situations of imminent danger to human
life and safety, no peace officer or designated city official will enter
private property for the purpose of inspecting or preventing public nuisances
without the permission of the owner, resident or other person in control of the
property, unless the officer or person designated has obtained a warrant or
order from a court of competent jurisdiction authorizing entry.
(Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015)
§ 130.04  ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Generally. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter
regarding enforcement and in conjunction therewith, any violation of this
chapter may be enforced by the City Administrator or designee sending a notice
of violation in an attempt to have the violation voluntarily abated. If the
violation continues, the matter shall be presented to the City Attorney. The
City Attorney is authorized to seek compliance by injunctive action or other
appropriate civil remedy.
   (B)   Enforcement procedure.
      (1)   Procedure.
         (a)   Whenever the City Administrator or other designated official
determines that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on the premises
in the city, the official shall notify in writing the owner of record or
occupant of the premises of such fact and order that the nuisance be terminated
or abated. If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or
if the owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice, notice of the
violation shall be served by posting it on the premises. The notice shall
state:
            1.   The property location of the public nuisance;
            2.   The nature of the public nuisance, with reference to the
appropriate chapter provision;
            3.   The steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and a reasonable
amount of time within which the nuisance is to be abated;
            4.   If the owner, occupant or other responsible party does not
comply with the notice within the time specified, the city may provide for
abating the nuisance;
            5.   The owner, occupant or other responsible party has the right
to appeal the designation as a public nuisance by submitting a writing to the
City Clerk before the date by which abatement must be completed or within seven
calendar days after service of the notice, whichever comes first; and
            6.   The city may assess its costs against the property in
accordance with this section.
         (b)   Without affecting any other penalty provision in this section,
if the notice of violation is not complied with within the time specified or no
written notice requesting a hearing is timely received, the City Administrator
or other designated official may initiate an immediate abatement of the
violation. If written notice for a hearing is timely received, there shall be a
hearing before the City Council. A notice of the hearing must state the date,
time and location of the City Council hearing, must be served in the same
manner as the abatement notice and must be given at least ten days before the
hearing. After holding the hearing, the City Council may issue an order
requiring abatement of the nuisance.
         (c)   The owner of record or occupant of the property responsible for
the nuisance may request an extension to the abatement deadline by submitting
written explanation of how the nuisance will be abated. Staff may grant an
extension to the abatement deadline if sufficient reasons were submitted.
      (2)   Emergency procedure; summary enforcement. In cases of emergency,
where delay in abatement required to complete the procedure and notice
requirements as set forth in division (B)(1) above will permit a continuing
nuisance to unreasonably endanger public health, safety or welfare, the City
Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance. To proceed with
summary enforcement, the peace officer or other designated official shall
determine that a public nuisance exists or is being maintained on premises in
the city and that delay in abatement will unreasonably endanger public health,
safety or welfare. The officer or designated official shall notify in writing
the occupant or owner of the premises of the nature of the nuisance, whether
public health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by delay in
abatement required to complete the procedure set forth in division (D)(1) above
and may order that the nuisance be immediately terminated or abated. If the
nuisance is not immediately terminated or abated, the City Council may order
summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.
      (3)   Immediate abatement. Nothing in this section shall prevent the
city, without notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition
that poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.
      (4)   Judicial remedy. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city
from seeking a judicial remedy when no other adequate administrative remedy
exists.
   (C)   Recovery of costs.
      (1)   Personal liability. The owner of the premises on which a nuisance
has been abated by the city, or a person who has caused a public nuisance on
property not owned by that person, shall be personally liable for the cost to
the city of the abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work
has been completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk or other city
official shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon,
the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the City
Clerk.
      (2)   Assessment. After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. § 429.061,
as it may be amended from time to time, if the nuisance is a public health or
safety hazard on private property, the accumulation of snow and ice on public
sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside the traveled
portion of streets or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City Clerk shall,
on or before September 1 next following abatement of the nuisance, list the
total unpaid charges along with all other such charges as well as other charges
for current services to be assessed under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended
from time to time, against each separate lot or parcel to which the charges are
attributable. The City Council may then spread the charges against the property
under that statute and any other pertinent statutes for certification to the
County Auditor and collection along with current taxes the following year or in
annual installments, not exceeding ten, as the City Council may determine in
each case.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015)
§ 130.05  PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   (A)   Public nuisance prohibited; violations; penalty. In addition to those
activities or conditions which fall within the definition of a nuisance in M.S.
§ 609.74, as it may be amended from time to time, all acts described, regulated
and prohibited in the provisions of this section are hereby deemed to be, and
are hereby declared to be, nuisances. Any person who shall cause or create any
nuisance or permit a nuisance to be created to or to be placed upon or remain
upon any premises shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor.
It shall be a misdemeanor for anyone to aid, abet, advise, encourage or assist
another to violate any of the provisions of this section. All of such acts
shall constitute misdemeanors. In addition, the city may enforce this section
by injunctive action or other appropriate civil remedy.
   (B)   Property conditions constituting a public nuisance. The following
property conditions are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace,
welfare and safety:
      (1)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks within 24 hours
after the snow and ice has ceased to be deposited thereon;
      (2)   All limbs of trees which are less than eight feet above the surface
of any public sidewalk or nine feet above the surface of any street;
      (3)   All wires that are strung less than 15 feet above the surface of
the ground;
      (4)   All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged
by fire, decay or otherwise to an extent exceeding one-half their original
value, and which are so situated as to endanger the safety of the public;
      (5)   All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances
stored in any manner or in any amount contrary to state law, federal law or
this code;
      (6)   All use or display of fireworks, except as permitted by this
chapter and state law;
      (7)   Noises prohibited under the city code;
      (8)   The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to repeatedly fall from any
building or structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any
sidewalk;
      (9)   All barbed wire fences which are located within three feet of any
public sidewalk;
      (10)   All dangerous unguarded machinery or materials in any public
place, or so situated or operated on private property to attract the public;
      (11)   Any condition that interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous
for passage a public roadway, highway or right-of-way or waters used by the
public;
      (12)   Any abandoned property;
      (13)   Encroachments onto publicly-owned property, including tax-
forfeited property under public control, such as the placement of structures,
materials, recreational equipment, lawn chairs, fire pits, the dumping of
organic materials, the storing of privately-owned items, the undertaking of
activities affecting the physical nature of the property, such as mowing,
vegetation removal or the application of fertilizer, pesticides or herbicides
without the express, written permission of the city;
      (14)   A structure or portion of a structure located in a residential
zoning district, if the exterior is not completed in accordance with city-
approved construction plans within 180 days after the date that the city
building permit was issued;
      (15)   Construction materials, including, but not limited to, piles of
dirt, sand, lumber, bricks, concrete blocks or sod, left in the open on
property more than 60 days after construction has been completed or a
certificate of occupancy has been issued, whichever occurred first or stored
for off-site use and visible from public right-of-way;
      (16)   Discarded construction material or other litter at a construction
site that is not placed in an adequate waste container or that is allowed to
blow around or off the site;
      (17)   Buildings, fences and other structures that have been so poorly
maintained that their physical condition and appearance detract from the
surrounding neighborhood are declared to be public nuisances because they are
unsightly, decrease adjoining landowners’ and occupants’ enjoyment of their
property and neighborhood, and adversely affect property values and
neighborhood patterns. Standards to be considered in this determination shall
include the following.
         (a)   All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks and loose or
rotting materials and maintained weather-proof and properly surface-coated
where required to prevent deterioration.
         (b)   All exterior surfaces, including, but not limited to, doors,
door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences
shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than
decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by
painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and
chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and
masonry joints, as well as those between the building envelope and the
perimeter of windows, doors and skylights, shall be maintained weather-
resistant and water-tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion
shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust
or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and
corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces
designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement.
         (c)   Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound
condition, good repair and weather-tight. All glazing materials shall be
maintained free from cracks and holes.
         (d)   All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be
maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming
units and guestrooms shall tightly secure the door.
         (e)   All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall
facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with
proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
         (f)   The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects
that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or
deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains,
gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from
obstructions. Roof water may not be discharged in a manner that creates a
public nuisance.
         (g)   All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks and similar
appurtenances shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. All
exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and
against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials,
such as paint or similar surface treatment.
         (h)   All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from
open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the
entry of rodents and other pests.
      (18)   A clandestine lab site;
      (19)   Improper sewage disposal to such degree that sewage or effluent is
discharging onto the surface of the ground, backing up into a structure or
discharging into a body of water;
      (20)   An unsecured hole or opening caused by improperly abandoned
cistern, well pit, sewage treatment system, unused or non-maintained swimming
pool, foundation, mine shaft or tunnel, or any other hole or opening in the
ground of sufficient size or depth to pose a danger to the public or an
attractive nuisance;
      (21)   Failure to keep waste, refuse or garbage in an enclosed building
or property contained in a closed, insect- and rodent-proof container designed
or reasonably adapted for such purpose, except for the immediate time preceding
pick-up by a refuse hauler;
      (22)   Accumulation of carcasses of animals, birds or fish by failing to
bury or otherwise dispose of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death.
This provision shall not apply if the animals, birds or fish are intended for
human consumption;
      (23)   Accumulation of decaying animal or vegetable matter, animal or
human feces, trash, rubbish, garbage, rotting lumber, packing material, scrap
metal, tires or any other substances in which flies, mosquitoes, other disease-
carrying insects, rodents or other vermin can harbor; this definition does not
include compost bins or compost sites which are being managed in accordance
with acceptable standards;
      (24)   Accumulations of animal feces, rubbish or junk remaining in any
place as to become dangerous or injurious to the health and safety of any
individual or to the public;
      (25)   Accumulations in permanent dwellings to such an extent preventing
emergency egress;
      (26)   Any structure that has become dangerous for further occupancy
because of structural or sanitary defects or grossly unsanitary conditions;
      (27)   Infestations of flies, fleas, cockroaches, lice, rats, mice, fly
larvae or hookworm larvae;
      (28)   Unnatural breeding grounds which support mosquito larvae and
mosquitoes carrying West Nile Virus, La Crosse Encephalitis Virus or any other
disease causing microorganism;
      (29)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water;
      (30)   All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation which are
in violation of state statutes which regulate and/or control the growth of
weeds and other vegetation and are in violation of this chapter, including, but
not limited to, the separately published § 1001.24, Subd. 9;
      (31)   Accumulations or storage in the open (i.e., not contained within a
building) of any of the following items or any parts or accessories thereto:
         (a)   All dangerous unguarded machinery in any public place or so
situated or operated on private property as to attract the public;
         (b)   Household appliances or furnishings;
         (c)   Any equipment or motor vehicle which is inoperable, not
currently licensed, or generally is not being driven;
         (d)   Items which are not generally or normally used on the particular
premises;
         (e)   Firewood which is not neatly stacked in a compact manner;
         (f)   Any other materials or items of any kind or nature which tend to
harbor rats, mice, snakes or vermin or otherwise are a potential fire, health
or safety hazard from such accumulations;
         (g)   Pipe, lumber, forms, machinery or other occupational materials
kept upon any property for more than 90 days, except when in current use in
construction or repair work; and
         (h)   Accumulations of any items that tend to cause an unsightly
appearance of the premises and which cause discomfort for any other members of
the public who may be using their own or public property.
      (32)   To willfully oppose or obstruct a Health Officer or physician
charged with the enforcement of the health laws, in performing any legal duty;
      (33)   All signs, awnings, wires and other structures over the streets or
sidewalks so situated or constructed as to endanger public safety;
      (34)   Wastewater, excepting that of natural runoff rainwater or snow,
which is cast upon or permitted to flow upon or over streets or other public
property;
      (35)   For any person to urinate or defecate on public or private
property other than in facilities provided for such functions;
      (36)   The intentional or negligent discharge of items such as leaves,
grass clippings, solvents, antifreeze, oil, fireplace ashes, paint or cement
reinsate into a street, storm sewer system or water resource such as a wetland,
creek, pond or lake; and
      (37)   Temporary carport structures located in front of the footprint of
the primary structure.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015)  Penalty, see
§
130.99
§ 130.06  ABANDONED JUNK PROPERTY.
   (A)   Purpose. This section is enacted for the purpose of protecting and
promoting the public health, sanitation, safety and general welfare in the
city; suppressing disease and contamination; protecting against and lessening
the danger to human life, health and property from fire, explosion, noxious
fumes, infestations of insects and rodents, accidents and other hazards on
private and public premises; and protecting against and prohibiting the
creating or continuance of nuisances.
   (B)   Abandonment and storage restricted. No person shall place or leave, or
cause to be placed or left, abandoned property on public premises within the
city, or keep, store or cause or permit to be placed, left, kept or stored
abandoned property on private premises within the city, except as permitted
under the city code pertaining to zoning.
   (C)   Removal from public premises.
      (1)   Attachment of notice. When an enforcement officer shall find an
article of abandoned property on public premises within the city, he or she
shall cause a notice to be placed upon such article in substantially the
following form:
 
NOTICE
 
TO: The last registered owner and all persons interested in the following
described property: (setting forth brief description) located unlawfully on
public property known as (setting forth brief description of location). This
property is improperly stored and is in violation of §
130.03 of the Dayton Code. This property must be removed within 20 days from
the date of this notice unless, within said 20-day period, authority has been
granted by the City Council to permit it to remain so stored; otherwise, it
will be presumed to be abandoned property and will be removed and destroyed by
order of the city, and the expense therefor shall be assessed against the
property from which it is removed pursuant to Dayton Code.
 
If you have any questions, please call at the Dayton City Hall, (763) 427-4589,
during regular business hours.
 
Name and address of property owner: (if known by the agent of the City of
Dayton)
 
A copy of this notice was mailed to the above-mentioned property owners on the
         day of                  , 20     
 
THE CITY OF DAYTON
12260 S. Diamond Lake Road
Dayton, Minnesota 55327
(763) 427-4589
 
      (2)   Form of posted notice; mailing of notice. Such notice shall be not
less than eight inches by ten inches and shall be sufficiently weather-proof to
withstand normal exposure to the elements. In addition to posting, the
enforcement officer shall make reasonable efforts to ascertain the name and
address of the owner of the article and, if such is reasonably available to the
enforcement officer, he or she shall mail a copy of such notice to the owner on
or before the date of posting.
      (3)   Removal and disposition by city.
         (a)   If, at the end of 20 days after posting such notice, the owner
or any person interested in the abandoned article described in such notice has
not appealed to the City Council and been duly authorized to permit the
property to remain thereon, nor has the owner removed the article from the
public premises or shown reasonable cause for failure to do so, the enforcement
officer may cause the article of abandoned property to be removed, destroyed
and disposed of, and the salvage value, if any, of such article shall be
retained by the city to be applied against the cost of removal, storage,
handling, destruction and disposal thereof.
         (b)   If the proceeds from the salvage of the abandoned property
should be less than such cost, any deficiency, together with a certification
processing fee in the amount set forth in city ordinance, shall be assessed and
levied as a special assessment against the premises from which the abandoned
property was removed, in like manner as other special assessments, payable in
one sum, assessed, levied and collected by the city.
         (c)   If the salvage proceeds exceed the cost of removal, storing,
handling, destruction and disposal of the abandoned property, such excess shall
be held for a period of six months for the benefit of the former owner of the
property, upon proof of such ownership within six months of such removal,
destruction or disposal of the property.
   (D)   Removal from private premises. Any article of abandoned property on
private premises within the city in violation of this section shall be dealt
with in the manner set forth in division (E) above. Additionally, private
property owners may exercise their property rights and have the property
removed at their own expense.
   (E)   Request to permit property to remain in location.
      (1)   Any person who has an interest in the property upon which a posted
notice has been made as described in this section shall have the right, within
the 20-day period prior to mandatory removal by the city, to request of the
Council authority to permit the property to remain in its location.
      (2)   If the Council grants such authority, the notice to remove the
property shall be declared null and void.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015)  Penalty, see
§
130.99
§ 130.07  GARBAGE AND REFUSE.
   (A)   Refuse storage and disposal.
      (1)   Containers required. The owner of any premises, and any other
person having refuse as herein defined, must provide and keep on such premises
sufficient containers for the storage of refuse accumulated on the premises
between disposal or collection. Each such container must be water-tight, must
have tight-fitting covers, must be impervious to pests and absorption of
moisture and must not exceed 90 gallons in size unless otherwise specifically
authorized in writing by the health authority. Refuse on any premises must be
stored in the containers required. All refuse from demolition or construction
sites must be stored in roll-off containers or dumpsters and may not be stored
on the ground. Commercial, business, industrial or other such establishments
having a refuse volume in excess of two cubic yards per week and all six-family
and larger dwellings must provide approved bulk or box type refuse storage
containers or approved equivalent. These containers must be so located as to be
accessible to collection equipment and so as not to require an intermediate
transfer.
      (2)   Sanitary disposal. Refuse must be disposed of in a sanitary manner
as approved by the health authority and must not constitute a nuisance. Refuse
must not be composted or buried; except that, composting in an approved rodent-
and fly-proof device or filling operations using approved fill materials and
methods may be permitted. In no case may garbage be composted or buried.
      (3)   Frequency and manner of collection. The contents of refuse
containers must be collected once every week, or more frequently if necessary
or required by the provisions of any other ordinance of the city, by a
collector licensed hereunder. The collector must transfer the contents of the
containers to the vehicle without spilling them, or if any spilling occurs, the
collector must clean it up immediately and completely. Collection must be
conducted in such a manner as to not create a nuisance. Upon each collection,
the containers must be completely emptied and returned to the racks or stands
where they are kept, and the covers of the containers must be replaced.
      (4)   Placement of containers.
         (a)   Refuse containers shall be stored either inside a building or
outside not more than three feet from a building.
         (b)   Containers stored outside of a building shall be placed and kept
in a neat and orderly manner.
         (c)   Containers may not be placed or maintained in such a way as to
unreasonably interfere with the use of adjoining property.
         (d)   Containers kept outside must be placed in such a manner as not
to permit entry of or harborage for pests and so maintained as not to be tipped
over.
         (e)   Containers must be maintained in a reasonably clean condition at
all times.
         (f)   Containers shall be placed at their assigned collection location
the night before or the day of collection. Containers shall be removed no more
than 12 hours after the scheduled collection day.
         (g)   Containers must not be placed on public sidewalks or interfere
with the removal of snow from roadways; except, those properties with a
sidewalk immediately behind the curb may place containers on that part of the
sidewalk closest to the curb.
      (5)   Defective containers. If, upon inspection by the city, a container
is found to be in poor repair, corroded or otherwise defective so as to permit
pests to enter, or does not meet other requirements of this section, the city
must notify the provider or user of the container of the deficiency and must
require repair or replacement of the container and must state a compliance date
in the notice. If the deficiency is not corrected by said compliance date, the
city may condemn the deficient container and affix a tag so stating such
condemnation. It is unlawful for any person to place or deposit refuse in a
container which has been condemned.
      (6)   Dumpster location and requirements. A dumpster may not be located
in any public place. A dumpster may not be located on any premises for more
than three consecutive months during any 12-month period. The Administrator is
authorized to issue temporary permits for placement of a dumpster on any
premises for more than three consecutive months when, in the Administrator’s
judgment, special circumstances exist justifying the issuance of the temporary
permit and the purposes of this section will not be impaired thereby. The
permit must be displayed on the dumpster or elsewhere on the premises. All
dumpsters must have the current licensed collector’s name, address and phone
number in clearly legible letters no less than three inches in height. No fee
is required for the temporary permit.
   (B)   Refuse storage and disposal - commercial and industrial; dumpsters.
Exterior storage of refuse, including recyclables, and refuse containers,
including dumpsters, at buildings in property zoned for commercial or
industrial uses must conform to the following rules.
      (1)   The refuse must be contained in a refuse enclosure or in the case
of food establishments, in a refuse enclosure - food service.
      (2)   The exterior storage area must be constructed in compliance with
the city code.
   (C)   Refuse littering prohibited. It is unlawful to throw, scatter or
deposit, or cause or permit to be thrown, scattered or deposited, any refuse,
handbills or other littering materials upon or in public or private lands,
bodies of water, vehicles or structures within the city. A property owner must
maintain the owner’s premises and abutting sidewalks and boulevard areas free
of refuse litter.
   (D)   Public health nuisance and abatement. Unless stored in containers in
compliance with this section, any accumulation of refuse at any time and on any
premises creates a public health nuisance. Such accumulation of refuse may be
abated by order of the health authority and the cost of abatement may be
accessed against the property from which such accumulation was removed, as
authorized in M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (E)   Composting.
      (1)   General rule. A compost must be maintained or contained in a manner
to prevent it from becoming a habitat for pests and create objectionable odors.
      (2)   Permitted contents. A compost may contain only plant material
consisting of grass clippings, weeds, leaves, small twigs, evergreen cones and
needles, wood chips, sawdust and herbaceous garden debris.
      (3)   Prohibited contents. The following materials may not be placed in a
compost:
         (a)   Garbage;
         (b)   Refuse;
         (c)   Rubbish;
         (d)   Waste matter;
         (e)   Fecal material; and/or
         (f)   Any matter of animal origin.
      (4)   Compost; construction. A compost may be constructed of:
         (a)   Wood;
         (b)   Wire mesh;
         (c)   A combination of wood and wire;
         (d)   Metal barrels with ventilation; and/or
         (e)   Commercially fabricated bins or barrels.
      (5)   Compost; maintenance. The compost must periodically be mixed to
incorporate air, properly mix wet and dry material and promote rapid biological
degradation. The compost must provide for adequate air circulation to prevent
objectionable odors. The contents of the compost must be completely removed at
least once a year.
      (6)   Compost; location. A compost may not be placed closer than five
feet from a property line. The compost may be located only in the rear yard of
a residential lot and in the rear of commercial and industrial properties.
      (7)   Technical assistance. The Administrator is directed to prepare
informational materials to assist persons operating a compost in the efficient
and odor free operation of a compost and to offer technical assistance to those
persons on the proper operation and maintenance of a compost.
      (8)   Nuisance. The operation of a compost in a manner that results in
objectionable odors and the placing of prohibited materials in a compost is a
public nuisance and may be abated as such under §
130.04(E) of this chapter.
   (F)   Wood piles.
      (1)   General rule. The outside storage of cut firewood for residential
buildings is permitted in residential zoning districts of the city subject to
the provisions of this division (F).
      (2)   Number of stacks. There may be four separate stacks of wood on one
residential lot.
      (3)   Dimensions. Stacks of wood may not exceed five feet in height, four
feet in width and ten feet in length. A stack must:
         (a)   Provide for at least a four-inch space between the ground and
the first layer of wood by using decay-resistant material; or
         (b)   Be placed on a decay-resistant surface.
      (4)   Location. Stacks of wood governed by this division (F) may be
located only in rear yards as defined in the zoning ordinance and may not be
located on a property line.
      (5)   Screening. A stack of wood located within five feet of the lot
property line must be screened with a solid wall or fence.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015)  Penalty, see
§
130.99
§ 130.08  NOISE CONTROL.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning. Any other word or phrase used in this section and defined in
regulations of the state’s pollution control agency air quality and noise
pollution control, Minn. Rules Ch. 7030, have the meaning given in those
regulations.
      AIR CIRCULATION DEVICE. A mechanism designed and used for the controlled
flow of air used in ventilation, cooling or conditioning, including, but not
limited to, central and window air- conditioning units.
      L10. The sound level, expressed in decibels (dBA) which is exceeded 10%
of the time for a one-hour period, as measured by a sound level meter having
characteristics as specified in the latest standards, S1.4, of the American
National Standards Institute and using test procedures approved by the noise
control officer.
      L50. The sound level similarly expressed and measured which is exceeded
50% of the time for a one-hour period.
   (B)   Noises prohibited.
      (1)   General prohibition. It is unlawful to make or cause to be made any
noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace, safety or welfare of others or precludes their enjoyment
of property or adversely affects the value of the property. This general
prohibition is not limited by the specific restrictions of the following
divisions.
      (2)   Motor vehicles. It is unlawful to operate a motor vehicle in the
city in violation of the motor vehicle noise limits of the State Pollution
Control Agency or in violation of the provisions of this section.
      (3)   Horns, signaling devices and the like. It is unlawful to sound any
signaling device on any vehicle, except as a warning of danger.
      (4)   Exhaust, except motor vehicles. It is unlawful to discharge or
permit the discharge of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion
engine, motor boat, motor vehicle or snowmobile, except through a muffler or
other device that effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom and
complies with applicable state laws and regulations.
      (5)   Exhaust, motor vehicles. Every motor vehicle must at all times be
equipped with a muffler in good working order which blends the exhaust noise
into the overall vehicle noise and is in constant operation to prevent
excessive or unusual noise, and no person may use a muffler cutout, bypass or
similar device upon a motor vehicle or a street or highway. The exhaust system
must not emit or produce a sharp popping or crackling sound.
      (6)   Defective vehicles or excessive loads. It is unlawful to operate
any vehicle in such a state of disrepair or overloaded so as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
      (7)   Loading, unloading, unpacking. It is unlawful to create loud and
excessive noise in loading, unloading or unpacking any vehicle.
      (8)   Radios, phonographs and the like. It is unlawful to operate a radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, stereo system or other device
for the production or reproduction of sound in such manner as to disturb the
peace, quiet and comfort of neighbors or others nearby. Operation of any such
set, instrument, phonograph, machine or other device in such a manner as to be
plainly audible at a property line or at 50 feet from a vehicle, structure or
building in which it is located is prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section.
      (9)   Loud speakers, amplifiers for advertising and the like. It is
unlawful to use or operate or permit the use or operation of any loud speaker,
sound amplifier or other device for the production or reproduction of sound
when the sound is cast upon a street or other public place for the purpose of
commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any
commercial establishment or vehicle.
      (10)   Schools, churches, hospitals and the like. It is unlawful to
create any excessive noise on a street, alley or public grounds adjacent to any
school, institution of learning, church or hospital when the noise unreasonably
interferes with the working of the institution or disturbs or unduly annoys its
occupants or residents.
   (C)   Hourly restrictions on certain operations.
      (1)   Recreational vehicles. It is unlawful to drive or operate any
minibike, all-terrain vehicle or other recreational vehicle not licensed for
travel on public highways, except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
on any weekday or between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturday,
Sunday or a holiday. The operation of snowmobiles is defined in §
71.17.
      (2)   Outdoor power equipment. It is unlawful to operate a power lawn
mower, power hedge clippers, chainsaw or other outdoor property maintenance
equipment, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday
or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Saturday, Sunday or a
holiday. This division (C) does not apply to snow removal activities or to
municipal or commercial outdoor property maintenance activities; except that,
commercial activities must not unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet and
comfort of nearby residents. In the case of emergencies resulting from
unforeseen causes such as snow or wind storms, this section does not apply to
reasonable and necessary remedial actions.
      (3)   Refuse hauling. Garbage and refuse may not be collected or removed
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on a weekday or between the hours
of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday.
      (4)   Construction activities. It is unlawful to engage in or permit
construction activities involving the use of any kind of electric-, diesel- or
gas-powered machine or other power equipment, (including: fuel deliveries,
equipment and vehicle deliveries, equipment idling, and equipment repair),
except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on any weekday and 8:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on Saturday, Sunday or a holiday or as authorized by the
City Council. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the
city may impose additional hour restrictions on construction activities in
conjunction with the issuance of a land use permit or land use approval.
Construction activities which are a part of an approved building permit,
subdivision or development plan are allowed to exceed decibel restrictions
detailed in this section during approved working hours.
   (D)   Receiving land use standards.
      (1)   Maximum noise levels by receiving land use.
         (a)   It is unlawful to operate or cause to be operated any source of
noise in such a manner as to create a noise level exceeding the limit set in
the table below for the receiving land use category specified when measured at
or within the property line of the receiving land use.
 
Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use
                Day                      Night
                (7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.) (10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m.)
Zoning district L50 L10                  L50 L10
Commercial      65  70                   65  70
Industrial      75  80                   75  80
Residential     60  65                   50  55
 
         (b)   In the event that the property on which an industrial or
commercial noise source is located abuts residential property, the noise source
in question must not exceed an L10 noise level of 60 dBA in the daytime (7:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m.) and an L50 noise level of 50 dBA in the nighttime (10:00
p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) as measured on the property line abutting the source.
      (2)   Exemptions. The levels prescribed in division (D)(1) above do not
apply to streets owned, operated and maintained by the city.
   (E)   Motor vehicle sound level requirements.
      (1)   A motor vehicle operated or driven on any highway within the city
must comply with the noise limits of the state.
      (2)   Mufflers; noise limits: Minn. Rules parts 7030.1000 to 7030.1600
are adopted and incorporated by reference.
      (3)   A motor vehicle with a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating
of 9,000 pounds or less operated or driven within the city, on any highway,
public property or private property within a city, must also comply with the
following standards when a stationary testing procedure is used:
         (a)   Automobiles, vans, light trucks (GVWR - 10,000 pounds or less):
95 dBA; and
         (b)   Motorcycles: 99 dBA.
   (F)   ATR circulation devices. It is unlawful to install or place any air
circulation device, except a window air-conditioning unit in any location until
the noise control officer determines that the device in that location will
comply with the noise level standards prescribed in this section and issues a
permit for the installation. The noise produced by any window unit and by any
existing air circulation device must be attenuated by means deemed appropriate
by the noise control officer, including, but not limited to, relocation of such
device, if the noise results in or contributes to a violation of this section.
   (G)   Exception for emergency work; public improvements. Noise created
exclusively in the performance of emergency work to preserve the public health,
safety or welfare or in the performance of emergency work necessary to restore
a public service or eliminate a public hazard is exempt from the provisions of
this section for a period not to exceed 24 hours after the work is commenced.
Persons responsible for such work must inform the noise control officer of the
need to initiate such work, if the work is commenced during non-business hours
of the city, then at the beginning of business hours of the first business day
thereafter. A person responsible for such emergency work must take all
reasonable actions to minimize the amount of noise. Noise created exclusively
in the performance of completing a public improvement project is exempt from
the provisions of this section.
   (H)   Powers and duties of noise control officer.
      (1)   Administering officer. The noise control program established by
this section is administered by the noise control officer, who is appointed by
the City Administrator.
      (2)   Testing procedures. The noise control officer must adopt guidelines
establishing the test procedures and instrumentation to be used in enforcing
this section. A copy of such guidelines must be kept on file in the Clerk’s
office and must be available to the public for reference during office hours.
      (3)   Studies and the like. The noise control officer must conduct such
research, monitoring and other studies related to sound as are necessary or
useful in enforcing this section and reducing noise in the city. The officer
may make such investigations and inspections in accordance with law as required
in applying ordinance requirements.
      (4)   Noise impact statements. The noise control officer may require any
person applying to the city for a change in zoning classification or a permit
or license for any structure, operation, process, installation or alteration,
or project that may be considered a potential noise source to submit a noise
impact statement on a form prescribed by the officer. The officer must evaluate
each such statement and make appropriate recommendations to the Council or
other agency or officer authorized to take the action or approve the license or
permit.
      (5)   Other powers and duties. The noise control officer may exercise
such other powers and perform such other duties as are reasonable and necessary
to enforce this section.
   (I)   Variances.
      (1)   Authority. The City Council may grant variances from the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   Application. A person seeking a variance must file an application
therefor with the noise control officer on a form prescribed by the officer.
The application must state the dates during which the variance is proposed, the
location of the noise source and times of operation, the nature of the noise
source, reasons why the variance is sought, steps taken to minimize the noise
level and such other information as is required by the noise control officer.
If the application is for a variance for more than three days, the noise
control officer must give mailed notice of the requested variance to all
property owners within at least 500 feet of the noise source. Any person
claiming to be adversely affected by the variance applied for may, within ten
days of mailing of the notice, file a statement with the noise control officer
in support of the claim.
      (3)   Action on application. The Council may grant a variance only if it
finds that full compliance with the sound level requirements of this section
would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on other persons,
or on the general public. In determining whether to grant or deny the
application, the Council is to balance the hardship to the applicant against
the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of the persons affected,
the adverse impact on property affected and any other adverse effects of
granting the variance. The variance may be granted subject to conditions,
including a time limit.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015; Ord. 2018-25,
passed 10-24-2018)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.09  RECYCLING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CARRYOUT COLLECTION SERVICE. The collection of recyclable materials
accumulated in recycling containers from a location at a dwelling unit other
than the location designated by the recycling authority for regular collection.
      DWELLING UNIT. A residential structure in the city that is designated by
the recycling authority to receive recycling collection services.
      GENERATOR, MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE, RECYCLABLE MATERIALS and
RECYCLING. The meanings given those terms in M.S. § 115A.03, Subd. 12, 21, 25a
and 25b, respectively, as they may be amended from time to time.
      RECYCLING AUTHORITY. The official designated by the City Administrator to
perform the powers and duties of the recycling authority as provided in this
section.
      RECYCLING COLLECTION SERVICES. The collection of recyclable materials
accumulated in recycling containers from a location at a dwelling unit that is
designated by the recycling authority for regular collection.
      RECYCLING CONTAINER. A receptacle designated by the recycling authority
for the accumulation and collection of recyclable materials at a dwelling unit.
      RECYCLING SERVICES. Recycling collection services, carryout collection
services and any other services provided to a dwelling unit in accordance with
this section.
   (B)   Recycling authority; powers. The recycling authority is responsible
for supervising and controlling the collection, removal and disposal of
recyclable materials from all dwelling units in the city. The recycling
authority may contract with one or more collectors or haulers for the
collection, removal and disposal of some or all types of recyclable materials
from dwelling units. The recycling authority may adopt and enforce additional
rules not inconsistent with this section as necessary for the collection,
removal and disposal of recyclable materials, including, but not limited to,
rules governing the days and hours of collection, the types of recyclable
materials to be collected, the manner in which generators must prepare
recyclable materials for collection, the recycling containers to be used and
the location of recycling containers for collection. The rules of the recycling
authority are not effective until approved by the Council.
   (C)   Ownership of recyclable materials; scavenging prohibited.
      (1)   Ownership. Recyclable materials are the property of the generator
until collected by authorized city employees, collectors or haulers. Recyclable
materials become the property of the city, authorized collector or authorized
hauler upon collection.
      (2)   No scavenging. It is unlawful for a person, other than authorized
employees of the city, or authorized collectors or haulers to distribute,
collect, remove or dispose of recyclable materials after the materials have
been placed or deposited for collection.
   (D)   Multi-family dwellings.
      (1)   Recycling services. Owners of multi-family dwellings containing
more than eight dwelling units must provide recycling collection services to
all residents of the dwelling. Recyclable materials must be collected at least
once per month.
      (2)   Definitions. The term “multi-family dwelling” means a multiple
dwelling, as that term is defined by the city code. The term “recyclable
materials” has the meaning given by M.S. § 115A.03, Subd. 25a, as it may be
amended from time to time.
      (3)   Recycling; notice. Owners of multi-family dwellings must provide
notice to all new tenants of the opportunity to dispose of recyclable materials
as well as the location of the disposal site.
      (4)   Recycling; preparation. Owners of multi-family dwellings must
provide information to all new tenants related to the proper preparation of
recyclable materials for collection.
      (5)   Recycling containers. Owners of multi-family dwellings must ensure
that stolen or broken containers for recyclable materials are replaced within a
reasonable time.
      (6)   Landfilling prohibited. It is unlawful for an owner of a multi-
family dwelling or an agent or contractor of an owner, to transport for
disposal or to dispose of recyclable materials in a solid waste disposal
facility, or to contract for such transportation or disposal.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015)  Penalty, see
§
130.99
§ 130.10  FIREWORKS.
   (A)   The use, display, possession, discharge or sale of any fireworks not
expressly permitted by M.S. § 624.20, Subd. 1(c), as it may be amended from
time to time, is strictly prohibited.
   (B)   All use, display or discharge of those non-explosive, non-aerial
pyrotechnic entertainment devices only containing the limited amounts of
pyrotechnic chemical compositions described in and permitted by M.S. § 624.20,
Subd. 1(c), as it may be amended from time to time, hereinafter “permitted
consumer fireworks”, is strictly prohibited in the area on, below, above or
within or in close proximity to:
      (1)   Recreational areas, roadways, streets, highways, bicycle lanes,
pedestrian paths, sidewalks, rights-of-way, lakes, rivers, waterways and all
other property owned or leased by the city, Counties of Hennepin and Wright,
Three Rivers Park District, state or federal government and located in whole or
in part within the city limits;
      (2)   Private property within the city limits that has conspicuously
posted a written sign or notice that no fireworks discharge is allowed;
      (3)   Within 300 feet of any consumer fireworks retail sales facility or
storage area that has properly posted a written sign or notice that no
fireworks discharge is allowed; or
      (4)   Any property, area, structure or material that by its physical
condition or the physical conditions in which it is set would constitute a fire
or personal safety hazard.
   (C)   All other use, display or discharge of permitted consumer fireworks
must be conducted in a manner that minimizes the risk of fire or injury to
other persons or property.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015)  Penalty, see
§
130.99
§ 130.11  TRESPASSING.
   (A)   Purpose. To enable private owners of real property situated within the
city and to which the public has some implicit right of access to exclude
persons from that property where the person has committed a crime on the
premises or violated the properly posted rules of conduct for the property.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COMMON AREAS. All areas of the property which are maintained for the
common use of its tenants or the general public incidental to the conduct of
the normal and legitimate activities upon the premises, including, but not
limited to, parking lots and ramps, private roadways, reception areas, rotunda,
waiting areas, hallways, restroom facilities, elevators, escalators and
staircases.
      COVERED PREMISES. Any improved real property, or portion thereof, to
which the public has an implicit right of access including, but not limited to,
places of worship, shopping malls, retail sales facilities, hotels, motels,
nursing homes, restaurants, multiple-family residential buildings, hospitals,
medical and dental offices, clubs, lodges, office buildings, banks and
financial institutions, transit stations, athletic and recreational facilities,
personal service establishments, theaters and day care facilities.
      PROPERTY MANAGER. Any owner of a covered premises or the agent thereof
who is authorized to exercise control over the property, including common
areas. The term PROPERTY MANAGER includes any tenant who is an owner of the
property or agent of the owner and authorized to exercise control over the
property, including common areas.
      TENANT. Any authorized occupant of a covered premises, or the agent
thereof.
      TRESPASS NOTICE. A written notice which contains minimally the following
information:
         (a)   A verbatim copy of this section;
         (b)   The name, date of birth and address of the person to whom the
notice is issued and the name of the person’s custodial parent or guardian
where that person is a juvenile;
         (c)   A description of the specific conduct which serves as a basis
for the notice’s issuance;
         (d)   A description of the specific property to which the trespass
notice applies;
         (e)   The period during which the trespass notice is in effect,
including the date of its expiration;
         (f)   The name, title and telephone number of a person with authority
to modify, amend or rescind the trespass notice prior to its normal expiration;
and
         (g)   The method by which the trespass notice was served upon the
person to whom it was issued.
   (C)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   No person shall trespass in or upon any private property and,
without claim of right, refuse to depart therefrom on demand of the property
manager or tenant.
      (2)   No person who has been served with a trespass notice in conformity
with this section shall enter the premises described therein during its
effective period without the written permission of the issuing property manager
or tenant or the authorized agent thereof named in the notice. Violation of the
terms of the notice will result in criminal prosecution as a misdemeanor under
state law.
      (3)   No person shall enter any area of private property in violation of
conspicuously posted signs prohibiting or restricting access thereto,
including, but not limited to, the following signs, “No Trespassing”,
“Authorized Personnel Only”, “Private”, “Employees Only” and “Emergency Exit
Only”.
   (D)   Issuance of trespass notice. A property manager or tenant may issue a
trespass notice as provided under this section only under the following
circumstances:
      (1)   Where there is probable cause to believe that the person has
committed an act prohibited by state statute or city ordinance while on the
covered premises, whether on common areas or a tenant’s space; or
      (2)   Where there is probable cause to believe that the person has
violated the rules of conduct for the property which have been conspicuously
posted at all public entrances to the property or have been personally provided
to the person in writing by the property manager or tenant.
   (E)   Additional provisions.
      (1)   Where a trespass notice is issued by a tenant, who is not the
property manager, the notice is effective only as to that portion of the
premises over which the tenant is entitled to exercise control.
      (2)   No trespass notice shall be effective for more than one year from
the date of its original issuance.
      (3)   All trespass notices issued pursuant to this section must be
properly served upon the person named therein as follows:
         (a)   Personal service documented by either a receipt signed by the
person to whom it was issued or a written statement of the issuer; and
         (b)   Where the person named in the trespass notice is arrested by a
police officer for an act prohibited by state statute or city ordinance, the
arresting officer may personally serve the notice on behalf of the property
manager or tenant and so document that fact in the officer’s official police
report detailing the incident.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015)  Penalty, see
§
130.99
§ 130.12  CONDUCT OR EVENTS CONSTITUTING A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   Participation in unlawful gatherings.
      (1)   No person shall congregate because of, or participate in, any
unlawful gathering, as defined in §
130.02 of this chapter.
      (2)   No person shall keep or permit an unlawful gathering, as defined in
§
130.02 of this chapter, on any property owned, leased, controlled or occupied
by that person.
      (3)   Any person who is the property owner or other interested party in
the property, who has
actual or imputed knowledge of an unlawful gathering thereon and who fails to
immediately abate the unlawful gathering shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (4)   Any person, other than the property owner, tenant or person in
control of a building, who refuses to leave an unlawful gathering thereon after
being ordered to do so by a police officer or by an owner, tenant or person in
control of any building or other interested party in the property where an
unlawful gathering is occurring shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (5)   Any person who is the property owner, tenant or person in control
of a building and refuses to admit public officers attempting to gain
reasonable access to the premises for the purpose of investigating a suspected
unlawful gathering on the property or any structure thereon or refuses to
disperse an unlawful gathering at the building after being ordered to do so by
a police officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (6)   A police officer, who has probable cause to believe an unlawful
gathering is occurring on private property may make reasonable entry onto the
property or structure thereon in a manner consistent with law for the purpose
of investigating suspected law violations.
      (7)   A police officer may order all persons present at any public or
private place or building where an unlawful gathering is occurring to
immediately disperse.
   (B)   Disorderly house and false report to public officer prohibited. It
shall constitute a misdemeanor under state law to do the following:
      (1)   To keep, permit or be present in a disorderly house, as defined in
§
130.02 of this chapter;
      (2)   Be an owner or person in control of any residential property and to
permit the building to be used as a disorderly house; or
      (3)   To provide a false report to any public officer.
   (C)   Excessive nuisance service call.
      (1)   Nuisance incident notice. Where the City Administrator or designee
determines that a specific premises or building is being operated in violation
of this chapter, public officers have been dispatched to private property on a
nuisance service call, the City Administrator or designee may issue a written
nuisance incident notice to the owner of the property, and may provide a copy
thereof to any other interested parties. The nuisance incident notice may be
served upon the owner of said premises by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or by regular mail, supported by an affidavit of service by mailing,
to the address determined by the most recent property tax records maintained by
Hennepin County for said premises. The service of a nuisance incident notice,
as provided herein, shall be prima facie evidence that an owner or interested
party served person in control of a building has knowledge of and has permitted
subsequent conduct or behavior at said premises.
      (2)   Contents of the notice. The nuisance incident notice shall:
         (a)   Identify the type and specific location of nuisance service call
(s), including tenant or lessee names where applicable;
         (b)   Summarize the evidence of the nuisance occurring on the
property;
         (c)   Provide the dates on which the nuisance calls for service were
made and the dates of any prior responses by public officers to nuisance
incidents on the property; and
         (d)   Warn the owner, occupant and persons in control of the property
that future nuisance service calls may subject them jointly and severally to an
excessive nuisance service call fee in the amount of $250 or more, up to
$2,000, based upon the actual cost of the law enforcement response.
      (3)   Abatement notice. Where the City Administrator or designee
determines that public officers have been dispatched to two or more nuisance
service calls, as defined in §
130.02 of this chapter, to the same property within a 365-day period, he or she
shall cause a written abatement notice to issue to the owner of the property,
and may provide a copy thereof to any interested parties. The abatement notice
may be served upon the owner of said premises by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or by regular mail, supported by an affidavit of service by mailing,
to the address determined by the most recent property tax records maintained by
Hennepin or Wright Counties for said premises. The service of an abatement
notice, as provided herein, shall be prima facie evidence that an owner or
interested party served has knowledge of and has permitted subsequent conduct
or behavior at said premises.
      (4)   Contents of the abatement notice. The abatement notice shall:
         (a)   Identify the type and specific location of nuisance service
calls, including tenant or lessee names, where applicable;
         (b)   Summarize the evidence of the nuisance occurring on the
property;
         (c)   Provide the dates on which the nuisance service calls were made
and the dates of any prior responses by public officers to nuisance incidents
on the property;
         (d)   Warn the owner and interested parties that future nuisance
service calls will subject them jointly and severally to an excessive nuisance
service call fee in the amount of $250 or more, based upon the actual cost of
the law enforcement response, up to $2,000, for each separate call. The costs
of providing the excess law enforcement services shall include, without
limitation, the gross salaries, including all fringes, benefits and overhead
paid to the public officers responding, the pro rata cost of all equipment,
including vehicles and K-9 officers, and the cost of repairs to any city
equipment or property damaged in responding to the nuisance service call. The
civil penalty will issue in the manner set forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances and, if left unpaid, will be charged against
the property and collected in the manner of a tax; and
         (e)   Advise the owner and interested parties that subsequent conduct
in violation of this section may also subject them jointly and severally to
criminal charges punishable by up to a $1,000 fine and 90 days in jail for each
separate violation.
      (5)   Imposition of excessive nuisance service call fee. Property owners,
tenants and other persons having control over a property shall be jointly and
severally responsible for nuisance incidents occurring thereon and individually
responsible for payment of any nuisance service call fee issued to that party
hereunder. Where an abatement notice was properly served upon the owner and/or
tenant of the property as set forth in division (C)(3) above, each successive
nuisance service call within the same 365-day period shall result in an
administrative citation to that party in the manner set forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances in the amount of $250 or more based upon the
actual cost of the law enforcement response, up to $2,000 for each separate
call. The costs of providing the excess law enforcement services shall include
without limitation the gross salaries, including all fringes, benefits and
overhead paid to the public officers responding, the pro rata cost of all
equipment, including vehicles and K-9 officers, and the cost of repairs to any
city equipment or property damaged in responding to the nuisance service call.
      (6)   Affirmative defenses. In the case of rental property, it shall
constitute an affirmative defense to the issuance of an excessive nuisance
service call fee by administrative citation that the property owner has
commenced eviction proceedings against the tenant or tenants responsible for
the nuisance conduct, conditions or characteristics. In the case of large
public accommodations, it shall constitute an affirmative defense to the
issuance of an excessive nuisance service call fee by administrative citation
that the property owner or the owner’s property manager has entered into and
complied with a memo of understanding with regard to security with the City
Police Department.
      (7)   Appeal. Any party issued an excessive nuisance service call fee by
administrative citation may appeal the citation by filing a written request for
a hearing with the City Clerk within ten calendar days of the issuance of the
citation. A hearing shall be held within 45 calendar days thereof.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015)  Penalty, see
§
130.99
§ 130.13  PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit public indecency
in order to deter criminal activity, to promote societal order and public
health and to protect children.
   (B)   Findings. The City Council makes the following findings regarding the
need to prohibit public indecency.
      (1)   Public indecency can increase the incidence of criminal activity,
including, but not limited to, prostitution, disorderly conduct and sexual
assault.
      (2)   Public indecency can expose children to an unhealthy and
nurtureless environment.
      (3)   Public indecency can disrupt the orderly operation of public events
and public accommodations, thereby fostering societal disorder.
      (4)   Public indecency can present health concerns in places of public
accommodation and other public settings.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area
with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with
less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; or the depiction or showing of the
covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
      PERSON. A natural person 12 years of age or older, including employees or
agents of a public accommodation.
   (D)   Public indecency prohibited.
      (1)   A person who knowingly or intentionally in a public place or
setting:
         (a)   Appears in a state of nudity;
         (b)   Fondles the genitals of himself or herself;
         (c)   Fondles the genitals of another person; or
         (d)   Urinates or defecates commits public indecency and is guilty of
a misdemeanor.
      (2)   It is not a violation of this section for a woman to breastfeed.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015)  Penalty, see
§
130.99
§ 130.14  IMPROPER DISPLAY OF SEXUALLY-ORIENTED MATERIALS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect minors in public
accommodations from exposure to materials that are harmful to children, thereby
protecting the health, safety and welfare of the community.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      HARMFUL TO MINORS. The quality of any description or representation, in
whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic
abuse, when it:
         (a)   Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid
interest of minors;
         (b)   Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult
community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors; and
         (c)   Is utterly without redeeming social importance for minors.
      KNOWINGLY. Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or
ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
         (a)   The character and content of any material which is reasonably
susceptible of examination by the defendant; and
         (b)   The age of the minor; provided, however, that, an honest mistake
shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a
reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
      NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area
with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with
less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; or the depiction or showing of covered
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
      PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION. A business, accommodation, refreshment,
entertainment, recreation or transportation facility of any kind, whether
licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or
accommodations are extended, offered, sold or otherwise made available to the
public.
      SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad
in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume or the condition of being fettered,
bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse
or physical contact with a person’s unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks
or, if such a person be a female, her breast.
      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in
a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (C)   Display restrictions.
      (1)   Sealed wrapper. No person shall commercially and knowingly exhibit
or display any material which is harmful to minors in its content in any public
accommodation where minors are or may be present and where minors are able to
view the material unless each item is kept in a sealed wrapper at all times.
      (2)   Opaque cover. No person shall commercially and knowingly exhibit or
display any material the cover or packaging of which, standing alone, is
harmful to minors in any public accommodation where minors are or may be
present or allowed to be present and where minors are able to view the material
unless each item is blocked from view by an opaque cover. The opaque cover
requirement is satisfied if those portions of the cover or packaging containing
the material harmful to minors are blocked from view by an opaque cover.
      (3)   Segregation of materials. Divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) above shall
not apply to the exhibition or display of materials harmful to minors under
circumstances where minors are not present or are not able to view the material
or the material’s cover or packaging. A person may comply with the requirements
of this division (C)(3) by:
         (a)   Physically segregating the material in a manner that physically
prohibits access to and view of the material by minors;
         (b)   Prominently posting at the entrance to the restricted area:
“Adults only - you must be 18 to enter”; and
         (c)   Enforcing the restriction.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015)  Penalty, see
§
130.99
§ 130.15  JUVENILE CURFEW.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the public safety
and welfare by requiring a curfew for juveniles.
   (B)   Findings. The City Council makes the following findings regarding the
need to enact a juvenile curfew in the city.
      (1)   Increased juvenile criminal activity, juvenile gang activity and
juvenile violence in the Twin Cities Metropolitan Area in recent years has
taxed local law enforcement services and jeopardized the public safety.
      (2)   Increased rates of juvenile victimization in the Twin Cities
Metropolitan Area in recent years has endangered the emotional and physical
well-being and safety of juveniles.
      (3)   Because of their lack of maturity and experience, juveniles are
particularly susceptible to participation in unlawful and gang-related
activities.
      (4)   Juveniles are particularly vulnerable at nighttime hours to become
victims of crime due to their inability to make critical decisions in a mature
and experienced manner.
      (5)   A juvenile curfew seeks to minimize the dangers to which juveniles
are subject when they are upon the streets and in public places and
establishments unattended and unsupervised by adults at night time hours.
      (6)   A juvenile curfew seeks to regulate juvenile activities carried out
at night time hours upon the streets and in public places and establishments
where the risk of danger to juveniles can be the greatest.
      (7)   A juvenile curfew seeks to encourage parents and guardians of
juveniles to supervise, control and know the whereabouts of their children
during high-risk night time hours.
      (8)   A juvenile curfew seeks to reduce juvenile criminal activities and
juvenile gang activities during night time hours when local law enforcement
services are already taxed.
      (9)   A juvenile curfew seeks to diminish the undesirable impact juvenile
unlawful conduct has on a community.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EMERGENCY. A circumstance or combination of circumstances requiring
immediate action to prevent property damage, serious bodily injury or loss of
life.
      ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately-owned place of business to which the public
is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement,
entertainment or refreshment.
      GUARDIAN. An adult appointed pursuant to M.S. §§ 524.5-201 et seq., as
they may be amended from time to time, who has the power and responsibilities
of a parent as defined by M.S. § 524.5-102, as it may be amended from time to
time.
      JUVENILE. A person under the age of 18 years who is not married or who
has not been legally emancipated.
      PARENT. Birth parents, adoptive parents and stepparents.
      PROPRIETOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing, owning or conducting any establishment. The term includes
the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
alleys, parking lots, parks and the common areas of libraries, schools,
hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, shopping
malls and shops.
      RESPONSIBLE ADULT. A person over the age of 18 years specifically
authorized by the parent or guardian of the juvenile to have custody and
control of the juvenile.
      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any body part or organ.
   (D)   Prohibited acts.
      (1)   Juveniles under the age of 12. It is unlawful for a juvenile under
the age of 12 years to be present in any public place or establishment within
the city:
         (a)   From 9:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or
Thursday until 5:00 a.m. on the following day; and
         (b)   From 10:00 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday until 5:00 a.m. on the
following day.
      (2)   Juveniles under the age of 15. It is unlawful for a juvenile under
the age of 15 years to be present in any public place or establishment within
the city:
         (a)   From 10:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or
Thursday until 5:00 a.m. on the following day; and
         (b)   From 11:00 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday until 5:00 a.m. on the
following day.
      (3)   Juveniles, age 15, 16 or 17 years of age. It is unlawful for a
juvenile, age 15, 16 or 17, to be present in any public place or establishment
within the city:
         (a)   From 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or
Thursday until 5:00 a.m. on the following day; and
         (b)   From 12:01 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday.
      (4)   Law enforcement officers. A law enforcement officer may not detain
a juvenile beyond the time reasonably necessary for the law enforcement officer
to investigate whether or not a violation occurred, issue a citation or take a
juvenile into custody based upon a violation of this section unless the law
enforcement officer, after speaking with the juvenile and considering the
surrounding facts and circumstances, reasonably believes that the juvenile has
violated this section and that none of the defenses set forth apply.
      (5)   Parents or guardians. It is unlawful for a parent or guardian of a
juvenile to knowingly, or through negligent supervision, permit the juvenile to
be in any public place or establishment within the city during the hours
prohibited in this section.
      (6)   Proprietors. It is unlawful for a proprietor of an establishment
within the city to knowingly permit a juvenile to remain in the establishment
or on the property of the establishment during the hours prohibited in this
section. If the proprietor is not present at the time of the curfew violation,
the responding officer shall leave written notice of the violation with an
employee of the establishment. A copy of the written notice shall be served
upon the establishment’s proprietor personally or by certified mail.
   (E)   Defenses.
      (1)   It is an affirmative defense for a juvenile to prove that:
         (a)   The juvenile was accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or
other responsible adult;
         (b)    The juvenile was engaged in a lawful employment activity or was
going to or returning from an employment activity without any detour or stop;
         (c)   An emergency situation existed;
         (d)   The juvenile was attending an official school, religious or
other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored and/or
supervised by a public entity, a civic organization, a religious organization
or another similar entity that took responsibility for the juvenile, or was
going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official
school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored and/or supervised by a public entity, a civic organization, a
religious organization or another similar entity that took responsibility for
the juvenile;
         (e)   The juvenile was on an errand at the direction of the juvenile’s
parent or guardian without any detour or stop;
         (f)   The juvenile was exercising First Amendment rights protected by
the United States Constitution or Art. I of the Constitution of the state;
         (g)   The juvenile was engaged in interstate travel; and/or
         (h)   The juvenile was on the public right-of-way, boulevard, alley or
sidewalk abutting the juvenile’s residence or abutting the residence of his or
her next-door neighbor.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense for a proprietor of an establishment
to prove that:
         (a)   The proprietor reasonably and in good faith relied upon a
juvenile’s representations of proof of age. Proof of age may be established
pursuant to M.S. § 340A.503, Subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to time,
or other verifiable means, including, but not limited to, school identification
cards and birth certificates; and/or
         (b)   The proprietor promptly notified the responsible police agency
that a juvenile was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew
hours.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015)  Penalty, see
§
130.99
§ 130.16  VANDALISM OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   Every person who intentionally damages, displaces, removes or destroys any
of the following shall be guilty of a misdemeanor:
   (A)   A street or bridge;
   (B)   A tree, rock, post, sign or other monument which has been erected or
marked for the purpose of designating a point in any boundary or any mark or
inscription thereon;
   (C)   A mileboard, a milestone or guidepost erected upon a street, or any
inscription thereon;
   (D)   A line of telegraph, cable or telephone, or any part thereof, or any
appurtenance or apparatus connected with the working of any magnetic or
electric telegraph, cable or telephone, or the sending or conveyance of
messages thereby;
   (E)   A pipe or main for conducting gas or water, or heat or any works
erected for supplying buildings with gas or heat or water, or any appurtenance
or appendage connected therewith; and
   (F)   A sewer or drain, or a pipe or main connected therewith or forming
part thereof.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015)  Penalty, see
§
130.99
§ 130.17  DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the possession,
manufacture, advertisement and delivery of drug paraphernalia and thereby deter
the use of controlled substances in the city. This section is not intended to
allow what the state statutes prohibit nor to prohibit what the state statutes
expressly allow.
   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products and materials of any kind
which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state
statutes or this section. It includes, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
         (b)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;
         (c)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use
in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance;
         (d)   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances;
         (e)   Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use
in weighing or measuring controlled substances;
         (f)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for
use in cutting controlled substances;
         (g)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed
for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining,
marijuana;
         (h)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
         (i)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used,
intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;
         (j)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
         (k)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended
for use or designed for use in parenterally-injected controlled substances into
the human body;
         (l)   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
            1.   Water pipes;
            2.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
            3.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
            4.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material
such as a marijuana cigarette which has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand;
            5.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
            6.   Chamber pipes;
            7.   Carburetor pipes;
            8.   Electric pipes;
            9.   Air-driven pipes;
            10.   Chillums;
            11.   Bongs; and
            12.   Ice pipes or chillers.
      (m)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with
or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls.
   (C)   Evidence. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a
court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
      (2)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or anyone in control of the
object under state or federal law relating to any controlled substance;
      (3)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of this section;
      (4)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
      (5)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object;
      (6)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or
anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows,
or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation
of this section; the innocence of an owner or anyone in control of the object
as to a direct violation of this section should not prevent a finding that the
object is intended for use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
      (7)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use;
      (8)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
      (9)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
      (10)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
      (11)   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
      (12)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
      (13)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
      (14)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
   (D)   Offenses.
      (1)   Possession. It is unlawful for any person to use or to possess with
intent to use drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this section.
      (2)   Manufacture or delivery. It is unlawful for any person to deliver,
possess with intent to deliver or manufacture with intent to deliver drug
paraphernalia knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know,
that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this section.
      (3)   Minors. Any person 18 years of age or over who violates this
section by delivering drug paraphernalia and said delivery is to a person who
is under 18 years of age and at least three years his or her junior shall also
be violating this section.
      (4)   Advertisement. It is unlawful for any person to place in any
newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication any advertisement knowing,
or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of
the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects
designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015)  Penalty, see
§
130.99
§ 130.18  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, possess, sell, give
away, barter, exchange, distribute or otherwise: transfer any controlled
substance, as defined in M.S. § 152.02, as it may be amended from time to time;
any legend drug, as defined in M.S. § 151.01, Subd. 17, as it may be amended
from time to time; or any legend medical gas, as defined in M.S. § 151.01,
Subd. 18, as it may be amended from time to time; in a manner contrary to state
or federal law.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015)  Penalty, see
§
130.99
§ 130.19  PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages on any
public park or street, right-of-way, sidewalk, pathway or bikeway or in a
vehicle parked on any public street or right-of-way without a special permit.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015)  Penalty, see
§
130.99
§ 130.20  GRAFFITI.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prevent the spread of
graffiti vandalism and to establish a program for the removal of graffiti from
public and private property thereby limiting its adverse impact on
neighborhoods.
   (B)   Findings. The City Council makes the following findings regarding the
need to promptly remove graffiti from private and public property.
      (1)   Graffiti constitutes a form of vandalism defacing public and
private property without the permission of the owner, and causing citizens,
businesses and the city to incur the cost of repair and removal.
      (2)   Graffiti is a visual symbol of disorder eroding public safety,
contributing to a downward spiral of blight and decay, lessening property
values, business viability and ultimately tax revenues and, as such, is
inconsistent with the city’s property maintenance goals and aesthetic
standards.
      (3)   There is substantial evidence that prompt eradication of graffiti
is an effective prevention strategy which discourages its return while failure
to promptly remove graffiti increases the likelihood that more graffiti will
occur on the same site and on other nearby property.
      (4)   The failure to maintain one’s property by removing graffiti which
has been declared by the city to constitute a public nuisance within a
reasonable period of time is injurious to the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the residents of the city.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      GRAFFITI. Any inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement
that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted or engraved
on or otherwise affixed to any surface of a permanent structure, fixture or
object, including, but not limited to, buildings, walls, fences, bridges,
benches, shelters, sidewalks, hydrants, fountains, pavement, curbs, trees,
rocks, signs, utility poles or boxes situated on public or private property by
any graffiti implement, to the extent that the inscription, word, figure,
painting or other defacement was not authorized in advance by the responsible
party for the property or, despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed a
public nuisance by the City Administrator or the designee thereof.
      GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT. Paint, aerosol or pressurized containers of paint,
indelible broad-tipped markers, paint sticks, etching equipment or any other
devices capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or human-
made surface.
      PUBLIC NUISANCE. Real property within the city containing a condition
that defaces it or any permanent structure, fixture or object situated thereon
which in turn causes or tends to cause depreciation in the enjoyment and use,
or in the value of the property in its immediate vicinity or which has the
potential to unreasonably annoy, injure or endanger the safety, health, morals
or general welfare of ordinary and reasonable members of the public.
      RESPONSIBLE PARTY. An owner, legal occupant or an entity or person acting
as an agent for an owner by agreement, who has authority over the real property
or is responsible for the property’s maintenance or management. Irrespective of
any arrangement to the contrary with any other party, each property owner shall
always be a RESPONSIBLE PARTY for the purposes of this section. There may be
more than one RESPONSIBLE PARTY for a particular property.
   (D)   Graffiti vandalism.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally place or
apply, or attempt to place or apply, graffiti on any surface of a permanent
structure, fixture or object located on public or private real property within
the city without the advance authorization of a responsible party for the
property.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti
implement with the intent to use the same to place or apply graffiti on any
public or private real property within the city or any surface of a permanent
structure, fixture or object located thereon.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015)  Penalty, see
§
130.99
§ 130.21  SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The City Council of the City of Dayton finds that
sexual offenders and sexual predators present an extreme threat to the health,
safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. It is the intent of this
section to serve the city’s compelling interest to promote, protect and improve
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas
around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers
wherein certain designated offenders are prohibited from loitering or
prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residency.
   (B)   Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this chapter as
written unless context indicates or requires a different meaning.
      A PLACE WHERE CHILDREN REGULARLY CONGREGATE. Any school, licensed day
care center, park or playground, public school bus stop, place of worship,
seasonal pumpkin patch or apple orchard, and any other PROHIBITED AREA, as
defined below.
      DESIGNATED OFFENDER. Any person who has been convicted of a designated
sexual offense, regardless of whether adjudication has been withheld, in which
the victim of the offense was less than 16 years of age, or has been
categorized as a Level II or Level III sex offender under M.S. § 244.052 or
successor statute.
      DESIGNATED SEXUAL OFFENSE. A conviction, commitment under M.S. § 253B or
successor statute, or admission of guilt under oath without adjudication
involving any of the following offenses under M.S. §§ 609.342; 609.343;
609.344; 609.345; 609.352; 609.365; 617.246; 617.247; 617.293; successor
statutes; or a similar offense from another jurisdiction.
      LOITERING. Standing, sitting idly, whether or not the person is in a
vehicle or remaining in or around an area.
      PARK OR PLAYGROUND. One of the following:
         (a)   Any land, including improvements to the land that is
administered, operated or managed by the city for the use of the general public
as a recreational area.
         (b)   City recreational areas include, but are not limited to,
conservation area, hiking trail, biking trail, swimming pool, or athletic
fields.
      PERMANENT RESIDENCE. A place where the person abides, lodges, or resides
for 14 or more consecutive days.
      PROHIBITED AREA. Any amusement park and center, recreation center, youth
athletic field, indoor or outdoor ice skating facility, public or commercial
swimming pool, golf course, bowling alley, public library, privately operated
“tot lot,” or facility providing specialized services for children, including
but not limited to gymnastic and dance academies.
      TEMPORARY RESIDENCE. A place where the person abides, lodges, or resides
for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and
which is not the person’s permanent address, or a place where the person
routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four or more consecutive
or non-consecutive days in any month and which is not the person’s permanent
residence.
   (C)   Designated offender residence and activity prohibited; penalties;
exceptions.
      (1)    Prohibited location of residence. It is unlawful for any
designated offender to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence:
         (a)   Within 2,000 feet of any school, licensed day care center, park
or playground;
         (b)   Within 2,000 feet of any seasonal pumpkin patch or apple
orchard;
         (c)   Within 2,000 feet of any PROHIBITED AREA, as defined above;
         (d)   Within 1,000 feet of any public school bus stop; or
         (e)   Within 1,000 feet of any place of worship.
      (2)   Prohibited activity.
         (a)   It is unlawful for any Designated Offender to knowingly loiter
at a place where children regularly congregate.
         (b)   Designated Offenders shall not, on each October 30th and 31st
(or any other date set by the city for trick-or-treaters) distribute candy or
other items to children, leave an exterior porch light on or otherwise invite
trick-or-treaters to solicit their residence.
      (3)   Measurement of distance.
         (a)   For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the
requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer
property line of the permanent residence or temporary residence to the nearest
outer property line of the prohibited area or property.
         (b)   The City Clerk shall maintain an official map showing PROHIBITED
AREAS as defined by this section. The Clerk shall update the map at least
annually to reflect any changes in the location of prohibited areas.
      (4)   Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this section shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor as defined by state law and §
130.99 of this code and subject to the penalties thereof. Each day a person
maintains a residence in violation of this section constitutes a separate
violation.
      (5)   Exceptions.
         (a)   A designated offender residing within a prohibited area does not
commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply:
            1.   The person established the permanent residence or temporary
residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to M.S. §§ 243.166
and 243.167 or successor statutes, prior to October 28, 2016.
            2.   The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and
was not convicted as an adult.
            3.   The person is a minor.
            4.   The prohibited area was opened after the person established
the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the
residence pursuant to M.S. §§ 243.166 and 243.167.
            5.   The residence is a property owned or leased by the Minnesota
Department of Corrections.
            6.   For purposes of division (C)(5)(a)1. and division (C)(5)(a)4.
above, a person does not establish a permanent residence until the person has
physically abided, lodged, or resided at the residence for a period of 14
consecutive days. A person will not be deemed to have established a temporary
residence until the person has physically abided, lodged, or resided at the
temporary residence for:
               a.   Four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in a month;
or
               b.   Fourteen or more days in the aggregate in any calendar
year. Reporting and registering the residence pursuant to M.S. §§ 243.166 and
243.167, standing alone, does not establish a permanent residence or a
temporary residence.
   (D)   Property rental prohibited; penalties.
      (1)   It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure, or part
thereof, trailer or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used
as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from
establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to the
terms of this chapter, if such place, structure, or part thereof, is located
within a prohibited area and not subject to an exception set forth in division
(C)(5) above.
      (2)   A property owner who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor as defined by state law and § 130.99 of this code and shall be
subject to the penalties thereof.
(Ord. 2016-21, passed 10-28-2016)
§ 130.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor under
the state statutes. In addition, the city may enforce this section by
injunctive action or other appropriate civil remedy. Exception, noise
violations constitutes a petty misdemeanor, and upon conviction, a fine not to
exceed $100.
   (B)   (1)   A violation of §
130.09(C) of this chapter is a misdemeanor and may be punished as provided by
law. The city is authorized to enforce the provisions of §
130.09(C) of this chapter.
      (2)   Violation of §
130.09(D)(1), (D)(3), (D)(4) or (D)(5) of this chapter is punishable as a petty
misdemeanor. Upon a third or subsequent violation of §
130.09(D)(1), (D)(3), (D)(4) or (D)(5) of this chapter by the same owner, the
violation is punishable as a misdemeanor. Violation of §
130.09(D)(6) of this chapter is punishable as a misdemeanor.
   (C)   All drug paraphernalia, as defined in §
130.17 of this chapter, are subject to forfeiture, subject to the provisions
set forth in state statutes.
(Ord. 2009-13, passed 7-14-2009; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-25-2015)
CHAPTER 131:  WEAPONS
Section
   
131.01   Definition
   
131.02   Prohibited acts
§ 131.01  DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS WEAPON. Includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Archery bows, arrows, and crossbows.
      (2)   Firearms. Firearms include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Any device from which may be fired or ejected one or more solid
projectiles by means of cartridge or shell or by the action of an explosive
substance, or for which the propelling force is a spring, elastic band, carbon
dioxide, air or other gas or vapor.
         (b)   Rifles, shotguns, muzzleloaders, and pistols.
         (c)   All firearms, whether loaded or unloaded.
         (d)   All instruments used to expel by means of explosives, gas or
compressed air, springs or elastic materials, a hard, solid missile or
projectile, or bullet or pellet of any kind, including, but not limited to, B-
B guns, sling shots, paint ball and air rifles.
         (e)   Any similar type of instrument, whether such instrument is
called by any name set forth herein or any other name.
      (3)   High powered firearms, including, but not limited to, any gun from
which a shot or projectile other than a shot shell or shotgun slug is
discharged by means of explosive gas or compressed air.
(Ord. 2009-11, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 131.02  PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   Intent. The intent of this section is to prohibit the discharge of
firearms within close proximity of buildings occupied by humans or livestock in
the spirit of providing for public safety. In instances where hunting on public
lands or waters are impacted by this chapter, a landowner can give permission
for the discharge of firearms closer than 1,000 feet, but not less than the
distance mandated by Department of Natural Resources regulations, of a building
occupied by humans or livestock, but cannot solely control that section of
public land or water for their exclusive use. In such circumstances, the area
will be determined as open to all permitted hunters or closed, by the Chief of
Police.
   (B)   Prohibited acts. The following actions are prohibited within the
corporate limits of the City of Dayton:
      (1)   The discharge or use of a firearm within 500 feet of a building
occupied by humans or livestock without the written permission of the owner,
occupant, or lessee with the exception of all natural bodies of water
including, but limited to, Diamond Lake, Lake Laura, French Lake, Dubay Lake,
Grass Lake, unnamed lake on No. Diamond Lake Road, Powers Lake, and Goose Lake
and that would remain at 1,000 feet.
      (2)   The discharge or use of an archery bow and arrow(s) or crossbow and
all instruments used to expel by means of explosives, gas or compressed air,
springs or elastic materials, a hard, solid missile or projectile, or bullet or
pellet of any kind, including, but not limited to, B-B guns, sling shots, paint
ball and air rifles within 300 feet of a building occupied by humans or
livestock without the written permission of the owner, occupant, or lessee.
      (3)   The reckless handling or use of a dangerous weapon so as to
endanger the safety of another.
      (3)   The aiming of any dangerous weapon, whether loaded or not, at or
toward any human being.
      (4)   The discharge of any dangerous weapon upon, over, or across any
public road or while within the limits of any public road or railroad right-of-
way.
   (C)   Exceptions; lawful defense and law enforcement. The provisions of this
subdivision shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any police or peace officer, sheriff, or any officer of the United
States or the State of Minnesota or any of its counties who may discharge a
firearm or gun in the city in the course and scope of his or her duties.
      (2)   The discharge of any dangerous weapon in the lawful defense of
person or property.
      (3)   A landowner or a member of a landowner's immediate family may use a
firearm for the purpose of protecting livestock from an unprotected predator,
destroying nuisance raccoons, and nuisance unprotected birds and animals within
rural areas.
      (4)   The use of bows and discharge of arrows on official city or county
designated archery ranges.
      (5)   Minors attending a firearms safety program under the direction of
the Commissioner of Natural Resources undertaken with the permission of the
minor's parent or guardian.
(Ord. 2009-11, passed 10-13-2009)
TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
      
152.   RIGHT-OF-WAY MAINTENANCE
      
153.   PUBLIC PROPERTY; IMPROVEMENTS AND EXCAVATIONS
      
154.   UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
      
155.   MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOMES
      
156.   LAND SALES
      
157.   SWIMMING POOLS
      
158.   SUBDIVISIONS AND ZONING
CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
   
150.01   Building Code
   
150.02   Codes adopted by reference
   
150.03   Application, administration and enforcement
   
150.04   Permit and fees
   
150.05   Fire zones
   
150.06   Landscaping
   
150.07   Driveways
   
150.08   Plumbing permits
   
150.09   Heating, ventilation and air-conditioning permits
   
150.10   Fence permits
   
150.11   Siding or window replacement permits
   
150.12   Roofing permits
   
150.13   Stop work orders
   
150.14   Certificates of occupancy
   
150.15   Violations
 
   
150.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Building permit fees
§ 150.01  BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   This chapter provides for the application, administration and
enforcement of the State Building Code by regulating the erection,
construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition,
conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all
buildings and/or structures in the city; provides for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees thereof; provides penalties for violation thereof;
repeals all ordinances and parts of ordinances that conflict therewith. This
chapter shall perpetually include the most current edition of the State
Building Code, with the exception of the optional appendix chapters. Optional
appendix chapters shall not apply unless specifically adopted.
   (B)   (1)   The State Building Code, established pursuant to M.S. §§
326B.101 to 326B.194, as they may be amended from time to time, allows the city
to adopt by reference and enforce certain optional chapters of the most current
edition of the State Building Code.
      (2)   The following optional provisions identified in the most current
edition of the State Building Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as part
of the Building Code for the city: Ch. 1335, Floodproofing Regulations, parts
1335.0600 to 1335.1200.
(Ord. 2003-14, passed 10-28-2003)
§ 150.02  CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The State Building Code as adopted by the Commissioner of the Administration
pursuant to M.S. §§ 326B.101 to 326B.194, as they may be amended from time to
time, rules and regulations established, adopted and published from time to
time by the State Commissioner of Administration, through the Building Codes
and Standards Division, is hereby adopted by reference with the exception of
the optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this chapter. The State
Building Code is hereby incorporated in this chapter as if fully set out
herein.
(Ord. 2003-14, passed 10-28-2003)
§ 150.03  APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The application, administration and enforcement of the Code shall be
in accordance with the State Building Code. The Code shall be enforced within
the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S. § 326B.121, as it may be amended
from time to time, when so established by this chapter.
   (B)   The code enforcement agency of the city is called the “Building
Official”.
   (C)   This Code shall be enforced by the state-certified Building Official
designated by the city to administer the Code (M.S. § 326B.133, as it may be
amended from time to time).
(Ord. 2003-14, passed 10-28-2003)
§ 150.04  PERMITS AND FEES.
   (A)   Permits. The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be
as authorized in M.S. § 326B.121, as it may be amended from time to time. The
building permit fee schedule as set forth in the Building Permit Fee Schedule -
1997, found in Appendix A of this chapter, is hereby adopted for all permit
fees which are based on project valuation. Building permit fees which are not
based on valuation shall be as set forth by the City Council and revised from
time to time.
   (B)   Permit fees. Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this
Code in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the city and amended from
time to time. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits
issued for work governed by this Code in accordance with M.S. § 326B.148, as it
may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   Additional costs. Beyond the typical costs associated with permit
review and inspection by the contract building inspection firm, the permit fee
does not include the cost of any outside expenses the city may incur related to
the review, inspection or enforcement of the permit, such as those for soil
test, planning, legal or engineering consultants. The owner or agent shall make
payment for all such expenses when billed therefor by the city.
   (D)   Work without permit. Should any person begin work of any kind such as
hereinafter set forth or for which a permit from the city is required by the
Building Code without having first secured the necessary permit from the city
for so doing, that person shall be subject to a special investigation and fees.
   (E)   Building and construction valuation. Building valuation, for the
purpose of establishing building permit fees, shall be as adopted by the City
Council resolution and may be amended from time to time. Valuation for
alterations, repairs or extensions shall be determined by the Building
Inspector based on the Building Inspector’s estimate of the materials, cost and
the labor cost to put the construction in place.
   (F)   Approval, notice and building permit fee. Once the application has
been approved by the city, the city shall notify the applicant that he or she
has 30 days from the date of the notice to claim the building permit and to pay
the total building permit fee due to the city.
   (G)   Expiration and extensions of permits. Expiration of permits shall be
in accordance with the State Building Code unless otherwise specified. If the
work for which a permit was issued does not commence within 180 days or if the
work is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days, the permit shall be
considered void and invalid. The Building Official may grant, in writing,
extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be
requested in writing prior to the expiration of the permit and justifiable
cause demonstrated. The decision of the Building Official may be appealed to
the City Council.
(Ord. 2003-14, passed 10-28-2003; Ord. 2003-15, passed 10-28-2003)  Penalty,
see §
150.99
§ 150.05  FIRE ZONES.
   (A)   Fire Zone Three. The entire city shall constitute Fire Zone Three.
   (B)   Definition. When reference is made in the State Building Code to a
“fire zone”, it means the fire zone of the same number as delineated by this
section.
(Ord. 2003-14, passed 10-28-2003)
§ 150.06  LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Each applicant for a new residential dwelling permit shall:
      (1)   At his, her or their expense, within one year of the date of
issuance of said permit, and in accordance with the State Department of
Transportation 1998 Standards and Specifications, §§ 2571 and 2575, plant at
least:
         (a)   Six hundred square yards of either:
            1.   Sod with four inches of topsoil; or
            2.   Lawn seed and mulch with four inches of top soil, in the front
yard immediately adjacent to the house on the lot.
         (b)   Two trees, of not less than two inches in diameter on each lot,
in the front yard, but not within any public right-of-way or other easements.
      (2)   Place an amount to be determined by resolution of the City Council
in escrow with the City Clerk to be returned upon demonstration of the
compliance with this section.
   (B)   In the event an applicant fails to comply with this section within one
year of issuance of a building permit, the city, after notifying the applicant
of such intent, shall undertake the planting as described above and deduct the
costs thereof, including administration costs, from the escrow deposit.
(Ord. 2003-14, passed 10-28-2003)  Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.07  DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   All driveways. All driveways shall conform to the requirements of the
separately published § 1001.12, Subd. 4(11), regarding access driveways,
including, but not limited to, requirements regarding quantity, timing,
materials and permits.
   (B)   Driveways over 150 feet long. All dwellings lots with a proposed
primary structure setback in excess of 150 feet shall provide an access
driveway in compliance with this Code, and said driveway shall be installed,
inspected and approved prior to the first inspection done under the building
permit issued under this section.
(Ord. 2003-14, passed 10-28-2003)  Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.08  PLUMBING PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall construct, extend, alter or repair
any plumbing work (except that governed by the city’s On-Site Treatment Code)
within the city, unless it is in compliance with the State Building Code,
adopted herein, and after application for the issuance of a building permit.
   (B)   Application. Application for a plumbing permit shall be made on forms
provided by the city.
   (C)   Fees. The fees for plumbing permits shall be set by Council resolution
and amended from time to time. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected
on all permits issued for work governed by this Code in accordance with M.S. §
326B.148, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2003-14, passed 10-28-2003)  Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.09  HEATING, VENTILATION AND AIR-CONDITIONING PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required. No person, firm or corporation shall construct,
extend, alter or repair any heating, ventilation or air-conditioning system
within the city unless in compliance with the relevant parts of the State
Building Code adopted herein and after application for an issuance of a heating
ventilation or air-conditioning permit.
   (B)   Application. Application for a heating, ventilation or air-
conditioning permit shall be made on forms provided by the city.
   (C)   Fees. The fees for heating, ventilation or air-conditioning permits
shall be set by Council resolution. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be
collected on all permits issued for work governed by this Code in accordance
with M.S. § 326B.148, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2003-14, passed 10-28-2003)  Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.10  FENCE PERMITS.
   (A)   Permits required. Fence permits are required prior to the erection of
any fence within the city.
   (B)   Fees. The fees for fence permits shall be set by Council resolution.
In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work
governed by this Code in accordance with M.S. § 326B.148, as it may be amended
from time to time.
(Ord. 2003-14, passed 10-28-2003)  Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.11  SIDING OR WINDOW REPLACEMENT PERMITS.
   (A)   Permits required. Siding or window replacement permits are required
prior to the replacement of siding or windows within the city.
   (B)   Fees. The fees for siding or window replacement permits shall be set
by Council resolution. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all
permits issued for work governed by this Code in accordance with M.S. §
326B.148, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2003-14, passed 10-28-2003)  Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.12  ROOFING PERMITS.
   (A)   Permits required. Roofing permits are required prior to the reroofing
of any buildings within the city when shingles or roofing materials are being
torn off and replaced. Roofing permits are not required prior to addition of a
new layer of shingles.
   (B)   Fees. The fees for reroofing permits shall be set by Council
resolution. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits
issued for work governed by this Code in accordance with M.S. § 326B.148, as it
may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2003-14, passed 10-28-2003)  Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.13  STOP WORK ORDERS.
   Whenever any building work is being done contrary to the provisions of the
Building Code, the Building Official may order the work stopped by notice, in
writing, posted at the work site and/or served on any persons engaged in doing
or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such
work until authorized by the Building Inspector to proceed with the work.
(Ord. 2003-14, passed 10-28-2003)  Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.14  CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Upon satisfactory completion of work on a new residential or
commercial building and upon final approval by the Building Official, a
certificate of occupancy shall be granted.
   (B)   The exterior of any building shall be completed prior to occupancy of
that building, and prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 2003-14, passed 10-28-2003)
§ 150.15  VIOLATIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person firm or corporation to erect, construct,
extend, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use,
occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, except in an
agricultural building, or cause the same to be done contrary to or in violation
of any provision of this chapter or the codes adopted by reference in this
chapter.
(Ord. 2003-14, passed 10-28-2003)  Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person(s), firm or corporation, which shall violate any provision
of this chapter and/or the State Building Code, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (B)   Each day any such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense, unless otherwise specifically provided.
(Ord. 2003-14, passed 10-28-2003)
APPENDIX A:  BUILDING PERMIT FEES
To view Appendix A in PDF, click APPENDIX_A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1120.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1122.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1124.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1126.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1128.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1130.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1132.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1134.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1136.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1138.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1140.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1142.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1144.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1146.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1148.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1150.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1152.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1154.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1156.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1158.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f675afa363b2554a36543315115be56af9251478/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1160.png]
 
CHAPTER 151:  STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section
   
151.01   Intent
   
151.02   Statutory authorization
   
151.03   Findings
   
151.04   Purpose
   
151.05   Definitions
   
151.06   Scope and effect
   
151.07   Storm water pollution prevention plan submittal procedures
   
151.08   Storm water pollution prevention plan review process
   
151.09   Minimum construction site best management practices
   
151.10   Completion of work
   
151.11   Enforcement procedures
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01  INTENT.
   The intent of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the city by requiring storm water management
practices for construction activity.
(Ord. 2005-04, passed 3-22-2005)
§ 151.02  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to M.S.§ 462.351 (for cities and towns), as
it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2005-04, passed 3-22-2005)
§ 151.03  FINDINGS.
   The city hereby finds that uncontrolled land disturbing activity at
construction sites are subject to soil erosion and other pollutants which enter
into receiving water bodies adversely affecting the public health, safety and
general welfare by impacting water quality, creating nuisances, impairing other
beneficial uses of environmental resources and hindering the ability of the
city to provide adequate water, sewage, flood control and other community
services.
(Ord. 2005-04, passed 3-22-2005)
§ 151.04  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote, preserve and enhance the natural
resources within the city and protect them from adverse effects occasioned by
poorly sited development or incompatible activities by regulating land
disturbing activities that would have an adverse and potentially irreversible
impact on water quality and environmentally sensitive land; by minimizing
conflicts and encouraging proper installation and maintenance of best
management practices (BMPs) for land disturbing activities; and by requiring
detailed review standards and procedures for land disturbing activities
proposed for such areas, thereby achieving a balance between development,
redevelopment and protection of water quality and natural areas.
(Ord. 2005-04, passed 3-22-2005)
§ 151.05  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number and words
in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always
mandatory and not merely directive.
   APPLICANT. Any person who wishes to obtain a building permit, zoning or
subdivision approval.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP). Erosion and sediment control and water
quality management practices that are the most effective and practicable means
of controlling, preventing and minimizing the degradation of surface water,
including construction-phasing, minimizing the length of time soil areas are
exposed, prohibitions and other management practices published by state or
designated area-wide planning agencies.
   DETENTION FACILITY. A permanent natural or human-made structure, including
wetlands, for the temporary storage of runoff which contains a permanent pool
of water.
   DISCHARGE. The release, conveyance, channeling, runoff or drainage of storm
water, including snowmelt, from a construction site.
   EXPOSED SOIL AREAS. All areas of the construction site where the vegetation
(trees, shrubs, brush, grasses and the like) or impervious surface has been
removed, thus rendering the soil more prone to erosion. This includes topsoil
stockpile areas, borrow areas and disposal areas within the construction site.
It does not include stockpiles or surcharge areas of gravel, concrete or
bituminous. Once soil is exposed, it is considered EXPOSED SOIL until it meets
the definition of “final stabilization”.
   FINAL STABILIZATION. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been
completed, and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of 75%
of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures
has been established or equivalent permanent stabilization measures have been
employed. Simply sowing grass is not considered FINAL STABILIZATION.
   LAND DISTURBING OR DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES. Any change of the land surface
including removing vegetative cover, excavating, filling, grading and the
construction of any structure.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, franchise,
association or governmental entity.
   PUBLIC WATERS. Waters of the state, as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, Subd. 15,
as it may be amended from time to time.
   RETENTION FACILITY. A permanent natural or human-made structure that
provides for the storage of storm water runoff by means of a permanent pool of
water.
   SEDIMENT. Solid matter carried by water, sewage or other liquids.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A joint storm water and
erosion and sediment control plan that is a document containing the
requirements of this chapter, that when implemented will decrease soil erosion
on a parcel of land and off-site non-point pollution.
   STRUCTURE. Anything manufactured, constructed or erected which is normally
attached to or positioned on land, including portable structures, earthen
structures, roads, parking lots, paved storage areas, fences and retaining
walls.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. As defined in M.S. § 115.01, Subd. 22, as it may be
amended from time to time, the term “... “waters of the state” means all
streams, lakes, ponds, marches, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs,
reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies
or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial,
public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the
state or any portion thereof”.
   WETLANDS. Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where
the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by
shallow water. For purposes of this definition, WETLANDS must have the
following three attributes:
      (1)   Have a predominance of hydric soils;
      (2)   Are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and
      (3)   Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such vegetation.
(Ord. 2005-04, passed 3-22-2005)
§ 151.06  SCOPE AND EFFECT.
   (A)   Applicability. Every applicant for a building permit, subdivision
approval or a permit to allow land disturbing activities where the area to be
disturbed is greater than or equal to one acre or part of a larger common plan
or development greater or equal to one acre must submit a storm water pollution
prevention plan to the Zoning Administrator. No building permit, subdivision
approval or permit to allow land disturbing activities shall be issued until
approval of the storm water pollution prevention plan or a waiver of the
approval requirement has been obtained in strict conformance with the
provisions of this chapter. The provisions of division (B) below apply to all
land, public or private.
   (B)   Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:
      (1)   Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been
approved by the City Council on or before the effective date of this chapter;
      (2)   A lot for which a building permit has been approved on or before
the effective date of this chapter;
      (3)   Installation of fence, sign, telephone and electric poles and other
kinds of posts or poles;
      (4)   Emergency work to protect life, limb or property; or
      (5)   Tilling, planting or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural or
silvicultural (forestry) crops.
(Ord. 2005-04, passed 3-22-2005)
§ 151.07  STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN SUBMITTAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application.
      (1)   A written application for storm water pollution prevention plan
approval, along with the proposed storm water pollution prevention plan, shall
be filed with the city and shall include a statement indicating the grounds
upon which the approval is requested, that the proposed use permitted by right
or as an exception in the underlying zoning district, and adequate evidence
showing that the proposed use will conform to the standards set forth in this
chapter. Prior to applying for approval of a storm water pollution prevention
plan, an applicant may have the storm water pollution prevention plan reviewed
by the appropriate departments of the city.
      (2)   Two sets of clearly legible blue or black lined copies of drawings
and required information shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator and
shall be accompanied by a receipt from the City Clerk evidencing the payment of
all required fees for processing and/or financial securities in accordance with
the city. Drawings shall be prepared to a scale appropriate to the site of the
project and suitable for the review to be performed. At a minimum, the scale
shall be one inch equals 100 feet.
   (B)   Storm water pollution prevention plan. At a minimum, the storm water
pollution prevention plan shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Existing site map. A map of existing site conditions showing the
site and immediately adjacent areas, including:
         (a)   The name and address of the applicant, the section, township and
range, north point, date and scale of drawing and number of sheets;
         (b)   Location of the tract by an insert map at a scale sufficient to
clearly identify the location of the property and giving such information as
the names and numbers of adjoining roads, railroads, utilities, subdivision,
towns and districts or other landmarks;
         (c)   Existing topography with a contour interval appropriate to the
topography of the land, but in no case having a contour interval greater than
two feet;
         (d)   A delineation of all streams, rivers, public waters and wetlands
located on and immediately adjacent to the site, including depth of water, a
description of all vegetation which may be found in the water, a statement of
general water quality. The classification given to the water body or wetland
shall be consistent with the State Department of Natural Resources, the State
Pollution Control Agency and/or the United States Army Corps of Engineers;
         (e)   Location and dimensions of existing storm water drainage systems
and natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the site
delineating in which direction and at what rate storm water is conveyed from
the site, identifying the receiving stream, river, public water or wetland, and
setting forth those areas of the unaltered site where storm water collects;
         (f)   A description of the soils of the site, including a map
indicating soil types of areas to be disturbed as well as a soil report
containing information on the suitability of the soils for the type of
development proposed and for the type of sewage disposal proposed and
describing any remedial steps to be taken by the applicant to render the soils
suitable;
         (g)   Vegetative cover and clearly delineating any vegetation proposed
for removal; and
         (h)   One hundred year floodplain, flood fringes and floodways.
      (2)   Site construction plan. A site construction plan including:
         (a)   Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing
activities;
         (b)   Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt
stockpiles;
         (c)   Locations and dimensions of all construction site erosion
control measures and best management practices (BMPs) necessary to meet the
minimum BMP requirements listed in §
151.09 of this chapter; and
         (d)   Schedule of anticipated starting and completion date of each
land disturbing activity, including the installation of construction site
erosion control measures needed to meet the requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   Plan of final site conditions. A plan of final site conditions on
the same scale as the existing site map showing the site changes including:
         (a)   Finished grading shown at contours at the same interval as
provided above or as required to clearly indicate the relationship of proposed
changes to existing topography and remaining features;
         (b)   A landscape plan, drawn to an appropriate scale, including
dimensions and distances and the location, type, size and description of all
proposed landscape materials which will be added to the site as part of the
development;
         (c)   A drainage plan of the developed site delineating in which
direction and at what rate storm water will be conveyed from the site and
setting forth the areas of the site where storm water will be allowed to
collect;
         (d)   The proposed size, alignments and intended use of any structures
to be erected on the site;
         (e)   A clear delineation and tabulation of all areas which shall be
paved or surfaced, including a description of the surfacing material to be
used; and
         (f)   Any other information pertinent to the particular project which,
in the opinion of the applicant, is necessary for the review of the project.
      (4)   MPCA permit. Copy of MPCA permit number for discharging storm water
from construction activity (MN Rl 00001).
(Ord. 2005-04, passed 3-22-2005)
§ 151.08  STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   Process. Storm water pollution prevention plans meeting the
requirements of §
151.07 of this chapter and minimum BMP requirements of §
151.09 of this chapter will be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator or
designated representative which may approve, approve with conditions or deny
the storm water pollution prevention plan. If the storm water pollution
prevention plan is part of a large subdivision, the city may require the SWPPP
be reviewed by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may approve,
approve with conditions or deny the storm water pollution prevention plan.
Following Planning Commission action, the storm water pollution prevention plan
shall be submitted to the City Council at its next available meeting. City
Council action on the storm water pollution prevention plan must be
accomplished within 120 days following the date the application for approval is
filed with the city.
   (B)   Duration. Approval of a plan submitted under the provisions of this
chapter shall expire one year after the date of approval unless construction
has commenced in accordance with the plan. However, if prior to the expiration
of the approval, the applicant makes a written request to the city for an
extension of time to commence construction setting forth the reason for the
requested extension, the Planning Department may grant one extension of not
greater than one single year. Receipt of any request for an extension shall be
acknowledged by the city within 15 days. The city shall make a decision on the
extension within 30 days of receipt. Any plan may be revised in the same manner
as originally approved.
   (C)   Condition. A storm water pollution prevention plan may be approved
subject to compliance with conditions reasonable and necessary to ensure that
the requirements contained in this chapter are met. Such conditions may, among
other matters, limit the size, kind or character of the proposed development,
require replacement of vegetation, establish required monitoring procedures,
stage the work over time or require alteration of the site design to ensure
buffering.
   (D)   Financial security.
      (1)   Prior to approval of any storm water pollution prevention plan, the
applicant shall submit a financial security in the amount specified by the
current city fee and security structure. The securities shall guarantee
completion and compliance with conditions within a specific time, which time
may be extended in accordance with division (B) above.
      (2)   The adequacy, conditions and acceptability of any financial
security shall be determined by the City Council or any official of the city as
may be designated by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 2005-04, passed 3-22-2005)
§ 151.09  MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION SITE BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   (A)   General. No storm water pollution prevention plan which fails to meet
the standards contained in this section shall be approved by the City Council
or designated representative.
   (B)   Site dewatering. Water pumped from the site shall be treated by
temporary sedimentation basins, grit chambers, sand filters, upflow chambers,
hydrocyclones, swirl concentrators or other appropriate controls as
appropriate. Water may not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion, scour
or flooding of the site or receiving channels or a wetland.
   (C)   Construction site waste.
      (1)   Solid waste. Collected sediment, asphalt and concrete millings,
floating debris, paper, plastic, fabric, construction and demolition debris and
other wastes must be disposed of properly and must comply with MPCA disposal
requirements.
      (2)   Hazardous materials. Oil, gasoline, paint and any hazardous
substances must be properly stored, including secondary containment, to prevent
spill, leaks or other discharge. Restricted access to storage areas must be
provided to prevent vandalism. Storage and disposal of hazardous waste must be
in compliance with MPCA regulations.
      (3)   Liquid waste. All other non-storm water discharges (concrete truck
washout, vehicle washing, maintenance spills and the like) conducted during the
construction activity shall not be discharged to the municipal storm sewer,
wetlands, natural drainageways or waters of the state.
   (D)   Tracking. Vehicle tracking of sediment onto paved surfaces must be
removed by street sweeping as needed to prevent discharge of sediment laden
water from entering the city storm sewer system.
   (E)   Drain inlet protection. All storm drain inlets shall be protected
during construction until final establishment has been accomplished or until
approval from the city.
   (F)   Site erosion control. The following criteria (divisions (F)(1) through
(F)(4) below) apply only to construction activities that result in storm water
leaving the site.
      (1)   Channelized runoff from adjacent areas passing through the site
shall be diverted around disturbed areas, if practical. Otherwise, the channel
shall be protected as described below. Sheetflow runoff from adjacent areas
greater than 10,000 square feet in area shall also be diverted around disturbed
areas, unless shown to have resulted in runoff rates of less than one-half foot
per second across the disturbed area for the one-year storage. Diverted runoff
shall be conveyed in a manner that will not cause erosion, scour or flooding of
the conveyance at receiving channels.
      (2)   All activities on the site shall be conducted in a logical sequence
to minimize the area of bare soil exposed at any one time.
      (3)   Runoff from the entire disturbed area on the site shall be
controlled by meeting either divisions (F)(3)(a) and (F)(3)(b) or (F)(3)(a) and
(F)(3)(c) below.
         (a)   All exposed soil areas with a continuous positive slope within
200 lineal feet of a surface water must have temporary erosion protection or
permanent cover for the exposed soil areas year round, according to the
following table of slopes and time frames:
 
Type of Slope     Time
Steeper than 3:1  7 days
10:1 to 3:1       14 days
Flatter than 10:1 21 days
 
         (b)   For sites with more than ten acres disturbed at one time, or if
a channel originates in the disturbed area, one or more temporary or permanent
sedimentation basin shall be constructed. Each sedimentation basin shall have a
surface area of at least 1% of the area draining to the basin and at least
three feet of depth and constructed in accordance with accepted design
specifications. Sediment shall be removed to maintain a depth of three feet.
The basin discharge rate shall also be sufficiently low as to not cause
erosion, scour or flooding along the discharge channel or the receiving water.
         (c)   For sites with less than ten acres disturbed at one time, silt
fences or equivalent control measures shall be placed along all side slopes and
down slope sides of the site. If a channel or area of concentrated runoff
passes through the site, silt fences shall be placed along the channel edges to
reduce sediment reaching the channel. The use of silt fences or equivalent
control measures must include a maintenance and inspection schedule.
      (4)   Any soil or dirt storage piles containing more than ten cubic yards
of material should not be located with a downslide drainage length of less than
25 feet from the toe of the pile to a roadway or drainage channel. If remaining
for more than seven days, they shall be stabilized by mulching vegetative
cover, tarps or other means. Erosion from piles which will be in existence for
less than seven days shall be controlled by placing straw bales or silt fence
barriers around the pile. In-street utility repair or construction soil or dirt
storage piles located closer than 25 feet of a roadway or drainage channel must
be covered with tarps or suitable alternative control, if exposed for more than
seven days, the storm drain inlets must be protected with an appropriate
filtering barrier.
   (G)   Inspection and maintenance. All storm water management BMPs shall be
inspected weekly or after every one-half inch rain event by the applicant. If
sediment has reached one-third the capacity of the sediment control practice,
appropriate maintenance or replacement of the BMP must be completed to ensure
maximum effectiveness.
(Ord. 2005-04, passed 3-22-2005)
§ 151.10  COMPLETION OF WORK.
   Work will be considered complete when all exposed soil areas have undergone
final stabilization, as defined in §
151.05 of this chapter, is constructed to finish grade and is in conformance
with all permit conditions of approval to the satisfaction of the city. The
applicant or representative shall notify the city when the land disturbing
operations are ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not be given
until all work, including installation of all drainage facilities and their
protective devices, and all erosion control measures, have been completed and
final stabilization has occurred in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2005-04, passed 3-22-2005)
§ 151.11  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Right of entry. The applicant shall promptly allow the city and its
authorized representatives, upon presentation of credentials to:
      (1)   Enter upon the permitted site for the purpose of obtaining
information, examination of records, conducting investigations, inspections or
surveys;
      (2)   Bring such equipment upon the permitted site as is necessary to
conduct such surveys and investigations;
      (3)   Examine and copy any books, papers, records or memoranda pertaining
to activities or records required to be kept under the terms and conditions of
this permitted site;
      (4)   Inspect the storm water pollution control measures;
      (5)   Sample and monitor any items or activities pertaining to storm
water pollution control measures; and
      (6)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to the safe and easy access
of such an inspection shall be promptly removed upon the inspector’s request.
The cost of providing such access shall be borne by the applicant.
   (B)   Warning letter. If, upon inspection by the city or designated
representative, the applicant fails to implement the erosion and sediment
control practices outlined in the approved storm water pollution prevention
plan or minimum BMP standards outlined in §
151.05 of this chapter, the city will notify the applicant with a letter of
warning which outlines the issues of non-compliance and a timeline for
completion of any work to bring the site into compliance.
   (C)   Action against the financial security. If appropriate actions by the
applicant have not been completed within seven days after notification by the
city, the city may act against the financial security if any of the conditions
listed below exist. The city shall use funds from this security to finance any
corrective or remedial work undertaken by the city or a contractor under
contract to the city and to reimburse the city for all direct cost incurred in
the process of remedial work including, but not limited to, staff time and
attorney’s fees:
      (1)   The applicant ceases land disturbing activities and/or filling and
abandons the work site prior to completion of the city-approved grading plan;
      (2)   The applicant fails to conform to any city approved grading plan
and/or the storm water pollution control plan as approved by the city, or
related supplementary instructions;
      (3)   The techniques utilized under the storm water pollution control
plan fail within one year of installation;
      (4)   The applicant fails to reimburse the city for corrective action
taken; and
      (5)   Emergency action under division (D) below.
   (D)   Emergency action. If circumstances exist such that non-compliance with
this chapter poses an immediate danger to the public health, safety and
welfare, as determined by the City Engineer, the city may take emergency
preventative action. The city shall also take every reasonable action possible
to contact and direct the applicant to take any necessary action. Any cost to
the city may be recovered from the applicant’s financial security.
(Ord. 2005-04, passed 3-22-2005)
§ 151.99  PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $5, nor more than $500, for each offense and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2005-04, passed 3-22-2005)
CHAPTER 152:  RIGHT-OF-WAY MAINTENANCE
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Purpose
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   Applicability
   
152.04   Administration
   
152.05   Registration, bonding and right-of-way occupancy
   
152.06   Right to occupy rights-of-way; payment of fees
   
152.07   Franchise; franchise supremacy
   
152.08   Registration information
   
152.09   Reporting obligations
   
152.10   Reservation of regulatory and police powers
   
152.11   Severability
   
152.12   Non-exclusive remedy
Permits and Conditions
   
152.25   Permit required
   
152.26   Permit applications
   
152.27   Issuance of permit; conditions
   
152.28   Permit fees
   
152.29   Right-of-way restoration
   
152.30   Joint applications
   
152.31   Supplementary actions
   
152.32   Other obligations
   
152.33   Denial of permit
   
152.34   Installation requirements
   
152.35   Inspections
   
152.36   Work done without a permit
   
152.37   Supplementary notification
   
152.38   Revocation of permits
   
152.39   Appeals
   
152.40   Mapping data
Equipment and Use Restrictions
   
152.55   Locations of equipment
   
152.56   Relocation of equipment
   
152.57   Pre-excavation equipment location
   
152.58   Damage to other equipment
   
152.59   Right-of-way vacation
   
152.60   Indemnification and liability
   
152.61   Future uses
   
152.62   Abandoned and unusable facilities and equipment
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01  PURPOSE.
    A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the city:
      (1)   To manage its public rights-of-way and to recover its rights-of-way
management costs; and
      (2)   To regulate the use of public rights-of-way by providers of
telecommunication services, public utility services and the like, in a fair,
efficient, competitively neutral and substantially uniform manner, consistent
with and to the extent authorized by state law, specifically M.S. §§ 237.162,
237.163, 237.79, 237.81 and 238.086, as they may be amended from time to time,
and State Public Utility Commission Rules 7819.0050 through 7819.9950 where
possible.
   (B)   To the extent any provisions of this chapter cannot be interpreted
consistently with the state’s statutes and Public Utility Commission Rules,
that interpretation most consistent with state statutes, rules, and other
applicable statutory and case law is intended. This chapter shall not be
interpreted to limit the regulatory and police power of the city to adopt and
enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the public.
   (C)   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative and common law, the city hereby elects pursuant to
state statute to manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED FACILITY. A facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not abandoned
unless declared so by the right-of-way user or as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
   APPLICANT. Any person requesting permission to collocate, install, or place
a facility in a right- of-way or to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way.
   CITY. The City of Dayton and its duly appointed agents and representatives.
   CITY COST. The actual costs incurred by the city for managing rights-of-way
including, but not limited to, costs associated with utility fees; registering
of applicants; issuing, processing and verifying right-of-way permit
applications; revoking right-of-way permits; inspecting job sites; creating and
updating mapping systems; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration;
restoring work inadequately performed; maintaining, supporting, protecting or
moving user equipment during right-of-way work; budget analysis; record
keeping; legal assistance; systems analysis; and performing all of the other
tasks required by this chapter, including other costs the city may incur in
managing the provisions of this chapter, except as expressly prohibited by law.
   CITY INSPECTOR. Any person authorized by the city to carry out inspections
related to the provisions of this chapter.
   COLLOCATE. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a small
wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing wireless
support structure or utility pole that is owned privately or by the city or
other governmental unit.
   COMMISSION. The State Public Utilities Commission.
   CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY. A crowded condition in the subsurface of the public
right- of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing
underground facilities does not allow for construction of new underground
facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral facilities
in conformance with M.S. § 216D.04, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time, over a continuous length in excess of 500 feet.
   DEGRADATION. The accelerated depreciation of the right-of-way caused by
excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation
did not occur.
   DEGRADATION COST. Subject to State Public Utilities Commission Rule
7819.1100 means the cost to achieve a level of restoration as determined by the
city at the time the permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration
shown in plates 1 to 13, set forth in State Public Utilities Commission Rules
parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
   DEGRADATION FEE. The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by
the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of
the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation
cost.
   EMERGENCY. A condition that:
      (1)   Poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health, or of a
significant loss of property; or
      (2)   Requires immediate repair or replacement in order to restore
service to a customer.
   EQUIPMENT. Any tangible thing located in any right-of-way; but shall not
include boulevard plantings or gardens planted or maintained in the right-of-
way between a person’s property and the street curb.
   EXCAVATE. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An EXCAVATION PERMIT
allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such
permit.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by an applicant for an
excavation permit fee to cover the costs as provided in this chapter.
   FACILITY or FACILITIES. Any tangible asset in the right-of-way required to
provide utility service, including, but not limited to, any type of cables,
utility poles, wireless facilities, small wireless facilities, micro wireless
facilities, wireless support structures, and wireline blackhaul facilities.
   FIVE-YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next five years.
   HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR. A designated portion of the public right-of-way
within which right-of-way users having multiple and competing facilities may be
required to bill and install facilities in a common conduit system or other
common structure.
   HOLE. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length
less than the width of the pavement.
   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE. The person or persons, or designee of such person or
persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions for
that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is no larger than 24
inches long, 15 inches wide, and 12 inches high, and whose exterior antenna, if
any, is no longer than 11 inches.
   OBSTRUCT. To place any tangible object in the right-of-way so as to hinder
free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of a right-of-way by
placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way for the duration
specified.
   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by an applicant for an
obstruction permit to cover the costs as provided in this chapter.
   PATCH or PATCHING.
      (1)   A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in nature. A
PATCH consists of:
         (a)   The compaction of the sub base and aggregate base; and
         (b)   The replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum
of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions.
      (2)   A PATCH is considered full restoration only when the pavement is
included in the city’s five-year project plan.
   PAVEMENT. Any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-
way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete,
aggregate or gravel.
   PERFORMANCE AND RESTORATION BOND. Any of the following forms of security:
      (1)   Individual project bond;
      (2)   Cash deposit;
      (3)   Security in a form as listed or approved under M.S. § 15.73, Subd.
3, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   Letter of credit in a form acceptable to the city;
      (5)   Self insurance in a form acceptable to the city; or
      (6)   Blanket bond for projects within the city or other form of
construction bond for time specified in a form acceptable to the city.
   PERMIT. Has the meaning given “right-of-way permit” in M.S. § 237.162, as it
may be amended from time to time.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-
way, or to install or place a facility in the right-of-way,  has been granted
by the city under this chapter.
   PERSON. Any natural or corporate person, business association or other
business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any
kind, a utility, a successor or assignee of any of the foregoing, or any other
legal entity which has or seeks to have equipment located in any right-of-way.
   PROBATION. The status of a person that has not complied with the conditions
of this chapter.
   PROBATION PERIOD. One year from the date that a person has been notified in
writing that they have been put on probation.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, cartway, bicycle lane and public sidewalk in which the city has an
interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and
utility easements of the city. A RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include the airwaves
above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other non-wire
telecommunications or broadcast service.
   REGISTRANT. Any person who:
      (1)   Has or seeks to have its equipment located in any right-of-way; or
      (2)   In any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-
of-way or any equipment located in the right-of-way and, accordingly, is
required to register with the city.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT. Either the small wireless facility permit, excavation
permit, or the obstruction permit, or all three or any combination of the three
depending on the context, required by this chapter.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.
      (1)   A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by M.S. §
237.162, Subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time; or
      (2)   A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that
is used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a
right under law, franchise or ordinance to use the public right-of-way.
   RULES. Rule 7819.0050 through 7819.9950 adopted by the State Public Utility
Commission.
   SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE. Includes:
      (1)   Those services provided by a public utility as defined in M.S. §
216B.02, Subd. 4 and 6, as they may be amended from time to time;
      (2)   Services of a telecommunications right-of-way user, including
transporting of voice or data information;
      (3)   Services of cable communications systems as defined in M.S. Ch.
238, as it may be amended from time to time;
      (4)   Natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications services
provided by the city;
      (5)   Services provided by a cooperative electric association organized
under M.S. Ch. 308A, as it may be amended from time to time; and
      (6)   Water, sewer, steam, cooling and heating services.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (1)   A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications:
         (a)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six
cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
the antenna and all its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no
more than six cubic feet; and
         (b)   All other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless
facility, excluding electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications
demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding equipment, power
transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical cable runs for the
connection of power and other services, and any equipment concealed from public
view within or behind an existing structure or concealment, is in aggregate no
more than 28 cubic feet in volume; or
      (2)   A micro wireless facility.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter,
must be obtained before a person or entity may place a new small wireless
facility or wireless support structure in rights-of-way. A small wireless
facility permit allows the holder to place a small wireless facility or
wireless support structure in the right-of-way as described in such permit.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by an applicant
for a small wireless facility permit to cover the costs as provided in this
chapter.
   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION. An application made to excavate or obstruct more
of the right-of-way or to place more or different facilities in the right-of-
way, than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that has already been issued.
   TEMPORARY SURFACE. The compaction of sub base and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature, except when the placement is of pavement
included in the city’s two-year plan, in which case it is considered full
restoration.
   TRENCH. An excavation in the pavement, which the excavation having a length
equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.
      (1)   A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way, or
seeking to own or control the same, that is used or is intended to be used for
transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information.
      (2)   For purposes of this chapter, a cable communications system defined
and regulated under M.S. Ch. 238, as it may be amended from time to time;
telecommunications activities related to providing natural gas or electric
energy services; a public utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, as it may be
amended from time to time; a city, a municipal gas or power agency organized
under M.S. Ch. 453 and 453A, as they may be amended from time to time; or a
cooperative electric association organized under M.S. Ch. 308A, as it may be
amended from time to time, are not included in this definition for purposes of
this chapter. This definition shall be consistent with M.S. § 237.162, Subd. 4,
as it may be amended from time to time.
   TWO-YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction
within the next two years.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate
telecommunications or electric service.
   WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (1)   Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision of
wireless series between user equipment and a wireless service network,
including:
         (a)   Equipment associated with wireless service;
         (b)   A radio transceiver, antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable,
regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration; and
         (c)   A small wireless facility.
      (2)   Wireless facility does not include:
         (a)   Wireless support structures;
         (b)   Wireline blackhaul facilities; or
         (c)   Coaxial or fiber-optic cables (i) between utility poles or
wireless support structure, or (ii) that are not otherwise immediately adjacent
to or directly associated with a specific antenna.
   WIRELESS SERVICE. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum, including the use of wi-fi, whether at a fixed location or by means
of a mobile device, that is provided using wireless facilities. WIRELESS
SERVICE does not include services regulated under Title VI of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including a cable service under U. S.
C., Title 47, § 522, clause (6).
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURES. A new or existing structure in a public right-
of-way designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities,
as reasonably determined by a local government unit.
   WIRELINE BLACKHAUL FACILITY. A facility used to transport communications
data by wire from a wireless facility to a communications network.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.03  APPLICABILITY.
    This chapter shall apply to the entire jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.04  ADMINISTRATION.
    (A)   The city may designate a principal city official responsible or the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits and the ordinances
related thereto.
   (B)   The city may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.05  REGISTRATION, BONDING AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Each person which occupies, uses or seeks to occupy or use, the right-
of-way or any equipment located in the right-of-way, including by lease,
sublease or assignment, or who has, or seeks to have, equipment located in any
right-of-way must register with the city. Registration will consist of
providing application information to and as required by the city, paying a
registration fee and posting a performance and restoration bond.
   (B)   The performance and restoration bond required shall be in an amount
determined in the city’s sole discretion, sufficient to serve as security for
the full and complete performance of the obligations under this chapter,
including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the city pays or incurs because
of any failure to comply with this chapter or any other applicable laws,
regulations or standards. During periods of construction, repair or restoration
of rights-of-way or equipment in rights-of-way, the performance and restoration
bond shall be in an amount sufficient to cover 100% of the estimated cost of
such work, as documented by the person proposing to perform such work, or in
such lesser amount as may be determined by the city, taking into account the
amount of equipment in the right-of-way, the location and method of
installation of the equipment, the conflict or interference of such equipment
with the equipment of other persons and the purposes and policies of this
chapter. Sixty days after completion of the work, the performance and
restoration bond may be reduced in the sole determination of the city.
   (C)   No person shall construct, install, repair, remove, relocate or
perform any other work on, or use any equipment or any part thereof located in
any right-of-way without first being registered with the city.
   (D)   Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the provisions of
a city ordinance permitting persons to plant or maintain boulevard plantings or
gardens or in the area of right-of-way between their property and the street
curb. Persons planting or maintaining boulevard plantings or gardens shall not
be deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way, and shall not be required to
obtain any permits to satisfy any other requirements for planting or
maintaining such boulevard plantings or gardens under this chapter. However,
excavations deeper than 12 inches are subject to permit requirements. However,
nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the provisions of M.S. Ch.
216D, Gopher One Call Law, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.06  RIGHT TO OCCUPY RIGHTS-OF-WAY; PAYMENT OF FEES.
   (A)   Any person required to register under §
152.05 of this chapter, which occupies, uses or places its equipment in the
right-of-way, is hereby granted a right to do so if and only so long as it:
      (1)   Timely pays all fees as provided herein; and
      (2)   Complies with all other requirements of law.
   (B)   The grant of right is expressly conditioned on, and is subject to, the
police powers of the city, continuing compliance with all provisions of law now
or hereinafter enacted, including this chapter as it may be from time to time
amended and, further, is specifically subject to the obligation to obtain any
and all additional required authorizations, whether from the city or other body
or authority.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.07  FRANCHISE; FRANCHISE SUPREMACY.
    (A)   The city may, in addition to the requirements of this chapter,
require any person that has or seeks to have equipment located in any right-of-
way to obtain a franchise to the full extent permitted by law, now or
hereinafter enacted. The terms of any franchise which are in direct conflict
with any provisions of this chapter, whether granted prior or subsequent to
enactment to this chapter (excluding the city’s police powers which shall
always be reserved to the city), shall control and supersede the conflicting
terms of this chapter; provided, however, that, requirements relating to
insurance, bonds, penalties, security funds, letters of credit, indemnification
or any other security in favor of the city may be cumulative in the sole
determination of the city or unless otherwise negotiated by the city and the
franchise grantee. All other terms of this chapter shall be fully applicable to
all persons whether franchised or not.
   (B)   A wireless service provider may collocate small wireless facilities on
wireless support structures owned or controlled by the city and located within
the public roads or rights-of-way without being required to apply for or enter
into any individual license, franchise, or other agreement with the city or any
other person or entity, except for the small wireless facility permit required
by this chapter or the standard small wireless facility collocation agreement
under M.S. § 237.163, Subd. 3a(f), if the city elects to utilize such an
agreement.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.08  REGISTRATION INFORMATION.
   (A)   The information provided to the city at the time of registration shall
include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   The registrant’s name, Gopher State One Call registration
certificate number, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers;
      (2)    The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or
designee shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to
contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time
of registration;
      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
         (a)   Shall be on a form approved by the city;
         (b)   Shall verify that an insurance policy has been issued to the
registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state; or is
covered by self-insurance which the city determines to provide the city with
protections equivalent to that of a state licensed insurance company, legally
independent from the registrant;
         (c)   Shall verify that the registrant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the:
            1.   Use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees and permittees; and
            2.   Placement and use of equipment in the right-of-way by the
registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees, including, but not
limited to, protection against liability arising from completed operations,
damage of wireless support structures and other telecommunications facilities
and aboveground equipment, damage of underground equipment and collapse of
property.
         (d)   Shall name the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will
be provided as to all such coverages;
         (e)   Shall require that the city be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy; and
         (f)   Shall indicate comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, worker’s compensation and umbrella coverage in amounts
established by the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and carry out
the purposes and policies of this chapter.
      (4)   If the registrant is a corporation, a copy of the certificate
required to be filed, as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State;
      (5)   A copy of the registrant’s certificate of authority from the State
Public Utilities Commission, where the registrant is lawfully required to have
such certificate from said Commission; and
      (6)   Such other information as the city may require.
   (B)   The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above current
at all times by providing to the city information of changes within 15 days
following the date on which the registrant has knowledge of any change.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.09  REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   Operations. Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by
December 1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan with
the city. Registrants must use commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate
and plan for all upcoming projects and include all such projects in a
construction or major maintenance plan. Such plan shall be submitted using a
format designated by the city and shall contain the information determined by
the city to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the
frequency of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way. The plan shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information:
      (1)   The specific locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates
of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (a “next-year
project”); and
      (2)   The tentative locations and beginning and ending dates for all
projects contemplated for the five years following the next calendar year (a
“five-year project”). The term project shall include both next-year projects
and five-year projects. By January 1 of each year, the city will have available
for inspection in its offices a composite list of all projects of which it has
been informed in the annual plans. All registrants are responsible for keeping
themselves apprised of the current status of this list. Thereafter, by February
1, each registrant may change any project in its list of next-year projects,
and must notify the city and all other registrants of all such changes in said
list. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a
next-year project of another registrant that was listed by the other
registrant.
   (B)   Additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
may, for good cause shown, allow a registrant to submit additional next-year
projects. Good cause includes, but is not limited to, the criteria set forth in
this chapter concerning the discretionary issuance of permits.
   (C)   Exemption for collocation of small wireless facilities. A registrant
need not include collocations of small wireless facilities in the annual
construction and major maintenance plan, unless the collocation or work to be
performed will obstruct or require excavation of a right-of-way.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.10  RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.
   (A)   The city, by the granting of a right-of-way permit, or by registering
a person under this chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive,
impair or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be
hereafter vested in the city under the constitution and statutes of the state
or the ordinance of the city to regulate the use of the right-of-way by the
permittee; and the permittee by its acceptance of a right-of-way permit or of
registration under those ordinances agrees that all lawful powers and rights,
regulatory power or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from
time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and
effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A permittee
or registrant is deemed to acknowledge that its rights are subject to the
regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general
ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public deemed to agree to
comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the city
pursuant to such powers.
   (B)   Any conflict between the provisions of a registration or of a right-
of-way permit and any other present or future exercise of the city’s regulatory
or police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.11  SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or
administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions thereof. If a regulatory body or a court
of competent jurisdiction should determine by a final, non-appealable order
that any permit, right or registration issued under this chapter or any portion
of this chapter is illegal or unenforceable, then any such permit, right or
registration granted or deemed to exist hereunder shall be considered as a
revocable permit with a mutual right in either party to terminate without cause
upon giving 60 days’ written notice to the other. The requirements and
conditions of such a revocable permit shall be the same requirements and
conditions as set forth in the permit, right or registration, respectively,
except for conditions relating to the term of the permit and the right of
termination. If a permit, right or registration shall be considered a revocable
permit as provided herein, the permittee must acknowledge the authority of the
City Council to issue such revocable permit and the power to revoke it. Nothing
in this chapter precludes the city from requiring a franchise agreement with
the applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to requirements set forth herein.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.12  NON-EXCLUSIVE REMEDY.
   The remedies provided in this chapter and other ordinances of the city are
not exclusive or in lieu of other rights and remedies that the city may have at
law or in equity. The city is hereby authorized to seek legal and equitable
relief for actual or threatened injury to the public rights-of-way, including
damages to the rights-of-way, whether or not caused by a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter or other provisions of the city.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
PERMITS AND CONDITIONS
§ 152.25  PERMIT REQUIRED.
    Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, no person may obstruct or
excavate any right-of-way, or install or place facilities or equipment in the
right-of-way, without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit
from the city to do so.
   (A)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required to allow the
holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and/
or to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-
way by placing equipment described therein, to the extent and for the duration
specified therein.
   (B)   Obstruction permit.
      (1)   An obstruction permit is required to allow the holder to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing
equipment, vehicles or other obstructions described therein on the right-of-way
for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a
person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.
      (2)   No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way beyond the date
or dates specified in the permit unless a new permit or permit extension is
granted.
   (C)   Small wireless facility permit.
      (1)   A small wireless facility permit is required to install or place a
new facility in that part of the public right-of-way described in such permit
and/or to place or collocate a small wireless facility to the wireless support
structure described in such permit;
         (a)   Routine maintenance of a small wireless facility;
         (b)   Replacement of a small wireless facility with a new facility
that is substantially similar or smaller in size, weight, height, and wind or
structural loading than the small wireless facility being replaced; or
         (c)   Installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or placement of
micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing
utility poles in compliance with national safety codes.
      (2)   The telecommunications right-of-way user must notify the city of
these activities at least seven days before the activities are scheduled to
occur if the work will obstruct a public right-of-way.
      (3)   The term of a small wireless facility permit is equal to the length
of time that the small wireless facility or wireless support structure is in
use, unless the permit is revoked under this chapter.
      (4)   The placement of small wireless facilities and wireless support
structures to accommodate small wireless facilities are a permitted use in a
public right-of-way, except that:
         (a)   A special or conditional land use permit is required to install
a new wireless support structure for the siting of a small wireless facility in
a right-of-way in a district or area zoned for single-family residential use or
within a historic district established by federal law, state law, or city
ordinance as of the date of application for a small wireless facility permit;
         (b)   No new wireless facility shall extend more than ten feet above
its wireless support structure; and
         (c)   New wireless support structures installed in a right-of-way
shall not exceed 50 feet above ground level, unless the city agrees in writing
to a greater height, and shall be subject to separation from other wireless
support structures by a minimum of 600 feet and be subject to lower height
limits if necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare or to protect
the right-of-way and its current use.
         (d)   Notwithstanding division (C)(5)(c), a wireless support structure
that replaces an existing wireless support structure that is higher than 50
feet above ground level may be placed at the height of the existing wireless
support structure, unless the city agrees in writing to a greater height.
      (5)   An applicant may file a consolidated permit application to
collocate up to 15 small wireless facilities, or a greater number if agreed to
by the city, provided that all small wireless facilities in the application:
         (a)   Are located within a two-mile radius;
         (b)   Consist of substantially similar equipment; and
         (c)   Are to be placed on similar types of wireless support
structures.
      (6)   In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the
city may approve a permit for some small wireless facilities and deny a permit
for others but will not use denial of one or more permits as a basis to deny
all or some of the small wireless facilities in the application.
   (D)   Delay penalty. In accordance with State Public Utility Commission
Rules part 7819.1000, Subd. 3, and notwithstanding the provisions of this
chapter, the city shall establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable
delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching or restoration. The
delay penalty shall be established from time to time by City Council
resolution.
   (E)   Display of permit. Excavation and obstruction permits issued under
this chapter shall be conspicuously displayed at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the city inspector and
authorized city personnel.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.26  PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Applications. Application for a right-of-way permit is made to the
city. Right-of-way permit applications shall contain, and will be considered
complete only upon compliance with, the requirements of the following
provisions:
      (1)   Registration with the city pursuant to this chapter;
      (2)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all existing and proposed equipment and
facilities;
      (3)   Payment of all money due to the city for:
         (a)   Permit fees, estimate restoration costs, management costs, and
other costs due;
         (b)   Prior obstructions, collocations, facility installations, or
excavations;
         (c)   Any loss, damage or expense suffered by the city as a result of
prior excavations, collocations, facility installations, or obstructions of the
rights-of-way of any emergency actions taken by the city; and
         (d)   Franchise fees, if applicable.
      (4)   Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or
depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 110% of the amount
owing.
   (B)   Additional excavation bond. When an excavation permit is requested for
purposes of installing additional equipment, and a performance and restoration
bond which in existence is insufficient with respect to the additional
equipment in the sole determination of the city, the permit applicant may be
required by the city to post an additional performance and restoration bond in
accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.27  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Issuance of permit. If the city determines that the applicant has
satisfied the requirements of this chapter, the city may issue a permit.
   (B)   Permit conditions. The city may impose any reasonable conditions upon
the issuance of a permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to ensure the
structural integrity of the right-of-way, to protect the property and safety of
other users of the right-of-way, to minimize the disruption and inconvenience
to the traveling public, to ensure compliance with local, state, and federal
law, and to otherwise efficiently manage use of the right-of-way.
   (C)   Small wireless facility permit application timeline.
      (1)   The city will issue or deny a small wireless facility permit within
90 days after the date a permit application is filed if the application
includes attaching a small wireless facility to a new pole or wireless support
structure or within 60 days if the application only includes attaching small
wireless facilities to preexisting structures. The permit is automatically
issued if the city does not issue or deny the permit within the applicable
timeframe, unless there are exceptional circumstances justifying a delay and
the city has provided advance notice of the delay and the reasons for the delay
in writing to the permit applicant. Parties can mutually agree in writing to
toll or extend the 90-day or 60-day deadline at any time.
      (2)   The city will provide a written notice of incompleteness to an
applicant within ten days of receiving an incomplete small wireless facility
permit application. The notice will clearly and specifically delineate all
missing documents or information that were publicly required as of the date of
the application and reasonably relate to the city’s determination whether the
proposed equipment or facility falls within the definition of small wireless
facility and whether the proposed deployment satisfied all health, safety, and
welfare regulations applicable to the small wireless facility permit request.
Upon an applicant’s submittal of additional documents or information in
response to a notice of incompleteness, the city will notify the applicant in
writing within ten days of any information requested in the initial notice that
is still missing. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness will not
request documents or information that were not delineated in the original
notice of incompleteness.
   (D)   Conditions for approval of small wireless facility permits. As
established or adopted by the city, approval of a small wireless facility
permit may be conditioned on compliance with:
      (1)   All applicable local, state, and federal laws, including Federal
Communications Commission Regulations:
      (2)   Generally applicable and reasonable health, safety, and welfare
regulations consistent with the city's public right-of-way management;
      (3)   Reasonable accommodations for decorative wireless support
structures or signs. The small wireless facility shall have limited exposed
cabling and mounting hardware. It shall also match the wireless support
structure it is attached to in color and, as close as practical, in material
and design;
      (4)   Any reasonable restocking, replacement, or relocation requirements
when a new wireless support structure is placed in a public right-of-way; and
      (5)   Accommodations and requirements for ground-mounted equipment.
Ground mounted equipment, excluding wireless support structures, associated
with the small wireless facility is prohibited unless the applicant can show
that ground-mounted equipment is necessary for the operation of the small
wireless facility. If ground-mounted equipment is necessary, it shall comply
with the provisions of this code and shall also meet the following standards:
         (a)   Ground-mounted equipment shall be placed below grade unless not
technically feasible;
         (b)   Ground-mounted equipment shall not disrupt traffic or pedestrian
circulation and shall
not interfere with vehicle and pedestrian intersection sight lines;
         (c)   Ground-mounted equipment shall not create a safety hazard;
         (d)   If placed above grade, ground-mounted equipment shall be
separated from the nearest
ground-mounted equipment on the same block face by a minimum of 330 feet unless
the equipment is placed underground, or unless waived by the city;
         (e)   If placed above grade and located adjacent to residential uses,
ground-mounted equipment shall be limited to three feet in height and 27 cubic
feet in cumulative size;
         (f)   If placed above grade and located adjacent to non-residential
uses, ground-mounted equipment shall be limited to five feet in height above
grade and 81 cubic feet in cumulative size; and
         (g)   Ground-mounted equipment shall be designed or screened in a
manner to comply with the following requirements:
            1.   It shall blend into the surrounding environment through the
use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment, except in instances
where the color is dictated by federal or state authorities;
            2.   Landscaping plans for the base of the utility poles and around
any ground-mounted equipment must be submitted with the small wireless facility
permit application and must be approved by the City Council prior to the
issuance of the small wireless facility permit; and
            3.   Screening plans shall be provided and include a 100% opaque
barrier to be constructed and must be approved by the City Council prior to the
issuance of the small wireless facility permit.
   (E)   Small wireless facility permit approval. An approval of a small
wireless facility permit under this chapter authorizes the installation,
placement, maintenance, or operation of a small wireless facility to provide
wireless service on the wireless support structure identified in the
application and does not confer authorization to:
      (1)   Provide any service other than a wireless service; or
      (2)   Install, place, maintain, or operate a wireline blackhaul facility
in the public right-of-way. See division (E)(1).
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.28  PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Registration fee. The registration fee shall be established to recover
the cost of administration, review and recording of the permit.
   (B)   Excavation permit fee. The excavation permit fee shall be established
by the city in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
      (1)   The city cost;
      (2)   The degradation of the right-of-way that will result from the
excavation; and
      (3)   Restoration, if done or caused to be done by the city.
   (C)   Obstruction permit fee. The obstruction permit fee shall be
established by the city and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the
city cost including, but not limited to, administration, plan review, recording
of permit, map review, testing result review and inspection.
   (D)   Small wireless facility permit fee.
      (1)   The small wireless facility permit fee shall be established by the
city and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover a reasonable approximation
of the objectively reasonable and nondiscriminatory city cost, including, but
not limited to, administration, equipment and facilities review, recording of
permit, map review, and inspection.
      (2)   No small wireless facility permit shall be issued without full
payment of the small wireless permit fees. The city may allow the applicant to
pay such fees within 30 days of billing.
      (3)   Small wireless facility permit fees that were paid for a permit
that has been revoked for a breach as stated in §
152.38 are not refundable.
      (4)   A "rental" fee will be charged for each small wireless facility
attached to a wireless support structure owned by the city, in addition to the
other fees and charges in this chapter, consisting of:
         (a)   $150 per year for rent to occupy space on a wireless support
structure;
         (b)   $25 per year for maintenance associated with the space occupied
on a wireless support structure; and
         (c)   A monthly fee for electricity used to operate a small wireless
facility, if not purchased directly from a utility company, at the rate of:
            1.   $73 per radio node less than or equal to 100 max watts;
            2.   $182 per radio node over 100 max watts; or
            3.   The actual costs of electricity, if the actual costs exceed
the amount in divisions (a) or (b).
         (d)   Notwithstanding the foregoing fees, the rental fee per year for
each small wireless facility will not exceed a reasonable approximation of the
objectively reasonable and nondiscriminatory city cost.
   (E)   Disruption fees. The city may establish and impose a disruption fee as
a penalty for unreasonable delays in excavations, obstructions or restoration.
Disruption fees will not be imposed if the delay in completion is due to
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant, including without limitation
inclement weather, acts of God or civil strife.
   (F)   Payment of permit fees. No right-of-way permit shall be issued without
payment of all fees required prior to the issuance of such a permit unless the
applicant shall agree (in a manner, amount and substance acceptable to the
city) to pay such fees within 30 days of billing therefor. All permit fees
shall be doubled during a probationary period. Permit fees that were paid for a
permit revoked for a breach are not refundable. Any refunded permit fees shall
be less all city cost, up to and including the date of refund.
   (G)   Use of permit fees. All right-of-way permit fees shall be used solely
for city costs, including any management, construction, maintenance and
restoration costs of the right-of-way.
   (H)   Fees and costs limitations. Fees and costs collected from a
telecommunications right-of-way user or owner of a cable communications system
awarded a franchise under M.S. Ch. 238 will be:
      (1)   Based on the actual costs incurred by the city;
      (2)   Based on an allocation among all users of the public right-of-way,
including the city, which shall reflect the proportionate costs imposed on the
city by each of the various types of uses of the public rights-of-way;
      (3)   Imposed on a competitively neutral basis; and
      (4)   Imposed in a manner so that aboveground uses of public rights-of-
way do not bear costs incurred by the city to regulate underground uses of
public rights-of-way.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.29  RIGHT-OF-WAY RESTORATION.
   (A)   The work to be done under the permit, and the restoration and the
right-of-way as required herein, must be completed within the dates specified
in the permit, increased by as many days as work could not be done because of
circumstances constituting force majeure or when work was prohibited as
unseasonal or unreasonable, all in the sole determination of the city. In
addition to repairing its own work, the permittee must restore the general area
of the work, and the surrounding areas, including the paving and its
foundations, to the same condition that existed before the commencement of the
work and must inspect the area of the work and use reasonable care to maintain
the same condition for 36 months thereafter.
   (B)   In its application for an excavation permit, the permittee may choose
to have the city restore the right-of-way. In any event, the city may determine
to perform the right-of-way restoration and shall require the permittee to pay
a restoration fee to provide for reimbursement of all costs associated with
such restoration. In the event the permittee elects not to perform restoration,
the city may, in lieu of performing the restoration itself, impose a fee to
fully compensate for the resultant degradation as well as for any and all
additional city costs associated therewith. Such fee for degradation shall
compensate the city for costs associated with a decrease in the useful life of
the right-of-way caused by excavation and shall include a restoration fee
component. Payment of such fee does not relieve a permittee from any
restoration obligation. It does not relieve the permittee from any restoration
obligation, including, but not limited to, replacing and compacting the
subgrade base material and the excavation. The restoration fee will not include
the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way, the
permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If, during the
36 months following such restoration, the right-of-way settles due to
permittee’s excavation or restoration, the permittee shall pay to the city,
within 30 days of billing, the cost of repairing said right-of-way.
      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee chooses at the time of
application for an excavation permit to restore the right-of-way itself, such
permittee shall post an additional performance and restoration bond in an
amount determined by the city to be sufficient to cover the cost of restoring
the right-of-way to its pre-excavation condition. If, 24 months after
completion of the restoration of the right-of-way, the city determines that the
right-of-way has been properly restored, the surety on the performance and
restoration bond posted shall be released.
      (3)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way
restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However,
the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation
fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
   (C)   (1)   The permittee shall perform the work according to the standards
and with the materials specified by the city and in compliance with State
Public Utility Commission Rule part 7819.1100. The city shall have the
authority to prescribe the manner and extent to the restoration, and may do so
in written procedures of general application or on a case-by-case basis. The
city, in exercising this authority, shall be guided, but not limited by the
following standards and considerations:
         (a)   The number, size, depth and duration of the excavations,
disruptions or damage to the right-of-way;
         (b)   The traffic volume carried by the right-of-way; the character of
the neighborhood surrounding the right-of-way;
         (c)   The pre-excavation condition of the right-of-way; the remaining
life expectancy of the right-of-way affected by the excavation;
         (d)   Whether the relative cost of the method of restoration to the
permittee is in reasonable balance with the prevention of an accelerated
depreciation of the right-of-way that would otherwise result from the
excavation, disturbance or damage to the right-of-way; and
         (e)   The likelihood that the particular method of restoration would
be effective in slowing the depreciation of the right-of-way that would
otherwise take place.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the maximum limits of restoration
methods and area requirements the city will impose are found in Public Utility
Commission Plates 1 to 13, shown in parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
   (D)   By choosing to restore the right-of-way itself, the permittee
guarantees its work and shall maintain it for 24 months following its
completion. During this 24-month period, it shall, upon notification from the
city, correct all restoration work to the extent necessary, using the method
required by the city. Said work shall be completed within five calendar days of
the receipt of the notice from the city, not including days during which work
cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when
work is prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable, all in the sole determination
of the city.
   (E)   (1)   If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner
and to the condition required by the city, or fails to satisfactorily and
timely complete all repairs required by the city, the city at its option may
perform or cause to be performed such work. In that event, the permittee shall
pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-
way.
      (2)   If the permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise
its rights under the performance and restoration bond.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.30  JOINT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Registrants may jointly make application for permits to excavate or
obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.
   (B)   Registrants who join in and during a scheduled obstruction or
excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint application by
two or more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the
obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee but a permit would still
be required.
   (C)   Registrants who apply for permits for the same obstruction or
excavation, which is not performed by the city, may share in the payment of the
obstruction or excavation permit fee. Registrants must agree among themselves
as to the portion each will pay and indicate the same on their applications.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004 ; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.31  SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.
    (A)   A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area or location of the
right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may perform any work or
place equipment outside the area or location specified in the permit, except as
provided herein. Any permittee which determines that an area different or
greater than that specified in the permit must be obstructed or excavated must,
before working in that different or greater area:
      (1)   Make application for a new permit or permit extension and pay any
additional fees necessitated; and
      (2)   Be granted a new permit or permit extension.
   (B)   A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates specified in the
permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit start date or, except
as provided herein, continue working after the end date. If a permittee does
not finish the work by the permit end date, it must make application for a new
permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit or an
extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the previous
permit. The supplementary application must be done before the permit end date.
The term of a small wireless facility permit equals the length of time that the
small wireless facility or wireless support structure is in use, unless the
permit is revoked under this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.32  OTHER OBLIGATIONS.
    (A)   Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve the permittee of its
duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, franchises or other
authorizations and to pay all fees required by the city, any other city,
county, state or federal rules, laws or regulations. A permittee shall comply
with all requirements of local, state and federal laws, including M.S. §§
216D.01 through 216D.09 (One Call Excavation Notice System), as they may be
amended from time to time. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance
with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is
responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit,
regardless of who performs the work.
   (B)   Except in the case of an emergency, and with the approval of the city,
no right-of-way collocation, facility installation, obstruction or excavation
may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable
for such work.
   (C)   A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free
and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be
interfered with. Private vehicles may not be parked with or adjacent to a
permit area. The loading or unloading of trucks adjacent to a permit area is
prohibited unless specifically authorized by the permit.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.33  DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   The city may, in accordance with M.S. § 237.163, Subd. 4, as it may be
amended from time to time, deny any application for a permit as provided in
this chapter.
   (A)   Mandatory denial. Except in the case of an emergency, no right-of-way
permit will be granted:
      (1)   To any person required by §
152.05 of this chapter to be registered who has not done so;
      (2)   To any person required by §
152.09 of this chapter to file an annual report but has failed to do so;
      (3)   For any next-year project not listed in the construction and major
maintenance plan required under §
152.09 of this chapter unless the person used reasonable efforts to anticipate
and plan for the project;
      (4)   For any project that requires the excavation of any portion of a
right-of-way that was constructed or reconstructed within the preceding five
years;
      (5)   To any person who has failed within the past three years to comply,
or is presently not in full compliance, with the requirements of this chapter;
      (6)   To any person as to whom there exists grounds for the revocation of
a permit under §
152.38 of this chapter; and/or
      (7)   If, in the sole discretion of the city, the issuance of a permit
for the particular date and/or time would cause a conflict or interfere with-an
exhibition, celebration, festival or any other event. The city, in exercising
this discretion, shall be guided by the safety and convenience of ordinary
travel of the public over the right-of-way, and by considerations relating to
the public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   Permissive denial. The city may deny a permit in order to protect the
public health, safety and welfare, to protect interference with the safety and
convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way, or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its users. The city may consider one or more of
the following factors:
      (1)    The extent to which right-of-way space where the permit is sought
is available;
      (2)   The competing demands for the particular space in the right-of-way;
      (3)   The availability of other locations in the right-of-way or in other
rights-of-way for the equipment of the permit applicant, except that the city
will not require placement of a small wireless facility on any specific
wireless support structure other than the one proposed in the small wireless
facility permit application;
      (4)   The applicability of this chapter or other regulations of the
right-of-way that affect location of equipment in the right-of-way;
      (5)   The degree of compliance of the applicant with the terms and
conditions of its franchise; if any, this chapter, and other applicable
ordinances and regulations;
      (6)   The degree of disruption to surrounding communities and businesses
that will result from the use of that part of the right-of-way;
      (7)   The condition and age of the right-of-way, and whether and when it
is scheduled for total or partial reconstruction; and
      (8)   The balancing of the costs of disruption to the public and damage
to the right-of-way, against the benefits to that part of the public served by
the expansion into additional parts of the right-of-way.
   (C)   Discretionary issuance. Notwithstanding the provisions of this
section, the city may issue a permit in any case where the permit is necessary:
      (1)   To prevent substantial economic hardship to a customer of the
permit applicant;
      (2)   To allow such customer to materially improve its utility service;
or
      (3)   To allow a new economic development project; and, where the permit
applicant did not have knowledge of the hardship, the plans for improvement of
service or the development project when said applicant was required to submit
its list of next-year projects.
   (D)   Written notice of denial or revocation. Any denial or revocation of a
right-of-way permit will be made in writing and will document the basis for the
denial or revocation. The city will notify the applicant or right-of-way user
in writing within three business days of the decision to deny or revoke a
right-of-way permit.
   (E)   Opportunity to cure small wireless facility permit application. If a
small wireless facility permit application is denied, the telecommunications
right-of-way user may cure the deficiencies identified by the city and resubmit
its application. The telecommunications right-of-way user will be required to
pay another small wireless facility permit fee, unless it resubmits the
application within 30 days of receiving notice of the denial. The city will
approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after the revised
application is submitted.
   (F)   Permits for additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the
provisions of this section, the city may issue a permit to a registrant who was
allowed under §
152.09(B) of this chapter to submit an additional next-year project, or in the
event the registrant demonstrates that it used commercially reasonable efforts
to anticipate and plan for the project, such permit to be subject to all other
conditions and requirements of law, including such conditions as may be imposed
under §
152.27(B) of this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.34  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   In accordance with M.S. §§ 237.162, Subd. 8(3), and 237.163, Subd. 8, as
they may be amended from time to time, and the Public Utility Commission Rules,
all work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with the
Standard Specifications for Street Openings, as promulgated by the city and at
a location as may be required by §
152.55(B) of this chapter. The city may enforce local standards pursuant to its
inherent and historical police power authority, so long as such standards do
not impose greater requirements than those found in the Public Utility
Commission Rules.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004 ; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.35  INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   When the work under any permit hereunder is completed, the permittee
shall notify the city.
   (B)   The permittee shall make the work site available to the city inspector
and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times
during the execution and upon completion of work.
   (C)   At the time of inspection, the city inspector may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety
or well being of the public. The city inspector may issue an order to the
registrant for any work that does not conform to the applicable standards,
conditions or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten days after
issuance of the order, the registrant shall present proof to the city that the
violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the
required time, the city may revoke the permit pursuant to §
152.38 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004 ; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.36  WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   (A)   Emergency situations.
      (1)   Each registrant shall immediately notify the city or the city’s
designee of any event regarding its equipment that it considers to be an
emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in
order to respond to the emergency. Within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the necessary
permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the
requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for
the actions it took in response to the emergency.
      (2)   In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding
a registrant’s equipment, the city may attempt to contact the local
representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the
emergency. In any event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary
in order to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the
registrant whose equipment occasioned the emergency.
   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in the case of an emergency, any
person who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs,
excavates, collocates, installs or places facilities or equipment, or performs
any work requiring a permit in a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit
(s), pay double the normal fee for said permit(s), pay double all the other
fees required by city ordinance, including, but not limited to, criminal fines
and penalties, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage
to the right-of-way and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.37  SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.
    If the collocation or facility installation in, or obstruction or
excavation of, the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the date given
on the permit, the permittee shall notify the city of the accurate information
as soon as the information is known.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.38  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Registrants hold permits issued pursuant to this chapter as a
privilege and not as a right. The city reserves its right, as provided herein
and in accordance with M.S. § 237.163, Subd. 4, as it may be amended from time
to time, to revoke any right-of-way permit, without fee refund, in the event of
a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance,
rule or regulation or any condition of the permit. A substantial breach by the
permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the city or its citizens;
      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
      (4)   The failure to maintain the required bonds and/or insurance;
      (5)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; and
      (6)   The failure to correct a condition indicated on an order issued
pursuant to §
152.35(C) of this chapter.
   (B)   If the city determines that the permittee has committed a substantial
breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or
any condition of the permit, the city shall make a written demand upon the
permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall state that continued
violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. Further, a substantial
breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at the city’s discretion, to
place additional or revised conditions on the permit.
   (C)   Within 24 hours of receiving notification of the breach, the permittee
shall contact the city with a plan, acceptable to the city inspector, for its
correction. The permittee’s failure to so contact the city inspector, the
permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable plan or the permittee’s failure to
reasonably implement the approved plan shall be cause for immediate revocation
of the permit. Further, the permittee’s failure to so contact the city
inspector, or the permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable plan, or
permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan shall
automatically place the permittee on probation for one full year.
   (D)   From time to time, the city may establish a list of conditions of the
permit which, if breached, will automatically place the permittee on probation
for one full year, such as, but not limited to, working out of the allotted
time period or working on right-of-way outside of the permit.
   (E)   If a permittee, while on probation, commits a breach as outlined
above, the permittee’s permit will automatically be revoked and permittee will
not be allowed further permits for one full year, except for emergency repairs.
   (F)   If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the city
for the reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of
collection and reasonable attorney fees incurred in connection with such
revocation.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.39  APPEALS.
   (A)   A person who, as follows, may have the denial, revocation or fee
imposition reviewed by the City Council, upon written request. The City Council
shall act on a timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
A decision by the City Council affirming the denial, revocation or fee
imposition must be in writing and supported by written findings establishing
the reasonableness of the decision:
      (1)   Has been denied registration;
      (2)   Has been denied a right-of-way permit;
      (3)   Has had its right-of-way permit revoked; or
      (4)   Believes that the fees imposed on the user by the city do not
conform to the requirements of law.
   (B)   Upon affirmation by the City Council of the denial, revocation or fee
imposition, the right-of-way user shall have the right to have the matter
resolved by binding arbitration. Binding arbitration must be before an
arbitrator agreed to by both the city and the person. If the parties cannot
agree on an arbitrator, the matter must be resolved by a three-person
arbitration panel made up of one arbitrator selected by the city, one
arbitrator selected by the person and one arbitrator selected by the other two
arbitrators. The costs and fees of a single arbitrator shall be borne equally
by the city and the person. In the event there is a third arbitrator, each
party shall bear the expense of its own arbitrator and shall jointly and
equally bear with the other party the expense of the third arbitrator and of
the arbitration.
   (C)   Each party to the arbitration shall pay its own costs, disbursements
and attorney fees.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004 ; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.40  MAPPING DATA.
    (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, each registrant shall
provide as a part of its permit application the following information:
      (1)   Location and approximate height or depth of applicant’s mains,
cables, conduits, switches, small wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, and related equipment and facilities with the location based on:
         (a)   Offsets from the property lines, distances from the centerline
to the public right-of-way, and curb lines as determined by the city;
         (b)   Coordinates derived from the coordinates system being used by
the city; or
         (c)   Any other system agreed upon by the applicant and the city.
      (2)   Type and size of the utility facility;
      (3)   Description showing above ground appurtenances;
      (4)   A legend explaining symbols, characters, abbreviations, scale and
other data shown on the map; and
      (5)   Any facilities to be abandoned, if applicable, in conformance with
M.S. § 216D.04, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time. Mapping data
shall be provided by the applicant with specificity and in the format requested
by the city for inclusion in the mapping system used by the city. If such
format is different from what is currently utilized and maintained by the
registration, the registrant may provide such information in the format that
they currently are utilizing. The permit application fee may include the cost
to convert the data furnished by the applicant to a format currently in use by
the city.
   (B)   Information regarding equipment of telecommunications right-of-way
users constructed or located prior to 5-10-1997, need only be supplied in the
form maintained, however, all telecommunications right-of-way users must submit
some type of documentary evidence regarding the location of equipment within
the rights-of-way of the city.
   (C)   At the request of any registrant, any information requested by the
city, which qualifies as a “trade-secret” under M.S. § 13.37(b), as it may be
amended from time to time, shall be treated as trade secret information as
detailed therein. With respect to the provision of mapping data, the city may
consider unique circumstances from time to time required to obtain mapping
data.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
EQUIPMENT AND USE RESTRICTIONS
§ 152.55  LOCATIONS OF EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Undergrounding. Unless otherwise permitted by an existing franchise or
M.S. § 216B.34, as it may be amended from time to time, or unless existing
above ground equipment is repaired or replaced, or unless infeasible such as in
the provision of electric service at certain voltages, new construction, the
installation of new equipment and the replacement of old equipment shall be
done underground or contained within or attached to buildings or other
structures in conformity with applicable codes unless otherwise agreed to by
the city in writing, and such agreement is reflected in applicable permits.
   (B)   High density corridor.
      (1)   The city may assign specific high density corridors within the
right-of-way or any particular segment therefor as may be necessary for each
type of equipment that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects
will someday be located within the right-of-way, excavation, obstruction or
other permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of
equipment may designate the proper corridor for the equipment at issue and such
equipment must be located accordingly.
      (2)   In the event the city desires to establish a high-density corridor,
it shall include the elements required in Public Utility Commission Rule part
7819.0200.
   (C)   Next reconstruction, excavation. Any registrant whose equipment is
located prior to enactment of this chapter in the right-of-way in a position at
variance with the corridors established by the city shall, no later than at the
time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where its equipment
is located, move that equipment to its assigned position within the right-of-
way, unless this requirement is waived by the city for good cause shown, upon
consideration of such factors as the remaining economic life of the facilities,
public safety, customer service needs and hardship to the registrant.
   (D)   Nuisance. One year after the passage of this chapter, any equipment
found in a right-of-way that has not been registered shall be deemed to be a
nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in
equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking
possession of the equipment and restoring the right-of-way to a useable
condition.
   (E)   Limitation of space. To protect health, safety and welfare, the city
shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional
equipment within the right-of-way if there is insufficient space to accommodate
all of the requests of registrants or persons to occupy and use the right-of-
way. In making such decisions, the city shall strive to the extent possible to
accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be
guided primarily by considerations of the public interest, the public need for
the particular service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year
with respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing equipment in
the right-of-way, and future city plans for public improvements and development
projects which have been determined to be in the public interest.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.56  RELOCATION OF EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The person must promptly and at its own expense, with due regard for
seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and relocate its equipment and
facilities in the right-of-way whenever the city requests such removal and
relocation, and shall restore the right-of-way to the same condition it was in
prior to said removal or relocation.
   (B)   The city may make such requests in order to prevent interference by
the company’s equipment or facilities with:
      (1)   A present or future city use of the right-of-way for a public
project;
      (2)   The public health or safety; and
      (3)   The safety and convenience of travel over the right-of-way.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004 ; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.57  PRE-EXCAVATION EQUIPMENT LOCATION.
   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. §§ 216D.01 through
216D.09 (One Call Excavation Notice System), as they may be amended from time
to time, before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant
who has equipment located in the area to be excavated shall mark the horizontal
and approximate vertical placement of all said equipment. Any registrant whose
equipment is less than 20 inches below a concrete or asphalt surface shall
notify and work closely with the excavation contractor in an effort to
establish the exact location of its equipment and the best procedures for
excavation.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004 ; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.58  DAMAGE TO OTHER EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support or move a registrant’s facilities to protect it, the city
shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible. The
costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be paid
within 30 days from the date of billing.
   (B)   Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any
facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damages. Each
registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the
facilities of another registrant caused during the city’s response to an
emergency occasioned by that registrant’s facilities.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004 ; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.59  RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.
   (A)   If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by
State Public Utility Commission Rule part 7819.3200.
   (B)   If the vacation requires the relocation of registrant or permittee
equipment and:
      (1)   If the vacation proceedings are initiated by the registrant or
permittee, the registrant or permittee must pay the relocation costs;
      (2)   If the vacation proceedings are initiated by the city, the
registrant or permittee must pay the relocation costs unless otherwise agreed
to by the city and the registrant or permittee; or
      (3)   If the vacation proceedings are initiated by a person or persons
other than the registrant or permittee, such other person or persons must pay
the relocation costs.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004 ; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.60  INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   (A)   By reason of the acceptance of a registration or the grant of a right-
of-way permit, the city does not assume any liability:
      (1)   For injuries to persons, damage to property or loss of service
claims by parties other than the registrant or the city; or
      (2)   For claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the
installation, presence, maintenance or operation of equipment by registrants or
activities of registrants.
   (B)   By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this
chapter, a registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city in
accordance with the provisions of State Public Utility Commission Rule part
7819.1250.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004 ; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.61  FUTURE USES.
   In placing any equipment, or allowing it to be placed, in the right-of-way
the city is not liable for any damages caused thereby to any registrant’s
equipment which is already in place. No registrant is entitled to rely on the
provisions of this chapter, and no special duty is created as to any
registrant. This chapter is enacted to protect the general health, welfare and
safety of the public at large.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004 ; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
§ 152.62 ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT.
    (A)   A registrant who has determined to discontinue its operations with
respect to any facilities or equipment in any right-of-way, or segment or
portion thereof, in the city must either:
      (1)   Provide information satisfactory to the city that the registrant’s
obligations for its facilities and equipment in the right-of-way under this
chapter have been lawfully assumed by another registrant; or
      (2)   Submit to the city a proposal and instruments for transferring
ownership of its facilities and equipment to the city. If a registrant proceeds
under this clause, the city may, at its option:
         (a)   Purchase the facilities or equipment;
         (b)   Require the registrant, at its own expense, to remove the
facilities or equipment; or
         (c)   Require the registrant to post an additional bond or an
increased bond amount sufficient to reimburse the city for reasonably
anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities or equipment.
   (B)   Equipment or facilities of a registrant which fails to comply with the
preceding paragraph and which, for two years, remains unused shall be deemed to
be abandoned by the registrant. Abandoned facilities or equipment is deemed to
be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in
equity, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Abating the nuisance;
      (2)   Taking possession of the facilities or equipment and restoring it
to a useable condition;
      (3)   Requiring removal of the facilities or equipment by the registrant
or by the registrant’s surety; or
      (4)   Exercising its rights pursuant to the performance and restoration
bond.
   (C)   Any registrant who has unusable facilities or equipment in any right-
of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way during the next scheduled
excavation, unless this requirement is waived by the city.
(Ord. 2004-09, passed 11-23-2004; Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-8-2019)
CHAPTER 153:  PUBLIC PROPERTY; IMPROVEMENTS AND EXCAVATIONS
Section
Streets
   
153.01   Lanes and avenues
   
153.02   Unique roadways
   
153.03   House or building numbering
   
153.04   Snow placement
Excavations
   
153.15   Excavation permit required
   
153.16   Exceptions
   
153.17   Application requirements
   
153.18   Minimum requirements
   
153.19   Additional requirements
   
153.20   Inspections
   
153.21   Revocation
STREETS
§ 153.01  LANES AND AVENUES.
   The roadways within the city shall be named as shown on the official address
map which is similar to the predominant alphabetical county system and shall be
as follows.
   (A)   Commencing at the east boundary of the city and proceeding west, there
shall be, where appropriate, a north-south roadway approximately every 330 feet
more or less, which will have an alphabetical name corresponding where
practical with names used in neighboring communities which generally adhere to
the county system and that all such roadways be generally referred to as
“lanes”. Each lane shall also have a designated block number included on the
street signs for the purpose of numbering houses and buildings in the block
immediately west of said lane and the said block numbers will be increased 100
numbers in sequence beginning with 11100 for every lane proceeding numerically
east to west.
   (B)   Starting from the south boundary of the city and proceeding north,
there shall be east-west roadways generally named avenues intersecting where
appropriate with the aforesaid lanes approximately every 660 feet more or less.
The avenues shall be named numerically beginning with the 10900 block. Block
numbers shall be increased 100 numbers at every avenue approximately 660 feet
more or less. Being that the block numbers are a continuation of North
Minneapolis, avenues will be suffixed with the term “north”.
   (C)   The house and building numbers on lanes will be numbered from the
block number of the avenue immediately south thereof with houses and buildings
on the east side of a lane being even numbered while on the west side, they
shall be odd numbered.
   (D)   The house and building numbers on avenues will be taken from the lane
block number immediately east and the numbers on the north side of an avenue
will be even numbered while on the south side, the house and building numbers
will be odd.
   (E)   The terms “parkway”, “circle”, “drive”, “road”, “boulevard”, “place”,
“way”, “trail” and “court” shall generally be applied where applicable and
appropriate.
   (F)   The original roadway names and designations in the Townsite of Dayton
will remain the same, except as otherwise provided by ordinance.
(1978 Code, § 301.01)
§ 153.02  UNIQUE ROADWAYS.
   The grid system of addressing as described above is not always applicable
considering the need to provide for the addressing of houses and buildings on
curvilinear or meandering roadways. The city has a number of such roadways
which shall be referred to as “unique roadways”. The house and building
numbering on unique roadways will be taken from the grid, but will be a
continuation of one system throughout its length.
(1978 Code, § 301.02)
§ 153.03  HOUSE OR BUILDING NUMBERING.
   (A)   A sequence of ten shall be used to establish address numbers beginning
with “00” for the even numbers and “01” for the odd numbers. If additional
numbers may be required in future developments (such as P.U.D.), the sequence
shall be by two, four, six or eight at the discretion of the City Planning
Commission.
(1978 Code, § 301.03)
   (B)   The official address map consisting of half section maps of the city
(scale one inch equals 200 feet)  showing the basic lane and avenue grid system
is hereby adopted and made part of this subchapter and will be on permanent
file and for public inspection. Said map will be the primary document of the
city’s official address system record. It shall be the responsibility of the
City Planning Commission to maintain said map and new house and building
numbers shall be recorded on it within 30 days after issuance of an address
number.
(1978 Code, § 301.04)
   (C)   In order to provide for the public safety and to ensure the orderly
functioning of the Police and Fire Departments, postal and private delivery
services for the people of the city, it shall be the duty of the owner, lessor
or occupant of every house, industrial, commercial or other buildings to have
the proper address number affixed to the building in the following manner.
      (1)   The number shall be metal, glass, plastic or other durable material
and the number shall not be less than three and one-half inches in height, in a
contrasting color to the base on which it is mounted.
      (2)   The numbers shall either be lighted or made of some reflective
material and so placed to be easily seen.
      (3)   All auxiliary buildings within a lot having a building with an
assigned number and buildings such as garages, barns and buildings, the likes
thereof are not affected by this subchapter.
(1978 Code, § 301.05)
   (D)   The City Planning Commission will assign house numbers and street
names in accordance with this subchapter and shall maintain the official
address system record. Every property owner shall be responsible for obtaining
the proper number and having the house or building number on his or her
property correlate with the number assigned thereto in the said official
address system record. After the publication date of this subchapter, as a
condition for the approval of a final plat, the city will require an address
plat (scale one inch equals 200 feet) prepared by the developer in accordance
with this subchapter.
(1978 Code, § 301.06)
§ 153.04  SNOW PLACEMENT.
   (A)   No person shall place, or cause to be placed, any snow which is
removed from private property upon the right-of-way of any public street or
roadway within the city.
   (B)   Further, no person shall place, or cause to be placed, snow on private
property which causes a view of traffic to be obstructed from any public street
or roadway to another public street or roadway within the city.
(1978 Code, § 301.07)  (Ord. 85-11, passed 12-16-1985)
EXCAVATIONS
§ 153.15  EXCAVATION PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall remove, store, place or excavate rock,
sand, dirt, gravel, clay or other like material within the city unless such
person, firm or corporation shall first have obtained an excavation permit
authorizing the same and complied with all of the terms of this subchapter.
(1978 Code, § 902.01)  (Ord. 91-16, passed 9-3-1991)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.16  EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   The excavation, removal, placement or storage of rock, sand, dirt,
gravel, clay or other like material for the purpose of the foundation, cellar
or basement of some immediately pending superstructure to be erected, built or
placed thereon contemporaneously with, or immediately following such
excavation, removal or storage, providing a building permit has been issued;
   (B)   Such excavations, removal, placement or storage of rock, sand, dirt,
gravel, clay or other like material as may be required by the state, county or
city authorities in connection with the construction or maintenance of roads
and highways within their respective rights-of-way;
   (C)   The moving of dirt pursuant to an approved plot for the construction
of roads or to provide for surface water drainage; and
   (D)   The excavation, removal, placement or storage of rock, sand, dirt,
gravel, clay or other like material by the owner of land for landscaping or
other purposes, except commercial purposes, within the contiguous boundaries of
such owned premises.
(1978 Code, § 902.02)  (Ord. 91-8, passed 6-17-1991; Ord. 91-16, passed 9-3-
1991)
§ 153.17  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Original permit. The applicant’s original excavation permit shall be
issued only after a public hearing by the Planning Commission, and approval by
the Council. Such hearing shall be held only after notice, deemed appropriate
by the Planning Commission, is given. The original permit shall expire one year
following the date of issuance. An applicant’s subsequent permit may be issued
by the Council without public hearing.
   (B)   Information required. All applicants for excavation permits shall
provide the following information:
      (1)   A correct legal description of the tract, giving complete
descriptive data by bearings and distances, made and certified to by a licensed
land surveyor. The corners of the tract shall also be located on the ground
marked by substantial monuments of such size and type as approved by the City
Engineer, and be referred and tied to the nearest quarter section corner and
shall be shown. Descriptions, reference ties and elevations of all bench marks
shall also be included;
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and of the
owner of the land;
      (3)   The names of all adjacent land owners within a one-half mile radius
of the proposed excavation;
      (4)   Copies of any portions of agreements or leases which grant to the
applicant the right to use the land for excavation;
      (5)   The purpose of the excavation and, if material removed is to be
sold, the proposed site for such sale;
      (6)   The estimated length of time removal operations will be on-going;
      (7)   The highways, streets or other public ways within the city, upon
and along which the material removed shall be transported and the maximum
number of truck loads per day which will be transported along said routes;
      (8)   The plan of operation, including soil processing, nature of the
processing and equipment, the area, depth and grade of such processing, the
estimated quantity of earthly deposits to be added to or removed from the
premises, location of the plant, source of water, disposal of water and re-use
of water. In the event that water is used in the operation of a pit, then
approval from the State Department of Natural Resources, or other appropriate
state or federal agencies, if necessary, shall be obtained as to the type,
location and depth of said well and water use;
      (9)   The development plan of the property where the excavation is to
occur. Said plan shall contain site analysis information, such as trees, depth
of topsoil, soil type, adjacent and on-site buildings and land uses, a map or
plat of the proposed pit or excavation, showing the confines or limits thereof,
together with the proposed finished elevations, based on sea level readings.
Elevation and percent slope within 100 feet beyond the perimeter of the
excavation and such other information necessary to analyze the site shall be
provided by the applicant; and
      (10)   The applicant shall submit a comprehensive restoration and land
use plan, showing suitable provision for restoration of the excavated area to a
useable condition compatible with the adjacent land and that it will not become
a health or safety hazard or a nuisance. Such plan should include anticipated
final elevations, slopes and a plan for the return of subsoil and top soil.
Where the Council deems it practical and necessary, such plan shall include
adjoining related areas where excavations have previously been made and remain
under the control of the owner of the land on which the excavating is to be
done or under the control of the person, other than the owner to whom the
permit is to be issued.
   (C)   Fees, insurance and bond. With each application, the applicant shall
submit the following:
      (1)   The annual fee for the license in the amount set by Council
resolution;
      (2)   (a)   A surety bond acceptable to and in an amount deemed
sufficient by the Council and conditioned such that the permittee will:
            1.   Successfully perform all conditions of this subchapter;
            2.   Restore the land in conformity with the plan submitted and
approved; and
            3.   Pay for any damage which may occur to adjacent public roads by
reason of the excavating activity being done under permit.
         (b)   Said bond shall forfeit to the city in full if compliance with
the foregoing is not completed within 30 days of demand by the city for such
completion or compliance.
      (3)   The permittee shall provide proof of public liability insurance
assuring against bodily injury and property damage and indemnifying and holding
the city harmless for any such causes of action and costs and expenses,
including attorneys fees, incurred therein. Said insurance shall be in the
following amounts for public liability, personal injury and property damage:
         (a)   Injury or death of one person: $1,000,000;
         (b)   Injury or death to more than one person in a single occurrence:
$1,000,000; and
         (c)   Property damage: $300,000.
(1978 Code, § 902.03)  (Ord. 88-10, passed 8-15-1988)
§ 153.18  MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   In cases in which the following minimum requirements cannot be met, no
permit shall be issued.
   (B)   For all permits issued, the following are minimum requirements for the
operation of excavation under this subchapter and are deemed to be a condition
of the permit.
      (1)   The slopes or any edge contiguous to the excavation shall not be
less than a three-foot horizontal to one-foot vertical slope, or as otherwise
approved by the operation plan.
      (2)   All trees, stumps and debris must be disposed of within 30 days by
burying, removal or burning, if allowed; or within ten days after notification
by the city, whichever is less.
      (3)   The depth of removal of materials in areas programmed for future
public utilities and services in no instance shall be greater than 25 feet
below the present centerline grade of the road servicing the area, or as
determined by the City Engineer. No excavation shall be allowed below grade
closer than 100 feet to the right-of-way line of any existing street, road or
highway; except that, excavating may be conducted within such limits in order
to reduce the elevation thereof, in conformity to the existing proposed street
grades.
      (4)   The operator shall be responsible for the lowering of any well so
as to provide potable water for each individual whose well is affected by
excavation operations. Further, the operation of the pit shall not affect the
safety or quality of any well water within one-quarter mile of the excavation.
Proof that the hydraulic or static effect is not detrimental to any such well
shall be provided by the permittee or applicant upon demand by the city.
      (5)   All rocks which are not crushed and which are one foot or larger in
diameter shall be buried after termination of excavation operations.
      (6)   Any storm or surface water cast into the excavation shall be the
responsibility of the permittee. No drainage of such water shall be made by the
permittee in such a way as to cause erosion or damage to any adjoining
properties.
      (7)   The operator shall maintain and operate all equipment in such a
manner as to minimize air pollution. Any emission which can cause any damage to
health, animals or vegetation or other forms of property, or which can cause
any excessive soiling at any point, or any emission of any solid or liquid
particles in concentration exceeding the State Pollution Control Agency Air
Quality Regulations, are hereby prohibited.
      (8)   Upon termination of the operation of any excavation, the excavation
site shall be regraded or modified according to the plans submitted with the
application.
      (9)   All excavated materials shall be removed from the premises only
upon and along such highways, streets or other public ways as the Council shall
authorize and direct.
      (10)   No noise resulting from the excavation shall exceed the
regulations of the State Pollution Control Agency’s Noise Control Regulations.
      (11)   Any vibration resulting in any combination of amplitude and
frequencies beyond the safe range of the most current standards of the United
States Bureau of Mines for any structure is hereby prohibited.
      (12)   The slope of banks of the excavation shall be kept in such a
condition so as not to be dangerous because of overhangs, slidings or cave-ins.
Upon notice by the city to the permittee, the permittee shall correct any such
dangerous condition immediately.
      (13)   The removal of natural vegetation shall be restricted to prevent
erosion into water bodies, to conserve nutrients in the soil, and to preserve
shoreland esthetics to the maximum degree possible. Removal shall be restricted
within a strip paralleling a lakeshore, river or stream and shall extend inland
a minimum distance of 100 feet from the normal high water mark, as determined
by the point where the natural vegetation changes from predominately aquatic to
predominately terrestrial.
      (14)   Land alteration shall in no way adversely affect adjacent private
or public properties, and may not obstruct the free flow of water in a natural
waterway or public street drain, storm sewer, gutter or ditch.
      (15)   The hours of operation of any excavation shall be limited to 7:00
a.m. to 7:00 p.m. daily. No excavation, crushing or processing or trucking
shall be conducted on Sundays or legal holidays, with the exception of Columbus
Day and Veteran’s Day.
   (C)   The Council may, in its discretion, waive or modify the provisions of
division (B) above upon a showing that the requested modification will not
undermine the purposes set forth in this subchapter and shall not jeopardize
the public health, welfare and safety or the environment.
(1978 Code, § 902.04)  (Ord. 91-16, passed 9-3-1991)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.19  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Council may impose additional conditions on the permit and the
operation of any excavation site if it deems it necessary for the protection of
the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city.
   (B)   These may include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following.
      (1)   The permittee shall properly fence any excavation site, or portion
of any excavation site, which may be a hazard or create a danger to the public.
      (2)   The applicant or owner shall submit a landscape screening plan and
provide such screening consisting of natural shrubbery or other device as the
Council deems appropriate.
      (3)   On completion of the operation, the applicant shall properly drain
and level any excavation and restore the contour of the site to a condition as
indicated on the plan submitted and approved by the Council.
      (4)   The permittee shall remove any extracted material abandoned upon or
along the highways, streets or other public ways in the city, as the City
Engineer shall direct and order.
      (5)   The permittee shall submit to the Council, a detailed map of the
highways, streets, roads and other public ways within the city upon and along
which the material removed shall be transported. The City Engineer shall
inspect such roads proposed to be used by the permittee and shall recommend to
the Council necessary upgrading or repairing of such roads prior to their use
as routes for the hauling of material excavated. The Council may designate city
roads and incorporate the said recommendations of the Engineer into the permit
issued. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage to said roads caused
by its operations.
      (6)   The permittee shall submit in writing to the Council, the estimated
quantity of material to be removed, the anticipated route over which trucks
will travel, the beginning and completion of time for operation and the area of
the pit which will be used for excavation during that 12-month period. It is
understood that while the information may not be able to be submitted with
certainty, the permittee must make his or her best estimate of said removal
operation. If the quantity of material to be removed is for any reason likely
to significantly exceed the original estimated amount, the permittee shall
notify the city of such change in estimated quantity as soon as such
information is available to it.
      (7)   In the event that a development plan is submitted which anticipates
a lake about which lots will be platted, said lake must be planned for at least
a 15-foot depth. Any development plan indicating a lake development shall
provide a means for level control or computations which proves that the lake
can contain drainage directly to it by free board storage utilizing a 100-year
storm.
      (8)   Within a period of three months after the termination of operation
of any excavation, or within three months after abandonment of such operation,
or within three months after expiration of a permit hereunder, the permittee or
owner of the premises shall dismantle all buildings and structures incidental
to the excavation operation.
(1978 Code, § 902.05)
§ 153.20  INSPECTIONS.
   Each excavation site shall be inspected by the city a minimum of every 60
days during operation of the excavation. By applying for a permit under this
subchapter, the permittee has agreed to permit and cooperate in such
inspections. The permittee and/or owners of any premises in violation of any of
the requirements of this subchapter or its permit shall remedy such violations
within the time specified by written notice from the city.
(1978 Code, § 902.06)
§ 153.21  REVOCATION.
   Excavation permits may be revoked upon violation of any conditions of said
permit provided herein or established by the Council. Said revocation shall be
effective immediately upon written notice of the same by the Council to the
permittee. Upon written demand, the permittee may have a hearing before the
Council at its next available meeting.
(1978 Code, § 902.07)
CHAPTER 154:  UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
Section
   
154.01   Underground installations in new developments
   
154.02   Underground installations in existing developments
   
154.03   Repair and maintenance of existing overhead installations
   
154.04   Exceptions
   
154.05   Underground installations for new buildings
§ 154.01  UNDERGROUND INSTALLATIONS IN NEW DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   All permanent electric and telephone lines, excluding main feeder
lines and high voltage electric transmission lines in excess of 15 kilovolts’
capacity, and all other communication circuits and services as defined in the
National Electrical Code, including any amendments thereto, shall be placed
underground when installed in the following areas or when installed for the
following types of customers:
      (1)   In all new residential subdivisions or plats containing six or more
dwelling units;
      (2)   To all new multiple dwellings of four or more family units; and
      (3)   To all new commercial or industrial developments.
   (B)   All owners, platters or developers of the types of developments listed
above are responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and,
prior to the final approval of any plat or development plan, shall submit to
the City Council written instruments from the appropriate utility companies
showing that all necessary arrangements with said companies for underground
installation of such utilities have been made.
(Ord. 2009-06, passed 4-14-2009)
§ 154.02  UNDERGROUND INSTALLATIONS IN EXISTING DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   Underground utility district. The City Council may, by resolution,
upon receiving a petition signed by a majority of the owners of real property
to be benefitted, designate any area of the city as an underground utility
district, and within such a district all lines and circuits designated in this
chapter shall be required thereby to be placed underground within a period of
time set by the Council. The Council shall also set the time within which
affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service.
   (B)   Costs assessed.
      (1)   The cost of underground installation under division (A) above may
be assessed by the city against benefitting properties as a public improvement
following a public hearing and in full accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
      (2)   In determining the cost of said installation, the applicable
utility companies shall be entitled to amounts sufficient to repay them for the
following as computed and reflected by the existing regulations and procedures
of the Federal Power Commission and the Federal Communications Commission:
         (a)   The original cost less depreciation taken of the existing
overhead electric and telephone facilities to be removed;
         (b)   The estimated cost of removing such overhead electric and
telephone facilities less the salvage value of the facilities removed;
         (c)   The cost difference between the estimated cost of constructing
new overhead facilities and the cost of constructing the underground
facilities, less the cost of the betterment; and
         (d)   The cost of obtaining new easements when technical
considerations make it reasonably necessary to utilize easements for the
underground facilities different from those used for the overhead facilities.
      (3)   No assessment levied under this chapter shall be declared void nor
shall any such assessment or part thereof be set aside in consequence of any
error or irregularity permitted or appearing in any of the proceedings under
this chapter or any other provision of this chapter.
      (4)   It shall be the responsibility of any utility customer within an
underground utility district to sustain the expense of rewiring in order to
accept an underground service which was provided pursuant to this section for
that portion of the service which is usually and customarily the responsibility
of the customer.
   (C)   Costs not assessed, procedure. If underground installation in an
underground utility district is not to be assessed, the city shall provide for
such installation by direct agreement with the applicable utility companies.
(Ord. 2009-06, passed 4-14-2009)
§ 154.03  REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING OVERHEAD INSTALLATIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the repair,
maintenance, reconstruction, replacement or modification of existing overhead
utility lines.
(Ord. 2009-06, passed 4-14-2009)
§ 154.04  EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The requirements of this section shall apply unless the Zoning
Administrator determines:
      (1)   Placing of utilities underground would not be compatible with the
planned, existing or surrounding development;
      (2)   The additional cost of undergrounding such utilities would create
an undue financial hardship; or
      (3)   Topographical, soil or any other conditions make the underground
installation unreasonable or impractical.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Administrator may
appeal the decision to the City Council by filing written notice of appeal with
the City Clerk within ten days after a decision is made. An appeal shall
automatically stay the Zoning Administrator’s decision.
(Ord. 2009-06, passed 4-14-2009)
§ 154.05  UNDERGROUND INSTALLATIONS FOR NEW BUILDINGS.
   Within current municipal urban service areas, all service lines from new
buildings shall be buried.
(Ord. 2009-06, passed 4-14-2009)
CHAPTER 155:  MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOMES
Section
General Provisions
   
155.01   Manufactured homes
   
155.02   Definitions
   
155.03   Adoption of state regulations
   
155.04   Location requirements for mobile homes outside mobile home parks
   
155.05   Permits and use of mobile homes outside approved park
   
155.06   Mobile home park special use permit
   
155.07   Building permit for mobile home park
   
155.08   Installation permits
   
155.09   Site requirements
Manufactured Home Park Closings
   
155.20   Purpose
   
155.21   Definitions
   
155.22   Notice of closing
   
155.23   Notice of public hearing
   
155.24   Public hearing
   
155.25   Payment of relocation costs
   
155.26   Payment of additional compensation
   
155.27   Verification of costs
 
   
155.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.01  MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   After the date of the adoption of this code, only manufactured homes which
comply with the Manufactured Home Building Code established by M.S. § 327.31,
as it may be amended from time to time, may be located in and used as a
dwelling within the city.  A mobile home, manufactured home, house trailer or
other mobile dwelling which does not comply with the Manufactured Home Building
Code and which is used as a residence after the date of the adoption of this
code is a nonconforming use as defined by M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 1e, as it may
be amended from time to time, and this nonconforming use may be continued,
including through repair, maintenance, replacement, restoration or improvement
but if the nonconformity or occupancy is discontinued for a period of more than
one year, or the nonconforming use is destroyed by fire or other peril to the
extent of greater than 50% of its market value and no building permit is
applied for within 180 days of when the property is damaged, any subsequent use
or occupancy of the land or premises shall be a conforming use or occupancy.
Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure designed to be used as a dwelling which is
transportable in one or more sections, or a significant part of which was
constructed before being placed or located on a lot.
   MOBILE HOME. A manufactured home which was constructed on a permanent
chassis and which was designed to be used as a year-round dwelling, but which
is not attached or anchored to a permanent foundation.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. Any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which two or
more occupied mobile homes are kept, either free of charge or for revenue
purposes, and shall include any building, structure, vehicle or enclosure used
or intended for use as part of the equipment of such mobile home park.
   UNIT. A section of ground in a mobile home park designated as the location
for a mobile home, off-street parking space for two automobiles and other uses
considered pertinent to the establishment and use of a mobile home residence as
permitted by this subchapter.
(1978 Code, § 903.01)  (Ord. 83-7, passed 6-20-1983)
§ 155.03  ADOPTION OF STATE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Rules of Mobile Homes, set forth in Minn. Rules Ch. 1350 and the
following sections, are hereby confirmed and adopted by reference as if set out
in full.
   (B)   A copy of the rules are on file with the Clerk at City Hall.
   (C)   The installation of mobile homes within the city, except temporary
installation under §
155.05 of this chapter, should be in conformity with the regulations.
(1978 Code, § 903.02)
§ 155.04  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS FOR MOBILE HOMES OUTSIDE MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   No mobile home for dwelling use shall be located or used in the city outside
an established state approved and city licensed mobile home park, except by
special permission of the Council; provided, however, that, this section shall
not apply to manufactured housing which is attached or anchored to a permanent
foundation below frost line in accordance with the requirements of the State
Building Code in effect at the time the building permit is granted, and which
is in compliance with the city’s Zoning Ordinance, § 10 (separately published
document).
(1978 Code, § 903.03)  (Ord. 83-7, passed 6-20-1983)  Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.05  PERMITS AND USE OF MOBILE HOMES OUTSIDE APPROVED PARK.
   (A)   Application. Any person desiring to locate a mobile home for dwelling
use in the city outside an approved mobile home park shall make written
application to the Council for a temporary mobile home use permit, stating all
information necessary as established by Council resolution.
   (B)   Temporary mobile home permits. Permits for mobile homes located
outside approved mobile home parks, if granted, may be issued by Council only,
for periods not to exceed 90 days; provided, however, that, the Council may
extend the permit for additional 90 day periods upon payment of an additional
fee.
   (C)   Fee. A fee of $5 will be required for each temporary permit issued or
each renewal of a permit issued.
   (D)   Cancellation. Any permit issued under this section is subject to
cancellation at any time by order of the Council if any of the terms of the
subchapter are violated.
   (E)   Occupancy. If a temporary permit is issued, the mobile home shall be
occupied by the person to whom the permit is issued and members of his or her
immediate family only. The renting, or receipt of any payment for use of a
mobile home or the grounds upon which it is located, or the occupancy of the
mobile home by another party is prohibited and is cause for immediate
cancellation.
   (F)   Improvement. For mobile homes located outside approved mobile home
parks pursuant to a temporary mobile home permit, the removal of wheels or the
construction of a permanent foundation or of an addition to provide extra
living space is prohibited.
   (G)   Subdivision of land. If the plot of land upon which a mobile home
pursuant to a permit under this section is located, is subdivided or sold as a
separate parcel, any permit issued under the terms of this section is subject
to cancellation.
   (H)   Removal. Upon expiration of a temporary mobile home permit or
cancellation by the Council, the mobile home shall be removed from the property
by the person to whom the permit is issued or the owner or agent of the
property on which the mobile home is located.
(1978 Code, § 903.04)  (Ord. 83-7, passed 6-20-1983)  Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.06  MOBILE HOME PARK SPECIAL USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Application. Application for a special permit to establish, construct,
maintain and expand or enlarge a mobile home park under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be made to the Council. The application for a permit shall be
accompanied by ten copies plus an electronic copy of the mobile home park plan
showing the following, either existing or proposed:
      (1)   Legal description and survey of the area proposed for mobile home
park;
      (2)   Roads and driveways within the park;
      (3)   Location of sites or units for mobile homes;
      (4)   Location and number of sanitary conveniences;
      (5)   Proposed disposition of surface drainage;
      (6)   Proposed street surfacing and lighting;
      (7)   Off-street parking;
      (8)   Patios;
      (9)   Location of community buildings;
      (10)   Location of recreation facilities;
      (11)   Location of sidewalks;
      (12)   Location of setback lines for mobile homes;
      (13)   Location of screening, planting, green areas and the like;
      (14)   Any other information requested by the city; and
      (15)   Location of utility lines.
   (B)   Adjoining properties. Each application for a special use permit shall
be accompanied by a list of the names and addresses of all persons owning
property within 300 feet of any boundary line of the proposed mobile home park
site.
   (C)   Fee. Each applicant shall be required to pay a fee according to the
current fee schedule in §
35.02, plus engineering and attorney’s fees pursuant to §§
35.01 and
35.02 of this code of ordinances, at the time the application is filed with the
city. This money shall be used by the Council to defray the expense of
processing said application.
   (D)   Hearing. No special permit for any mobile home park shall be issued
until after a public hearing has been held on the matter by the Council. This
hearing shall be advertised in the official newspaper of the city at least
once, ten days and not more than 20 days prior to the public hearing. The
applicant shall mail a notice of said hearing to each of the property owners
within one-half mile of the proposed mobile home park site.
   (E)   Existing parks and amortization. All existing mobile home parks shall
be required to obtain a special use permit within 30 days of the effective date
of this subchapter. Other than making application to the Council, existing
mobile home park applicants need not comply with divisions (A), (B), (C) and
(D) above. All existing units not in conformity with setback, area or other
requirements relating to lot size in this subchapter shall be brought into
conformity therewith by 7-1-1981. Such lots may be brought into conformity by
combination of lots or other means of achieving necessary dimensions.
(1978 Code, § 903.05)  Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.07  BUILDING PERMIT FOR MOBILE HOME PARK.
   (A)   Applicability of subchapter. The applicant for a building permit for
the construction of a mobile home park or any part thereof shall comply with
all applicable provisions of this subchapter as they apply to such
construction.
   (B)   Plans. Each application shall be accompanied by ten four copies and
one electronic copy of detailed plans of the proposed construction and
improvements of the site.
   (C)   State approval. Every application for a building permit to construct a
mobile home park or to expand an existing mobile home park shall be accompanied
by plans approved by the State Department of Health, showing that the applicant
is complying with all recommendations, suggestions and laws under the
jurisdiction of that Department.
   (D)   Council approval. The building permit shall be issued by the Building
Inspector only after it has been approved by a majority vote of the Council.
(1978 Code, § 903.06)  Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.08  INSTALLATION PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required. A mobile home installation permit for the permanent
installation of mobile homes within a park is required. All permanent
installations shall be in conformity with this subchapter.
   (B)   Applications and fees. Permits for the installation of mobile home
shall be obtained by the owner or person making the installation prior to
placement of the mobile home on the unit. Application shall be made on forms
supplied by the city and shall be accompanied by a fee set by the Council
resolution. Said fee shall cover the cost of application and installation
inspection.
   (C)   Certificate of occupancy. No person shall occupy a mobile home within
a park until after inspection of the installation and issuance of a certificate
of occupancy by the Building Inspector.
   (D)   Violations. Whenever the inspection of a mobile home reveals a
violation of this subchapter, the inspector shall serve upon the owner or
installer a notice of violations setting forth the violations. Said notice
shall be deemed served by posting said notice on the mobile home in violation
and shall not be removed until the violation is corrected or the mobile home
removed from the city. The inspector shall provide a reasonable time for curing
of violation. Failure to cure within the time provided shall be deemed a
violation of this subchapter. If the violation is not cured within five days
after expiration of the period allowed to cure the defect, the mobile home
shall be removed from the city. Notice to remove shall be served by the
Inspector in the same manner as notice of violation. Failure to remove in
accordance with the notice shall give the city the right to seek injunction
relief and the owner of the mobile home shall be liable for the expense the
city incurs in bringing the action; including attorney’s fees and, if
necessary, removing the mobile home.
(1978 Code, § 903.07)  Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.09  SITE REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to the requirements of the Rules of Mobile Homes, adopted
herein, the following shall apply to all installations and sites.
   (A)   Utilities. All utilities shall be underground; the electrical service,
fuel, gas and sewage to each mobile home shall be underground.
   (B)   Recreational facilities. At least 10% of the land area shall be
developed for recreational use (tennis courts, children’s play equipment,
swimming pool, golf greens and the like) and developed and maintained at the
owner’s expense. The recreational areas shall be completed before any site is
offered for rental.
   (C)   Sewer and water. All mobile homes must be connected to a central water
and sanitary sewer system approved by the State Health Department, Pollution
Control Agency and the city. A system for disposal of surface storm water must
be approved by the Council.
   (D)   Solid waste disposal. The method of garbage, waste and trash disposal
must be approved by the Council and shall conform to State Board of Health
Regulations and this code of ordinances.
   (E)   Parking. There shall be adequate area or areas set aside for dead
storage and overload parking; there shall be one 20-foot by 25-foot paved
parking space per mobile home site. Overload parking spaces shall be located
within 500 feet of any mobile home.
   (F)   Office and storm shelter building. Each mobile home park shall contain
one or more enclosed facility building with space devoted to offices, storm
shelter (basement), laundry, sanitary and recreational facilities. The
buildings shall be so designed so as to provide at least 12 square feet of
space per mobile home lot, but in no case shall the building be less than 2,500
square feet. The number and location of buildings shall be subject to Council
approval.
   (G)   Manager. An adult caretaker or manager must be on duty in or about the
mobile home park at all times. There shall be an office for the use of the
manager distinctly marked “Office” and such marking shall be illuminated during
all hours of darkness.
   (H)   Additions. Addition to a mobile home of a foyer or vestibule is
permitted. The size of this addition is not to exceed 30 square feet. A
building permit and compliance with all applicable sections of this code is
required.
   (I)   Register. The manager shall maintain a registry in the office of the
mobile home park showing:
      (1)   The name and address of each guest or permanent resident according
to state regulation; and
      (2)   The make, type and license number of each mobile home and auto.
   (J)   Mobile homes and sites. Mobile homes shall be prohibited that:
      (1)   Do not conform to the requirements of the Mobile Home Construction
Code of the state, being M.S. §§ 327.31 et seq., as they may be amended from
time to time;
      (2)   Are in an unsanitary condition or the exterior is dilapidated or in
bad repair; and
      (3)   Are structurally unsound and do not protect the inhabitants against
the elements.
   (K)   Mobile home skirting. Skirting shall be installed within 30 days from
time of move-in. Skirting shall be weather resistant, non-combustible or not
more combustible than three-eighths inch exterior grade plywood. Untreated wood
shall not be nearer than six inches to any earth, unless separated by three
inches of metal or concrete. A minimum 18-inch by 24-inch access shall be
provided. Ventilation openings shall be provided for each 25 linear feet of
skirting. Each opening shall have a minimum net area of 36 square inches and
shall be located within two feet of the external corners of the home and shall
have a corrosion resistant louver or mesh cover; provided, however, that, for
metal skirting, supporting members of untreated lumber shall be separated from
the ground by not less than two inches.
   (L)   Accessory buildings or structures.
      (1)   Porch and steps shall be capable of supporting a 40 psf live load.
Minimum width of steps shall be 30 inches. If the main entry door swings
outward, a minimum 30-inch by 30-inch landing shall be provided. Steps shall
have a maximum rise of eight inches and a minimum run of nine inches. Two or
more risers shall constitute a stairway; therefore, a handrail shall be
provided. The handrail shall be placed not less than 30 inches, nor more than
34 inches above the nosing of the treads. The handrail shall be designed for a
horizontal load of not less than 20 psf. The handrail shall not reduce the
required width by more than three and one-half inches. Porches may be supported
on individual concrete or pressure treated lumber footings, capable of
supporting the design (40 psf) load and the dead weight of the porch. Other
approved material of equivalent load bearing capacity and resistance to decay
may be used.
      (2)   Permits for the installation of mobile home accessory buildings or
structures shall be obtained by the owner of the mobile home or person making
the installation for the owner prior to placement. Application for necessary
buildings or structures shall be on forms provided by the city at a fee set by
the Council.
      (3)   When the inspection reveals that a mobile home accessory building
or structure is in violation of any provisions of this subchapter, the
enforcing authority shall serve on the owner or dealer/installer a notice of
violations setting forth violation in the same manner and with the same
remedies as provided in §
155.08 of this chapter.
   (M)   Alterations.
      (1)   Permits for alteration shall be required. Application therefor
shall be on forms provided by the city at a fee set by Council resolution. Any
alteration affecting the construction, plumbing, mechanical, illuminating,
cooking or electrical equipment in a mobile home which bears or is required to
bear an insignia, shall void such approval and the insignia shall be returned
to or be appropriated by the Building Department. Mobile homes which have been
flooded, burned, overturned or otherwise damaged shall have the insignia label
returned to or appropriated by the Department. Alteration permits and
inspections shall be in accordance with the state mobile home rules.
      (2)   The following shall not constitute an alteration:
         (a)   Repairs with approved component parts;
         (b)   Conversion of listed fuel-burning appliances in accordance with
the terms of their listing;
         (c)   Adjustment and maintenance of equipment; and/or
         (d)   Replacement of equipment in kind.
   (N)   Map. A map of the mobile home park shall be displayed at the park
office and be illuminated during all hours of darkness.
   (O)   Site markings. The corners of each mobile home site shall be clearly
marked and each site shall be numbered.
   (P)   Laundry. Laundry and clothes shall be hung out to dry only on lines
located in approved areas established and maintained exclusively for that
purpose.
   (Q)   Lighting. Artificial light shall be maintained during all hours of
darkness in all common buildings. The park grounds shall be lighted as approved
by the Council from sunset to sunrise.
   (R)   Loudspeakers. No public address system shall be permitted.
   (S)   Animals. Dogs and other animals shall not be permitted to run at large
within the park.
   (T)   Fire protection. Fire protection shall be provided by fire hydrants;
they shall be located within 300 feet of any unit. The licensee shall provide a
plan for hydrants for Council review and approval. No license may be granted,
nor renewal issued, without an approved fire hydrant system.
   (U)   Camping. There shall be no outdoor camping nor any tents erected or
occupied anywhere in the park.
   (V)   Maintenance. Every structure shall be developed and maintained in a
safe, approved and substantial manner. The exterior of such structures shall be
kept in good repair and shall be repainted or refinished when directed by the
Council.
   (W)   Permanent structures. No person shall erect, place, construct,
reconstruct, reallocate, alter, maintain, use or occupy a permanent structure
in the park which is to be used as a residence.
   (X)   Ground cover. Crushed rock shall be placed under the entire area
occupied by each mobile home.
   (Y)   Unit size. The size of all units in the park shall be 6,000 square
feet or necessary to meet setback whichever is greater with a minimum width of
80 feet.
   (Z)   Site features. Each mobile home site shall have the following
features:
      (1)   Frontage on an approved roadway;
      (2)   A 30-inch concrete sidewalk along the entire frontage with a 30-
inch concrete sidewalk connecting from the home entrance to the frontage
sidewalk;
      (3)   Each site shall be completely sodded and landscaped with at least
one tree;
      (4)   No mobile home shall be parked closer than 20 feet to the side and
rear lot lines. All mobile homes shall be parked 25 feet from the front lot
line. Front setback is to be measured from the inside of the front sidewalk;
and
      (5)   Automobiles shall not park closer than ten feet from any wall of
any mobile home; automobiles shall not park nearer than five feet to any side
lot line.
   (AA)   Transient sites. No more than 10% of all mobile home sites shall be
occupied by transient (less than seven days’ occupancy) coaches. No building,
carport, awning, storage closet, cupboard or other structures shall be
permitted on a transient site.
   (BB)   Yard size and setback. Each site shall have a front yard not less
than 30 feet in depth across the entire frontage; the entire yard shall be
landscaped, except for a 20-foot by 25-foot parking area. Mobile home sites
with frontage to public streets shall conform to all setback and other
requirements of the zoning district in which said site is located.
   (CC)   Roads. Roadways within the mobile home park:
      (1)   Shall have a concrete (mountable, roll type) curb and gutter;
      (2)   Shall be not less than 40 feet in width;
      (3)   Shall be a 30-inch concrete sidewalk along both sides of all roads;
and
      (4)   Shall be developed and improved as approved by the Council.
   (DD)   Screening. A compact hedge or landscaped area shall be installed
across the front of the park and shall be maintained in good condition at all
times as approved by the Council. In addition, the entire park is to be
screened by plantings approved by the Council.
   (EE)   Land maintenance. All land areas within the mobile home park shall:
      (1)   Have drainage to drain a two-inch per hour intensity rainfall as
computed by the rational method; and
      (2)   Be free of dust, clean and free from refuse, garbage, rubbish or
debris.
   (FF)   Landscaping. All lands not used for mobile home sites shall be
adequately landscaped in accordance with approved plans.
   (GG)   Sales. No mobile home sales or storage shall be allowed on mobile
home park premises.
   (HH)   Mail facilities. Mail facilities shall not be on the public roadway.
   (II)   Street signs. Street designations and street signs shall be erected
as approved by the Council.
   (JJ)   Inspection. Periodic inspection by health, engineering, police,
building and other public personnel is hereby authorized. By acceptance of its
permit under this subchapter, the permittee agrees to allow such inspection and
pay all actual expenses, fees and costs of the same incurred by the city.
   (KK)   Number of occupants. No mobile home shall be inhabited by a greater
number of occupants than that for which it was reasonably designed. In no
event, shall there be less than 150 square feet of living space per person on
the ground floor of each mobile home. No additions or alterations of any mobile
home or accessory building shall increase the permissable number of
inhabitants.
   (LL)   Bus stops. Any shelter for school bus pickup shall be as approved by
the Council.
   (MM)   Existing trees. The permittee shall endeavor to retain existing trees
in development of the park.
(1978 Code, § 903.08)  Penalty, see §
155.99
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK CLOSINGS
§ 155.20  PURPOSE.
   In view of the peculiar nature and problems presented by the closure or
conversion of manufactured home parks, the City Council finds that the public
health, safety and general welfare will be promoted by requiring compensation
to displaced residents of such parks. The purpose of this subchapter is to
require park owners to pay displaced residents reasonable relocation costs and
purchasers of manufactured home parks to pay additional compensation, pursuant
to the authority granted under M.S. § 327C.095, as it may be amended from time
to time.
(Ord. 97-2, passed 2-25-1996)
§ 155.21  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLOSURE STATEMENT. A statement prepared by the park owner clearly stating
the park is closing, addressing the availability, location and potential costs
of adequate replacement housing within a 25-mile radius of the park that is
closing and the probable relocation costs of the manufactured homes located in
the park.
   DISPLACED RESIDENT. A resident of an owner-occupied manufactured home who
rents a lot in a manufactured home park, including the members of the
resident’s household, as of the date the park owner submits a closure statement
to the city’s Planning Commission.
   LOT. An area within a manufactured home park, designed or used for the
accommodation of a manufactured home.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, not affixed to or part of real estate,
transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight
body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected
on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis
and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating,
air-conditioning and electrical system contained in it.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which two
or more occupied manufactured homes are located, either free of charge or from
compensation, and includes any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure
used or intended for use as part of the equipment of the manufactured home
park. This definition does not include facilities which are open only during
three or fewer seasons of the year.
   PARK OWNER. The owner of a manufactured home park and any person acting on
behalf of the owner in the operation or management of a park.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, incorporated and
unincorporated association or any other legal or commercial entity.
(Ord. 97-2, passed 2-25-1996)
§ 155.22  NOTICE OF CLOSING.
   If a manufactured home park is to be closed, converted in whole or in part
to another use or terminated as a use of the property, the park owner shall, at
least nine months prior to closure, conversion to another use or termination of
use, provide a copy of a closure statement to a resident of each manufactured
home and to the city’s Planning Commission.
(Ord. 97-2, passed 2-25-1996)  Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.23  NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.
   The Planning Commission shall submit the closure statement to the City
Council and request the City Council to schedule a public hearing. The city
shall mail a notice at least ten days prior to the public hearing to a resident
of each manufactured home in the park stating the time, place and purpose of
the hearing. The owner shall provide the city with a list of the names and
addresses of at least one adult resident of each manufactured home in the park
at the time the closure statement is submitted to the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 97-2, passed 2-25-1996)
§ 155.24  PUBLIC HEARING.
   A public hearing shall be held before the City Council for the purpose of
reviewing the closure statement and evaluating what impact the park closing may
have on the displaced residents and the park owner.
(Ord. 97-2, passed 2-25-1996)
§ 155.25  PAYMENT OF RELOCATION COSTS.
   (A)   After service of the closure statement by the park owner and upon
submittal by the displaced resident of a contract or other verification of
relocation expenses, the park owner shall pay to the displaced resident the
reasonable cost of relocating the manufactured home to another manufactured
home park located within a 25-mile radius of the park that is being closed,
converted to another use or ceasing operation.
   (B)   Reasonable relocations costs shall include:
      (1)   The actual expenses incurred in moving the displaced resident’s
manufactured home and personal property, including the reasonable cost of
dissembling, moving and reassembling any attached appurtenances, such as
porches, decks, skirting and awnings, which were not acquired after notice of
closure or conversion of the park, and utility “hook-up” charges;
      (2)   The cost of insurance for the replacement value of the property;
      (3)   The cost of repairs or modifications that are required in order to
move the manufactured home; and
      (4)   Before the execution of an agreement to purchase a manufactured
home park, the purchaser must notify the park owner, in writing, if the
purchaser intends to close the manufactured home park or convert it to another
use within one year of the execution of the agreement. The park owner shall
provide a resident of each manufactured home with a 45-day written notice, by
first class mail, of the purchaser’s intent to close the park or convert it to
another use. The notice must state that the park owner will provide information
of the cash price and the terms and conditions of the purchaser’s offer to
residents requesting the information. During the notice period required herein,
the owners of at least 51% of the manufactured homes in the park or a non-
profit organization which has the written permission of the owners of at least
51% of the manufactured homes in the park to represent them in the acquisition
of the park shall have the right to meet the cash price and execute an
agreement to purchase the park for the purposes of keeping the park as a
manufactured housing community. The park owner must accept the offer it meets
the cash price and the same terms and conditions set forth in the purchaser’s
offer; except that, the seller is not obligated to provide owner financing. For
purposes of this section, CASH PRICE means the cash price offer or equivalent
cash offer.
(Ord. 97-2, passed 2-25-1996)
§ 155.26  PAYMENT OF ADDITIONAL COMPENSATION.
   (A)   (1)   If a resident cannot relocate the manufactured home within a 25-
mile radius of the park that is being closed or some other agreed upon
distance, the resident is entitled to additional compensation to be paid by the
purchaser of the park, in order to mitigate the adverse financial impact of the
park closing.
      (2)   If the resident tenders the title to the manufactured home, the
additional compensation shall be in an amount equal to the estimated market
value of the manufactured home as determined by the City Assessor and as
reported on the resident’s most recent property tax statement. The purchaser of
the park shall pay such compensation into escrow account, established by the
park owner, for distribution upon transfer of title to the home. Such
compensation shall be paid to the displaced residents no later than 30 days
prior to the closing of the park or its conversion to another use.
   (B)   If a resident cannot relocate the manufactured home within a 25-mile
radius of the park which is being closed or some other agreed upon distance,
the resident is entitled to relocation costs based upon an average of
relocation costs awarded to other residents in the park.
   (C)   The total compensation to be paid to displaced residents by the park
owner and purchaser of the park shall not exceed 20% of the purchase price of
the park.
(Ord. 97-2, passed 2-25-1996)
§ 155.27  VERIFICATION OF COSTS.
   (A)   The displaced resident must submit a contract or other verified cost
estimate for relocating the manufactured home to the park owner for approval as
a condition to the park owner’s liability to pay relocation expenses.
   (B)   If the park owner refuses to pay the contract or other verified costs
estimate, the park owner shall arrange for relocating the manufactured home and
pay the relocation costs identified in §
155.25 of this chapter.
(Ord. 97-2, passed 2-25-1996)
§ 155.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Violation of any provision of §§
155.20 through
155.27 of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor.
      (2)   Any provisions of §§
155.20 through
155.27 of this chapter may be enforced by injunction or other appropriate civil
remedy.
      (3)   The city shall not approve an application for a building permit,
rezoning, platting, conditional use permit (CUP) or variance in conjunction
with reuse of manufactured home park property unless the park owner has paid
reasonable relocation costs and the purchaser of the park has provided
additional compensation in accordance with the requirements of §§
155.20 through
155.27 of this chapter.
(Ord. 97-2, passed 2-25-1996)
CHAPTER 156:  LAND SALES
Section
   
156.01   Findings; statement of purpose
   
156.02   Notice required
   
156.03   Form of notice
   
156.04   Delivery of notice
   
156.05   Additional permits
§ 156.01  FINDINGS; STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   (A)   The Council finds that certain lots and parcels of land within the
city are inadequate for development and to render adequate for development may
require substantial alterations and improvements. With the rapid shift of land
use from agricultural to more intense usage, there is often inadequate
knowledge and notice of conditions which render lots and parcels less desirable
for development.
   (B)   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for orderly, economic and
safe development of land and public services within the city and promote the
public health, safety and welfare by providing adequate notice to potential
buyers of problems that may exist relative to the condition of the lot or
parcel being purchased which affects its capability for development.
   (C)   By enacting this chapter, the city is assuming no liability for
statements made in accordance herewith, nor is it creating any rights or causes
of action against the city.
(1978 Code, § 904.01)
§ 156.02  NOTICE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner of each existing lot or parcel of land ten acres or less in
size of record in the city shall, prior to the closing of a sale on such lot or
parcel, notify the buyer or buyers thereof in writing relative to the items
specified in §
156.03 of this chapter.
   (B)   Such notice shall not be required on lots upon which construction of
any structure designed for human habitation or use has been completed and for
which a certificate of occupancy has been issued as of 9-1-1978.
(1978 Code, § 904.02)
§ 156.03  FORM OF NOTICE.
   (A)   Such notification shall be on forms approved by Council resolution and
provided by the city at a fee to be set by Council resolution.
   (B)   The forms shall contain, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   The seller’s name or names and address or addresses;
      (2)   Street address and legal description of the lot or parcel being
sold; and
      (3)   Statement by the seller as to the capability of the lot to support
building and development. Said statement shall contain findings and the basis
thereof relative to the following:
         (a)   Water table as determined by borings, well logs, excavations or
other methods which will ascertain to a reasonable degree of certainty the
depth of the water table. The owner shall not be required to ascertain the
depth of the water table below a depth of ten feet;
         (b)   Soil type as determined by Hennepin County Soil Survey or a
qualified soil engineer through borings or excavations;
         (c)   Capability of the lot or parcel to support a standard on-site
sewage treatment system, as defined in
Ch. 52 of this code of ordinances. If said lot or parcel will not support a
standard system, what type, if any, will meet the needs of said lot or parcel
and allow development of permitted uses. Notice shall be given as to the
approximate location on the lot or parcel where such standard system, or
modified system, could be installed;
         (d)   In addition to division (B)(3)(c) above, a statement as to
whether or not the lot is capable of being built upon, in accordance with
applicable federal, state and local statutes, ordinances, rules and
regulations. If not capable of being built upon without some modification, what
modifications are necessary;
         (e)   For all platted lots, whether or not the public street or
streets abutting the lot comply with city ordinances. If said streets do not
comply, what is needed to comply therewith, and a statement as to whether or
not the seller of the lot will assume the costs attributable to the lot sold
for any work necessary to bring the abutting street or streets into compliance
with city ordinances in existence at the time the lot was platted;
         (f)   Any existing or pending special assessments levied or to be
levied against such lot; and
         (g)   The following statement which shall be subscribed by the owner,
or in the case of corporate ownership, by the senior executive officer:
 
The undersigned certifies that he or she has read the contents of the above form and the exhibits, if any, appended
hereto and certifies that he or she has personal knowledge of the contents hereof and knows that the responses and
statements set forth are true and accurate.
 
Dated this                  day of                                ,            
 
OWNER                                                                          
 
By                                                                                    
Its:
 
 
(1978 Code, § 904.03)
§ 156.04  DELIVERY OF NOTICE.
   The seller shall deliver the notice required by this chapter prior to the
signing of any purchase agreement or contract relative to the sale of lots or
parcels subject to this chapter. The buyer shall acknowledge in writing receipt
of a copy of the notice. This notice shall be delivered separately from any
other literature or statements provided the buyer and shall not be incorporated
in such literature.
(1978 Code, § 904.04)
§ 156.05  ADDITIONAL PERMITS.
   Statements on the notification form required by this chapter which
establish, or purport to establish, that a lot is capable of building or
development do not exempt lots and any construction thereon from requirements
established by federal, state and local statutes, ordinances, resolutions,
rules and regulations as to the use of the land and building thereon.
(1978 Code, § 904.05)
CHAPTER 157:  SWIMMING POOLS
Section
   
157.01   General provisions
   
157.02   Permit required
   
157.03   Application for permit
   
157.04   Construction setback requirements
   
157.05   Safety fence required
   
157.06   Nuisances, drainage and the like
   
157.07   Application
§ 157.01  GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS are regulated by this chapter and are defined as
follows: any enclosure, designed or intended or used for the containment of
water, whether constructed below ground level or above ground level, having a
surface area exceeding 100 square feet and a depth exceeding 18 inches which is
designed, intended or used for swimming, wading or other recreational use by
the owner or tenant of the property upon which the pool is constructed, or by
his, her or their family or invited guests without payment of a fee.
(1978 Code, § 905.01)  (Ord. 85-9, passed 11-4-1985; Ord. 2012-09, passed 10-9-
2012)
§ 157.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No swimming pool shall be constructed or established, and no such pool
construction shall be commenced in the city without first obtaining a permit
from the Building Inspector.
(1978 Code, § 905.02)  (Ord. 85-9, passed 11-4-1985)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 157.03  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Application for a swimming pool permit shall be made to the Building
Inspector upon forms provided by the Building Inspector. A fee set by
resolution of the Council shall be submitted with the application to cover the
costs of inspection.
   (B)   The application for the permit shall include, without limitation, the
following information:
      (1)   Complete plans and specifications for the construction of the pool;
      (2)   A site plan showing the location of all structures on the lot,
including the house, garage, fences, trees, overhead or underground wiring,
utility easements and other significant improvements or natural features;
      (3)   The proposed location of pumps, filters, electrical power source
(if applicable), flushing and drainage outlets, and other operational features;
and
      (4)   Location and specifications of protective fencing.
(1978 Code, § 905.03)  (Ord. 85-9, passed 11-4-1985; Ord. 2012-09, passed 10-9-
2012)
§ 157.04  CONSTRUCTION SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   Private swimming pools shall be constructed so as to avoid hazard or damage
to the occupants of the subject property or the occupants of adjacent property
and shall meet the following minimum requirements.
   (A)   Setback. No pool shall be located within 18 feet (measured
horizontally) from any underground or overhead utility line of any kind.
   (B)   Easements. No pool shall be located within any public or private
utility easement, ingress or egress easement, drainage way, marsh or other
location in which it will represent a threat to the natural environment.
   (C)   Accessory structures. Swimming pools are accessory structures in all
residential districts under the city’s zoning ordinance and must meet
appropriate setback regulations.
   (D)   Electrical. All electrical installations shall comply with current
building, electrical and other applicable state and local codes.
(1978 Code, § 905.04)  (Ord. 85-9, passed 11-4-1985)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 157.05  SAFETY FENCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Structure or fence required. A safety fence at least four feet in
height shall completely enclose the pool. All openings or points of entry into
the pool area shall be equipped with gates or doors. All gates and doors shall
have a latch which shall be so constructed and so placed as to be inaccessible
to small children. All gates and doors shall be latched and locked to prevent
access to the pool when the pool is not in use. Any opening between the bottom
of the fence and the ground level shall not exceed three inches. As an
alternative to a safety fence, an automatic pool cover may be utilized if it
meets the standards of F1346-91 of the American Society of Testing and
Materials (ASTEM), as such standards may be modified, superseded or replaced by
ASTM. The automatic pool cover shall be closed at all times the pool is not in
use.
   (B)   Walls and fence construction. The wall of any pool constructed above
ground level, regardless of the height thereof, shall not qualify as a safety
fence. Safety fences shall be constructed so as to inhibit the climbing thereof
by any person. Any safety fence constructed primarily of wood shall be composed
of vertical members with spaces no greater that three inches between the
boards. If constructed primarily of other materials, a safety fence shall
contain no space through which a sphere three inches in diameter may pass.
(1978 Code, § 905.05)  (Ord. 85-9, passed 11-4-1985; Ord. 96-1, passed 4-23-
1996; Ord. 2017-11, passed 8-23-2017)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 157.06  NUISANCES, DRAINAGE AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Nuisance. The conduct of persons and the operation of pools shall be
the responsibility of the owner and the tenant thereof and such conduct of
persons and operation of the pool shall be done in such a manner so as to avoid
any nuisance or breach of the peace, and it shall be unlawful to allow loud
noises to go beyond the boundaries of the property upon which the pool is
located to adjacent property.
   (B)   Drainage. All back flushing water or pool drainage water shall be
directed onto the property of the owner or onto approved drainage ways.
Drainage onto public streets or other public drainage shall require a permit
from the Building Inspector.
   (C)   Lighting. Any outdoor lighting of the pool shall not be permitted to
spill or shine upon adjacent properties.
   (D)   Filling. The filling of pools from fire hydrants or other public
facilities is prohibited without prior approval of the Director of Public
Works.
(1978 Code, § 905.06)  (Ord. 85-9, passed 11-4-1985)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 157.07  APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to pools constructed after the
date of passage of this chapter.
(1978 Code, § 905.07)  (Ord. 85-9, passed 11-4-1985)
CHAPTER 158:  SUBDIVISIONS AND ZONING
Section
   
158.01   Subdivision and zoning regulations adopted by reference
§ 158.01  SUBDIVISION AND ZONING REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The subdivision and zoning regulations, published separately, are hereby
adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
[Reserved]
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to 1978 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
 
M.S. Section                       Code Section
12.01 et seq.                      32.21
Ch. 13                             33.36,
                                   34.02
13.37(b)                           152.40
13D.01 et seq.                     31.01
14.57 to 14.69                     116.13
15.73, Subd. 3                     152.02
35.71                              94.05
84.86                              71.16
84.87                              10.98
88.171                             10.98
97A.015, Subd. 24                  91.01
103G.005, Subd. 15                 151.05
103G.291                           52.057
Ch. 115                            51.20
115.01, Subd. 5                    51.40
115.01, Subd. 20                   51.45
115.01, Subd. 22                   151.05
115.07                             51.40
115A.03, Subd. 12, 21, 25a and 25b 130.09
115A.03, Subd. 25a                 130.09
144.382, Subd. 4                   52.057
144.391                            111.01
Ch. 145A                           51.20
151.01                             130.18
151.01, Subd. 17                   130.18
152.02                             130.02,
                                   130.18
152.092                            113.030
168B.03                            10.98
Ch. 169                            71.16
169.01                             70.01
176.001 et seq.                    33.20
176.011, Subd. 9                   33.20
177.21 et seq.                     33.05
179.61 to 179.76                   33.19
179A.01 et seq.                    33.02
181.940 to 181.944                 33.10
192.26                             33.09
192.261                            33.09
Ch. 197                            33.02,
                                   33.17
197.46                             33.04,
                                   33.17
216B.02                            152.02
216B.02, Subd. 4 and 6             152.02
216B.34                            152.55
Ch. 216D                           152.05
216D.01 through 216D.09            152.32,
                                   152.57
216D.04, Subd. 3                   152.02,
                                   152.40
237.79                             152.01
237.81                             152.01
237.162                            152.01,
                                   152.02
237.162, Subd. 4                   152.02
237.162, Subd. 8(3)                152.34
237.163                            152.01
237.163, Subd. 3a(f)               152.07
237.163, Subd. 4                   152.33,
                                   152.38
237.163, Subd. 8                   152.34
Ch. 238                            152.02,
                                   152.28
238.086                            152.01
243.166                            130.21
243.167                            130.21
244.052                            130.21
Ch. 253B                           130.21
Ch. 278                            116.13
Ch. 308A                           152.02
309.53                             110.27
325J.11                            115.99
326B.101 to 326B.194               150.01,
                                   150.02
326B.121                           150.03,
                                   150.04
326B.133                           150.03
                                   150.04,
326B.148                           150.08—
                                   150.12
327.31 et seq.                     155.09
327C.095                           155.20
Ch. 333                            116.08
Ch. 340                            114.015
340.308                            114.047
                                   114.016,
Ch. 340A                           114.017,
                                   114.025
340A.101                           114.066
340A.408                           114.019
340A.409                           114.018,
                                   114.042
                                   114.024,
340A.414                           114.065,
                                   114.066
340A.414, Subd. 9                  114.066
340A.503                           111.99
340A.503, Subd. 6                  130.15
Ch. 347                            130.02
347.50 through 347.565             94.07
347.50                             94.06,
                                   94.07
347.515                            94.06
Ch. 349                            110.02,
                                   110.22
349.11 through 349.22              110.03,
                                   110.08
349.12, Subd. 11                   110.02
349.12, Subd. 26                   110.02
349.151                            110.02
349.166                            110.03
349.213, Subd. 1(a)                110.06
364.03                             114.045
364.03, Subd. 3                    116.06
364.05                             112.20
364.06                             33.36,
                                   34.02
364.09                             33.36,
                                   34.02
412.02, Subd. 2a                   31.10
412.111                            32.17
412.151                            52.057
412.601 through 412.751            52.057
415.02                             Adopting Ordinance
415.021                            Adopting Ordinance
Ch. 429                            34.15
429.011                            34.31
429.021                            34.33
429.021, Subd. 1                   34.32
429.061                            34.19,
                                   130.04
                                   34.19,
                                   51.28,
429.101                            90.03,
                                   90.04,
                                   130.04,
                                   130.07
435.194                            34.38
444.075                            51.42,
                                   52.033
450.20                             91.01
Ch. 453                            152.02
Ch. 453A                           152.02
461.12                             111.99
462.351                            151.02
463.15, Subd. 3                    113.055
514.67                             90.99
518B.01                            116.12,
                                   116.13
524.5-102                          130.15
524.5-201 et seq.                  130.15
609.02                             33.05
609.035                            130.02
609.50                             113.030
609.53                             113.030
609.66, Subd. 1a                   113.030
609.67                             113.030
609.72                             130.02,
                                   113.030
                                   10.98,
609.74                             113.030,
                                   130.05
609.74 through 609.745             130.02
609.75                             110.02
609.76                             110.02
609.79                             116.12,
                                   116.13
609.221                            130.02
609.222                            130.02
609.223                            130.02
609.224                            130.02
609.293 to 609.352                 116.12,
                                   116.13
609.342                            130.21
609.343                            130.21
609.344                            130.21
609.345                            130.21
609.352                            130.21
609.365                            130.21
609.745                            113.030
609.746 to 609.749                 116.12,
                                   116.13
609.755                            110.02
609.2231                           130.02
617.23                             130.02
617.202                            116.04
617.242                            116.01
617.246                            130.21
617.247                            130.21
617.293                            116.04,
                                   130.21
617.295                            116.04
624.20, Subd. 1(c)                 130.10
624.713                            113.030
626.862                            10.20
                                   
 
REFERENCES TO 1978 CODE
 
1978 Code Section 2015 Code Section
100.05            10.21
201.01            31.01
201.02            31.02
201.03            31.03
201.04            31.04
201.05            31.05
201.06            31.06
201.07            31.07
201.08            31.08
201.09            31.09
202.01            32.19
202.03            32.19
202.04            32.19
203.01            32.20
203.02            32.20
203.03            32.20
203.04            32.20
203.05            32.20
203.06            32.20
203.07            32.20
203.08            32.20
203.09            32.20
203.10            32.20
203.11            32.20
203.12            32.20
203.13            32.20
205.01            32.16
205.02            32.16
205.03            32.16
205.04            32.16
205.05            32.16
205.06            32.16
206.01            32.17
206.02            32.17
206.03            32.17
207.01            32.21
207.02            32.21
207.03            32.21
208.01            33.01
208.02            33.02
208.03            33.03
208.04            33.04
208.05            33.05
208.06            33.06
208.07            33.07
208.08            33.08
208.09            33.09
208.10            33.10
208.11            33.11
208.12            33.12
208.13            33.13
208.14            33.14
208.15            33.15
208.16            33.16
208.17            33.17
208.18            33.18
208.19            33.19
208.20            33.20
208.21            33.21
209.01            35.01
209.02            35.01
209.03            35.01
209.04            35.01
209.05            35.01
209.06            35.01
210.01            32.15
210.02            32.15
210.03            32.15
210.04            32.15
210.05            32.15
210.06            32.15
210.07            32.15
210.08            32.15
210.09            32.15
211.01            32.18
211.02            32.18
211.03            32.18
211.04            32.18
212.01            32.02
212.02            32.01
212.04            32.02
213.01            32.03
213.02            32.03
214.01            35.16
214.02            35.16
214.03            35.16
215.01            35.17
215.02            35.17
215.03            35.17
301.01            153.01
301.02            153.02
301.03            153.03
301.04            153.03
301.05            153.03
301.06            153.03
301.07            153.04
302.01            91.02
303.01            34.15
303.02            34.16
303.03            34.17
303.04            34.18
303.05            34.19
304.01            34.30
304.02            34.31
304.03            34.32
304.04            34.33
304.05            34.34
304.06            34.35
304.07            34.36
304.08            34.37
304.09            34.38
304.10            34.39
304.11            34.40
304.12            34.41
501.01            50.01
501.02            50.02
501.03            50.03
501.04            50.04
501.05            50.05
504.01            110.20
504.02            110.21
504.03            110.22
504.04            110.22
504.05            110.22
504.06            110.23
504.07            110.24
504.08            110.25
504.09            110.26
                  110.27,
504.10            110.29,
                  110.30
504.11            110.28
504.12            110.29
507.01            93.01
507.02            93.02
507.03            93.03
507.04            93.04
507.05            93.05
507.06            93.06
507.07            93.07
510.01            90.01
510.02            90.02
510.03            90.03
510.04            90.04
510.05            90.99
511.01            115.01
511.02            115.02
511.03            115.25
511.04            115.26
511.05            115.27
511.06            115.28
511.07            115.29
511.08            115.30
511.09            115.31
511.10            115.32
511.11            115.33
511.12            115.34
511.13            115.35
511.14            115.36
511.15            115.37
511.16            115.38
511.17            115.39
511.18            115.03
511.19            115.04
511.20            115.05
511.21            115.06
511.22            115.07
511.23            115.08
511.24            115.09
511.25            115.10
511.26            115.11
511.27            115.40
511.28            115.12
511.29            115.13
511.30            115.14
511.31            115.41
511.33            115.99
601.01            114.015,
                  114.016
601.02            114.017
601.03            114.018
601.04            114.019
601.05            114.020
601.06            114.021
601.07            114.022
601.08            114.023
601.09            114.024
601.10            114.025
602.01            114.040
602.02            114.041
602.03            114.042
602.04            114.043
602.05            114.044
602.06            114.045
602.07            114.046
602.08            114.047
602.09            114.048
602.10            114.049
602.11            114.050
603.01            114.065
603.02            114.066
603.03            114.067
603.04            114.068
603.05            114.069
603.06            114.070
603.07            114.072
603.08            114.073
603.09            114.074
604.01            114.001
604.02            114.001
604.03            114.001
702.01            71.15
702.02            71.16
702.03            71.17
702.04            71.18
702.05            71.19
702.06            71.20
702.07            71.21
702.08            71.22
703.01            91.01
703.02            91.01
703.03            91.01
902.01            153.15
902.02            153.16
902.03            153.17
902.04            153.18
902.05            153.19
902.06            153.20
902.07            153.21
903.01            155.02
903.02            155.03
903.03            155.04
903.04            155.05
903.05            155.06
903.06            155.07
903.07            155.08
903.08            155.09
904.01            156.01
904.02            156.02
904.03            156.03
904.04            156.04
904.05            156.05
905.01            157.01
905.02            157.02
905.03            157.03
905.04            157.04
905.05            157.05
905.06            157.06
905.07            157.07
                  
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
79-2     2-20-1979   31.06
81-1     3-16-1981   114.021,
                     114.023
83-3     4-4-1983    114.024,
                     114.047
83-4     4-11-1983   32.18
83-6     6-20-1983   70.04
                     155.02,
83-7     6-20-1983   155.04,
                     155.05
83-11    7-5-1983    91.02
                     114.066,
84-2     1-16-1984   114.067,
                     114.072
84-10    7-2-1984    91.02
84-13    11-19-1984  70.05
85-2     2-19-1985   31.04
85-7     9-21-1985   32.03
85-9     11-4-1985   157.01—
                     157.07
85-10    11-18-1985  34.34
85-11    12-16-1985  153.04
                     114.016—
86-5     5-5-1986    114.019,
                     114.024
86-8A    9-15-1986   31.09
86-9     9-15-1986   35.16
86-10    10-6-1986   71.18
87-5     5-4-1987    91.01
87-14    9-21-1987   35.17
                     33.05,
88-2     1-19-1988   33.08,
                     33.13
88-10    8-15-1988   153.17
88-15    12-19-1988  33.20
88-16    12-19-1988  33.21
90-4     2-5-1990    114.024
90-8     3-19-1990   33.10
                     90.01—
90-10    4-16-1990   90.04,
                     90.99
90-11    4-16-1990   50.02
90-12    5-21-1990   114.018
90-18    9-17-1990   33.07
91-1     1-7-1991    35.01
91-6     6-3-1991    33.04
91-7     6-17-1991   114.042
91-8     6-17-1991   153.16
91-10    7-1-1991    31.09
                     153.15,
91-16    9-3-1991    153.16,
                     153.18
91-20    11-4-1991   91.01
                     115.01—
                     115.14,
92-4     2-18-1992   115.25—
                     115.41,
                     115.99
                     92.01—
94-3     6-20-1994   92.09,
                     92.99
95-4     12-18-1995  31.01
                     155.20—
97-2     2-25-1996   155.27,
                     155.99
96-1     4-23-1996   157.05
96-8     8-27-1996   35.01
98-11    12-22-1998  35.15
                     51.40—
2000-2   - -2000     51.48,
                     51.99
                     51.40—
2000-8   - -2000     51.48,
                     51.99
                     52.001—
                     52.015,
                     52.030—
                     52.033,
2001-2   4-10-2001   52.050—
                     52.056,
                     52.070—
                     52.076,
                     52.999
                     110.01—
                     110.04,
2002-3   2-26-2002   110.06—
                     110.08,
                     110.99
                     111.01—
2002-5   3-12-2002   111.10,
                     111.99
                     71.01—
2002-14  12-10-2002  71.03,
                     71.99
2003-06  5-27-2003   71.01,
                     71.02
2003-09  7-8-2003    51.99
                     114.024,
                     114.040,
2003-13  10-14-2003  114.045,
                     114.047—
                     114.049,
                     114.067
                     150.01—
2003-14  10-28-2003  150.15,
                     150.99
2003-15  10-28-2003  150.04
                     152.01—
                     152.12,
2004-09  11-23-2004  152.25—
                     152.40,
                     152.55—
                     152.62
                     151.01—
2005-04  3-22-2005   151.11,
                     151.99
2006-08  9-5-2006    91.02
2007-12  7-24-2007   32.15—
                     32.17
2007-14  9-11-2007   35.01
2008-09  3-11-2008   51.42
2008-12  3-25-2008   51.42,
                     52.033
2008-15  8-12-2008   31.09
                     33.35,
2008-20  12-9-2008   33.36,
                     34.01,
                     34.02
2008-21  12-9-2008   35.01
2009-04  2-24-2009   32.01,
                     32.02
2009-06  4-14-2009   154.01—
                     154.05
2009-07  4-14-2009   51.01—
                     51.06
2009-11  10-13-2009  131.01,
                     131.02
2009-12  5-26-2009   35.01
                     130.01,
                     130.02,
2009-13  7-14-2009   130.04—
                     130.20,
                     130.99
2009-15  8-11-2009   10.98
2009-16  12-8-2009   35.01,
                     35.02
                     112.01—
                     112.08,
2011-03  3-22-2011   112.20—
                     112.23,
                     112.99
2011-08  5-24-2011   112.02
2012-04  3-13-2012   30.01
                     110.02,
2012-08  5-22-2012   110.04,
                     110.05
2012-09  10-9-2012   157.01,
                     157.03
2013-04  3-26-2013   31.09
2014-03  2-25-2014   32.22
                     70.01—
2014-06  4-29-2014   70.08,
                     70.99
2014-11  7-8-2014    94.01—
                     94.08
2014-12  9-9-2014    93.03
2014-13  10-4-2014   31.10
2015-01  1-28-2015   35.02
                     130.01—
2015-02  2-25-2015   130.20,
                     130.99
2015-03  2-25-2015   51.20—
                     51.30
2015-04  3-10-2015   51.42
2015-12  10-28-2015  Adopting Ordinance
2016-06  4-12-2016   35.02
2016-16  7-12-2016   70.02
2016-21  10-28-2016  130.21
2017-02  1-10-2017   10.98
2017-05  3-29-2017   51.42
2017-11  8-23-2017   157.05
2017-14  10-10-2017  52.057
2018-02  1-9-2018    35.02
2018-03  1-24-2018   94.01
                     113.001—
                     113.003,
                     113.020—
                     113.031,
                     113.040—
                     113.047,
                     113.055,
                     113.060—
                     113.062,
                     113.070—
2018-18  2-28-2018   113.073,
                     113.080—
                     113.084,
                     113.090—
                     113.098,
                     113.105—
                     113.115,
                     113.125—
                     113.127,
                     113.135—
                     113.144,
                     113.999
2018-25  10-24-2018  130.08
2019-01  1-8-2019    35.02
                     152.01—
                     152.12,
2019-02  1-8-2019    152.25—
                     152.40,
                     152.55—
                     152.62
                    
 
