ELKO NEW MARKET, MN
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Code current through:
Ord. 252, passed 7-28-2022
 
Published by:
STERLING CODIFIERS
an
American Legal Publishing Company
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of the City of Elko New Market, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 252, passed 7-28-2022. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 80
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE ELKO NEW MARKET CITY CODE
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ELKO NEW MARKET, MINNESOTA ORDAINS:
SECTION 1. From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the city code
of the city of Elko New Market, Minnesota prepared by Sterling Codifiers,
containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with
the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body
of the city, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official
code and law of the city as enacted by the mayor and city council. Except that
the city code prepared by Sterling Codifiers shall be revised to:
A. Reflect that title 11, chapters 14 – 18C shall be renumbered as title 11,
chapters 24 – 28C and all cross-references within the city code shall be
amended accordingly to reflect the renumbering of said chapters; and
B. Reserve title 11, chapters 14 – 23 for future use.
SECTION 2. There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the
loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official city code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which shall be
maintained in the office of the city clerk, certified as to correctness and
available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open.
SECTION 3. All ordinances of a general nature included in this official city
code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official city code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the city code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official city code.
SECTION 4. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change
or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or to
insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
SECTION 5. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to
the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
SECTION 6. This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be recorded
and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
publication.
ADOPTED this 17th day of November, 2011, by the city council for the city of
Elko New Market.
      CITY OF ELKO NEW MARKET
      BY: /s/   
         Jason Ponsonby, Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/   
Sandra Green, Deputy City Clerk
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
Elko New Market City Code   1
Saving Clause   2
Definitions; Interpretation   3
General Penalty   4
Mayor And City Council   5
City Officers And Personnel   6
City Clerk   6A
City Administrator   6B
Elections   7
CHAPTER 1
ELKO NEW MARKET CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Elko New Market. This code
of ordinances shall be known and cited as the ELKO NEW MARKET CITY CODE and is
hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3  of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title headings, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (New Market 2004 Code § 1-1-1; amd.
2011 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (New Market 2004 Code § 1-1-2)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the city code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the city
code. (New Market 2004 Code § 1-1-3)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said code, while in
actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the office of the city
clerk when directed so to do by order of the city council. (New Market 2004
Code § 1-1-4)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
   A.   Ordinances Repealed And Ordinances Saved From Repeal: All general
ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code are hereby
repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by necessary
implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses
contained in this chapter), and excluding the following ordinances which are
not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances
relating to boundaries and annexations; ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public
places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to
elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by
or from the city; and all special ordinances. (New Market 2004 Code § 1-2-1;
amd. 2011 Code)
   B.   Limitations On Repeal: The repeal of the ordinances, as provided in
subsection A of this section, shall not affect any debt or fee which is
accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding
commenced under or by virtue of the ordinances repealed or the term of office
of any person holding office at the time these ordinances take effect; nor
shall the repeal of any ordinance have the effect of reviving any ordinance
heretofore repealed or superseded. (New Market 2004 Code § 1-2-1)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of section
1-2-1 of this chapter, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (New Market 2004
Code § 1-2-2)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as
to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the effective date hereof. (New Market 2004 Code § 1-2-3)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code
or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or
ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or
any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed
each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid
or ineffective. (New Market 2004 Code § 1-2-4)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the mayor and city council may be fully carried
out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Computation Of Time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an
act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had,
the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted
in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall
be counted.
   D.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   E.   Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
   F.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
   G.   May; Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is
mandatory.
   H.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   I.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. (New
Market 2004 Code § 1-3-1)
   J.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the
words "of the city of Elko New Market". (New Market 2004 Code § 1-3-1; amd.
2011 Code)
   K.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   L.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city
has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city ordinances is not meant to
amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (New Market 2004
Code § 1-3-1)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
CITY: Elko New Market, Minnesota. The area within the corporate boundaries of
the city as presently established or as amended by ordinance, annexation or
other legal actions at a future time. The term "city", when used in this code,
may also be used to refer to the city council and its authorized
representatives.
CODE, THIS CODE OR THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES: This city code, as modified by
amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
COUNTY: Scott County, Minnesota.
MONTH: A calendar month.
OATH: An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath and, in those cases, the words "swear" and "sworn"
shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed". All terms shall mean
a pledge taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by
state law.
OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION OR DEPARTMENT: An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
PERSON: Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms "person" or "whoever", as
applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
PRECEDING OR FOLLOWING: Next before or next after, respectively.
SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION: Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
STATE: The state of Minnesota.
WRITTEN: Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing
or otherwise.
YEAR: A calendar year unless otherwise expressed. (Elko 2004 Code § 10.05; amd.
2011 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (New
Market 2004 Code § 1-3-3)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY 1 :
   A.   Violation; Penalties: Violation of a provision of this code is a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, a person shall be fined or penalized
not more than the maximum levels established by the state for misdemeanor
offenses. In either case, the costs of prosecution may be added. Each act of
violation and each day on which a violation occurs or continues is a separate
violation.
   B.   Definitions:
   MISDEMEANOR: An offense or crime that the city council is empowered to
punish with fine or imprisonment.
   PETTY MISDEMEANOR: As defined by law. (New Market 2004 Code § 1-4-1)
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 412.231.
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section.
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not
more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (New Market 2004 Code § 1-4-2)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (New
Market 2004 Code § 1-4-3)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Salaries
1-5-2: Meetings
1-5-1: SALARIES:
The salary of the Mayor shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month
commencing January 1, 2023, and the salary of each Council member shall be four
hundred dollars ($400.00) per month commencing January 1, 2023. (Ord. 126, 3-
10-2016; amd. Ord. 247, 5-26-2022)
1-5-2: MEETINGS:
   A.   Open Meetings; Regular Meetings: It is the policy of the city council
that all of its meetings shall be open to the public. A schedule of the regular
meetings of the city council shall be kept on file at city hall. If a meeting
is recessed or a continued session of a previous meeting, and the time and
place of the meeting was established during the previous meeting and recorded
in the minutes of the meeting, then no further published or mailed notice is
necessary.
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings of the city council may be called by
the mayor or by any two (2) members of the city council, in writing, filed with
the city clerk, who shall then mail a notice to all the members of the time,
place and agenda at least three (3) days before the meeting. The city clerk
shall also post written notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the
meeting on the bulletin board at city hall. The notice shall also be mailed or
otherwise delivered to each person who has filed a written request for notice
of special meetings with the city. The notice shall be posted and mailed or
delivered at least three (3) days before the date of the meeting.
   C.   Emergency Meetings: For an emergency meeting, the city clerk shall make
good faith efforts to provide notice of the meeting to each news medium that
has filed a written request for notice if the request includes the news
medium's telephone number. Notice of the emergency meeting shall be given by
telephone or by any other method used to notify the members of the city
council. Notice shall be provided to each news medium which has filed a written
request for notice as soon as reasonably practicable after notice has been
given to city council members. Notice shall include the subject of the meeting.
Posted or published notice of an emergency meeting shall not be required. An
"emergency meeting" is a special meeting called because of circumstances that,
in the judgment of the city, require immediate consideration by the city
council. If matters not directly related to the emergency are discussed or
acted upon at an emergency meeting, the minutes of the meeting shall include a
specific description of the matters. (2011 Code)
CHAPTER 6
CITY OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Background Checks For Applicants For City Employment
1-6-1: BACKGROUND CHECKS FOR APPLICANTS FOR CITY EMPLOYMENT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota's computerized
criminal history information for specified noncriminal purposes of employment
background checks for the positions described in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Authority To Conduct: The Elko New Market police department is hereby
required, as the exclusive entity within the city, to do a criminal history
background investigation on the applicants for the following positions within
the city, unless the city's hiring authority concludes that a background
investigation is not needed:
Finalists for regular and part time city positions of employment and for other
city positions of employment, independent contractor or volunteer status that
have:
      1.   Direct access to, or management of, public funds, sensitive city
systems and information such as security information and private data;
      2.   Substantial contact with juveniles in a setting where adults are not
present;
      3.   The task of entering private property on a regular basis;
      4.   Access to and use of city vehicles; or
      5.   Supervisory responsibilities.
In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen
employment applicants, the police department is authorized to access data
maintained in the Minnesota bureau of criminal apprehension's computerized
criminal history information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data
that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained in the police department
under the care and custody of the police chief or his or her designee. A
summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data may be
released by the police chief to the hiring authority, including the city
council, the city administrator, or other city staff involved in the hiring
process.
   C.   Procedures: Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the police department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
Minnesota statutes chapter 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of
the information. Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota statutes
section 364.09, the city will not reject an applicant for employment on the
basis of the applicant's prior conviction unless the crime is directly related
to the position of employment sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross
misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the city rejects the
applicant's request on this basis, the city shall notify the applicant in
writing of the following:
      1.   The grounds and reasons for the denial;
      2.   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in
Minnesota statutes section 364.06;
      3.   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment;
      4.   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered
upon reapplication. (Ord. 107, 9-26-2013)
ARTICLE A. CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-6A-1: Duties
1-6A-2: Audit
1-6A-1: DUTIES:
The city clerk shall perform the following duties and such other duties as may
be required by the provisions of this code:
   A.   Give the required notice of each regular and special election, record
the proceedings thereof, notify officials of their election or appointment to
office, and certify to the county auditor all appointments and the results of
all city elections.
   B.   Keep the following records:
      1.   A minute book, noting therein all proceedings of the council.
      2.   An ordinance book in which he shall record at length all ordinances
passed by the council.
      3.   An account book in which he shall enter all monetary transactions of
the city including the dates and amounts of all receipts and the person from
whom the money was received and all orders drawn with their payee and object.
   C.   Act as the clerk and bookkeeper of the city, be the custodian of its
seal and records, sign its official papers, post and publish such notices,
ordinances and resolutions as may be required and perform such other
appropriate duties as may be imposed upon him by the council. (2011 Code)
1-6A-2: AUDIT:
There shall be an audit of the city's financial affairs by the state auditor or
a public accountant in accordance with minimum auditing procedures prescribed
by the state auditor. (Elko 2004 Code § 30.01)
ARTICLE B. CITY ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-6B-1: General Provisions
1-6B-2: Appointment; Term; Removal
1-6B-3: Duties And Responsibilities
1-6B-4: Compensation
1-6B-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The existing position of city administrator is hereby affirmed, and such
officer of the city shall have the duties prescribed in this article. (2011
Code)
1-6B-2: APPOINTMENT; TERM; REMOVAL:
The city administrator shall be appointed by the city council for an indefinite
term. The city administrator may be removed from office after thirty (30)
calendar days' written notice only by a majority of the city council with or
without cause, except as otherwise agreed to in writing by the city council.
The city council may designate some qualified person to perform the duties of
the city administrator during his or her absence or disability. (2011 Code)
1-6B-3: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The city administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the city
and shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of
all affairs of the city and to that end shall be empowered and required to:
   A.   Supervise the administration of all departments, offices and divisions
of the city except as otherwise provided by law and carry out any other
responsibilities placed under his jurisdiction by this article or by subsequent
council action.
   B.   Receive and safely keep all monies belonging to the city; keep an
accurate account of monies received and disbursed, and report from time to time
to the council in detail such receipts and expenditures.
   C.   Interview and screen prospective city employees as permitted by law and
make recommendations to the council before the council makes any appointment.
   D.   Make recommendations for terminating and suspending employees and may
suspend any employee until the next council meeting when the council shall
affirm, modify or rescind the suspension.
   E.   Prepare and submit a proposed annual budget to the city council and
keep the city council advised of the financial condition of the city and make
such recommendations as he or she may from time to time determine desirable and
necessary.
   F.   Attend and participate in discussions at all meetings of the city
council and other official bodies as directed by the council. The city
administrator shall be responsible for the preparation of the city council
agenda.
   G.   Ensure that all laws and ordinances of the city are duly enforced.
   H.   Handle all personnel matters for the city in conjunction with policy
established by the city council, including the negotiation or delegation of the
negotiation of terms and conditions of employee labor contracts for
presentation to the city council. The city administrator shall conduct annual
evaluations and reviews of work performances of all department heads.
   I.   In accordance with the city purchasing policies, the city administrator
or the city administrator's designees may issue purchase orders for previously
budgeted items when the amount thereof is less than five hundred dollars
($500.00), unless otherwise designated by city policy.
   J.   Represent the city at official functions as directed by the city
council and maintain a good public relations with the citizens of the
community.
   K.   Recommend from time to time the adoption of such measures as he or she
may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety and welfare of the
community or for the improvement of the administration.
   L.   Monitor all consultant and contract work performed for the city and
coordinate the activities of the city attorney. (2011 Code)
1-6B-4: COMPENSATION:
The city administrator shall receive such compensation as the council shall fix
from time to time by resolution and/or by the terms of an employment agreement.
(2011 Code)
CHAPTER 7
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Date Of Election
1-7-2: Terms Of Mayor And Council Members
1-7-1: DATE OF ELECTION:
The regular city election shall be held biennially on the first Tuesday after
the first Monday in November in every even numbered year. (2011 Code)
1-7-2: TERMS OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS:
Council members shall be elected for four (4) year terms. The mayor shall be
elected for a two (2) year term. (2011 Code)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Planning Commission   1
Park And Recreation Commission   2
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Established
2-1-2: Composition; Qualifications; Compensation; Ex Officio Members
2-1-3: Appointments And Terms
2-1-4: Removal From Office
2-1-5: Organization
2-1-6: Powers And Duties
2-1-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established, pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 462.354, as
it may be amended from time to time, a Planning Commission for the City. (Ord.
2, 11-9-2006)
2-1-2: COMPOSITION; QUALIFICATIONS; COMPENSATION; EX OFFICIO MEMBERS:
   A.   Composition: The Planning Commission shall consist of five (5) regular
members, all appointed by the City Council.
   B.   Qualifications: Regular members of the Planning Commission shall be
qualified voters and residents of the City.
   C.   Compensation: All regular members shall serve with compensation as
established by City Council resolution.
   D.   Ex Officio Members: The City Council may appoint a member of the New
Market Township Board as an ex officio nonvoting member by resolution to serve
at the will of the City Council. An appointment of an ex officio member shall
be for a one year term, except as otherwise provided by the City Council. The
ex officio member shall not be considered a regular member of the Planning
Commission. (Ord. 135, 5-26-2016)
2-1-3: APPOINTMENTS AND TERMS:
   A.   Appointments: Appointments shall be made by the City Council for the
City of Elko New Market. (Ord. 2, 11-9-2006; amd. 2011 Code)
   B.   Terms Of Office: Planning Commission members shall serve staggered
terms of three (3) years, expiring on March 31 of each year. (Ord. 4, 11-28-
2006; amd. 2011 Code)
2-1-4: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
Any member of the Planning Commission may be removed from office with or
without cause by a majority vote of the entire City Council. (Ord. 2, 11-9-
2006)
2-1-5: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Officers: The commission shall select a Chairperson and Vice-
Chairperson from its appointed regular members to serve for a term of one year.
The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall be appointed at the regular April
meeting of the commission. (Ord. 164, 1-11-2018)
   B.   Rules Of Procedure: The Planning Commission shall adopt its own rules
and procedures, with approval of the City Council.
   C.   Meetings: The Planning Commission may hold at least one regular meeting
each month. The regular meeting date of the Planning Commission shall be
established by resolution of the City Council from time to time.
   D.   Records: The Planning Commission shall keep a public record of its
meetings. (Ord. 2, 11-9-2006)
2-1-6: POWERS AND DUTIES 1 :
The Planning Commission shall consider and make recommendations on all matters
affecting zoning, subdivision and building regulations and land use
development, Comprehensive Plans and other matters referred thereto by the City
Council from time to time. All recommendations made by the Planning Commission
shall take into consideration the established policies of the City Council on
such matters. The Planning Commission shall also carry on City planning
activities and recommend such plans for the regulation of future physical
development of the City including land use and building construction. (Ord. 2,
11-9-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. This section effective January 1, 2007.
CHAPTER 2
PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Established
2-2-2: Purpose
2-2-3: Composition And Compensation
2-2-4: Appointments And Terms
2-2-5: Oath Of Office
2-2-6: Removals
2-2-7: Officers
2-2-8: Responsibilities
2-2-9: Procedures
2-2-1: ESTABLISHED:
A city park and recreation commission is hereby established. (Ord. 3, 11-9-
2006)
2-2-2: PURPOSE:
The primary purpose of the commission is to act in an advisory capacity to the
city council in the formulation of a high quality of life for citizens through
the protection of its natural resources; its scenic, historical, and aesthetic
values; and by the development of compatible recreation facilities for public
enjoyment. (Ord. 3, 11-9-2006)
2-2-3: COMPOSITION AND COMPENSATION:
The commission shall be composed of five (5) members, all appointed by the city
council. The commission shall serve with compensation as established by
resolution of the city council, as amended from time to time. The commission
may also, with the consent of the city council, incur expenses that are deemed
necessary. (Ord. 3, 11-9-2006)
2-2-4: APPOINTMENTS AND TERMS:
   A.   Appointments: Appointments to the park and recreation commission shall
be made by the city council according to established administrative procedures.
(Ord. 3, 11-9-2006; amd. 2011 Code)
   B.   Terms Of Office: Commission members shall serve staggered terms of
three (3) years, expiring on March 31 of each year. Initial terms shall
commence on January 1, 2007. The initial terms for seats are as follows: 1) two
(2) seats shall be appointed for a term expiring March 31, 2008; 2) two (2)
seats shall be appointed for a term expiring March 31, 2009; and 3) one seat
shall be appointed for a term expiring March 31, 2010. Thereafter, terms for
these seats shall run for three (3) years in accordance with this subsection.
(Ord. 3, 11-9-2006)
2-2-5: OATH OF OFFICE:
Every appointed member shall, before entering service, take an oath that he or
she will faithfully discharge the duties of the commission. (Ord. 3, 11-9-2006)
2-2-6: REMOVALS:
Any member of the commission may be removed from office at any time by a
majority vote of the city council, and the city council shall fill such
vacancy. The city council shall notify, in writing, any person removed from his
or her position on the commission. (Ord. 3, 11-9-2006)
2-2-7: OFFICERS:
The commission shall elect a chairperson, vice chairperson, secretary, and
other subcommittee officers, and make any additional subcommittee assignments
from among its appointed members, for a term of one year. (Ord. 3, 11-9-2006)
2-2-8: RESPONSIBILITIES:
The responsibilities of the park and recreation commission are as follows:
   A.   To act in an advisory capacity to the city council regarding park
ordinances.
   B.   To make recommendations regarding development and maintenance of all
parks.
   C.   To review and make recommendations of each newly proposed plat of
subdivision for future development of park and recreation purposes.
   D.   To develop and continuously review a comprehensive plan, both of long
and short range development, for a park system and recreation program.
   E.   To form any committees within its own body necessary to perform
functions and duties of a park committee.
   F.   To work in an advisory capacity in the formulation of a budget to
include operation, maintenance, acquisition, and development of park and
recreation programs.
   G.   To work with the city council in the development and review of a
capital improvement budget and other long range plans.
   H.   To review all proposals for parks and recreation as authorized by the
city council.
   I.   To work in conjunction with all committees and organizations to develop
cooperation and efficiency within the city.
   J.   To act as a representative to the public for better lines of
communication and citizen input to all park and recreation matters. (Ord. 3,
11-9-2006)
2-2-9: PROCEDURES:
The park and recreation commission shall operate according to the following
procedures:
   A.   The chairperson of the commission may call special meetings with three
(3) days' notice to commission members. The chairperson shall make a sincere
effort to contact all members.
   B.   A quorum of the commission shall consist of a majority of all members
of the commission, with a minimum of three (3) members required to make up a
quorum.
   C.   The commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and
shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions and findings, which record
shall be a public record. (Ord. 3, 11-9-2006)
TITLE 3
FINANCE
Special Assessment Deferrals   1
Assessable Current Services   2
CHAPTER 1
SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DEFERRALS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Deferred Special Assessments Provided
3-1-2: Application For Deferral; Procedure
3-1-3: Exceptions; Consideration
3-1-4: Interest On Deferred Assessment
3-1-5: Deferment Termination
3-1-6: Provisions Not Exclusive
3-1-1: DEFERRED SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS PROVIDED:
The city council may defer the payment of any special assessment on homestead
property owned by a person who is sixty five (65) years of age or older, or
retired by reason of a permanent and total disability, when payment of the
assessment would create a hardship upon the property owner as defined herein,
or any homestead property owned by a person who is a member of the Minnesota
national guard or other military reserve who is ordered into active military
service, as defined in Minnesota statutes section 190.05, subdivision 5b or 5c,
as stated in the person's military orders, for whom it would be a hardship to
make the payments. (New Market 2004 Code § 1-6-1; amd. 2011 Code)
3-1-2: APPLICATION FOR DEFERRAL; PROCEDURE:
   A.   The homeowner shall make application for deferred payment of special
assessments on a form prescribed by the county auditor and supplied by the city
clerk. The application shall be made within thirty (30) days after the adoption
of the assessment roll by the city council and shall be renewed each year upon
the filing of a similar application no later than September 30.
   B.   The city clerk shall establish a case number for each application,
review the application for complete information and details and make a
recommendation to the city council to either approve or disapprove the
application for deferment. The city council, by majority vote, shall either
grant or deny the deferment, and if the deferment is granted, the city council
may require the payment of interest due each year. Renewal applications will be
approved by the city clerk for those cases whereby the original conditions for
qualifications remain substantially unchanged.
   C.   If the city council grants the deferment, the city clerk shall notify
the county auditor who shall, in accordance with Minnesota statutes section
435.194, record a notice of the deferment with the county recorder setting
forth the amount of the assessment. (New Market 2004 Code § 1-6-2)
3-1-3: EXCEPTIONS; CONSIDERATION:
   A.   A hardship shall be deemed prima facie to exist when all of the
following apply:
      1.   The total income of the applicant and spouse according to their most
recent federal income tax return, plus their tax exempt income, establishes
that they are below the poverty threshold for the applicable family size, age
of householder, and number of related children less than eighteen (18) years of
age present, according to the most recent poverty thresholds established by the
U.S. census bureau.
      2.   The average annual payment due for all assessments levied against
the property exceeds three percent (3%) of the applicant's income as thus
calculated.
      3.   The special assessments to be deferred exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
      4.   The total assets of the applicant and spouse, exclusive of the
homestead, do not exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00).
   B.   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the city council may
consider exceptional and unusual circumstances pertaining to an applicant not
covered by the foregoing standards, but any determination shall be made in a
nondiscriminatory manner and shall not give the applicant an unreasonable
preference or advantage over other applicants. (New Market 2004 Code § 1-6-3)
3-1-4: INTEREST ON DEFERRED ASSESSMENT:
Interest shall be charged on any assessment deferred pursuant to this chapter
at a rate equal to the rate charged on other assessments for the particular
public improvement project the assessment is financing. If the city council
grants an assessment deferral to an applicant, the interest may also be
deferred, or the interest may be due and payable on a yearly basis up until the
assessment period terminates and only the principal is deferred. The decision
as to whether the principal and interest or just the principal is deferred is
made by the city council when considering the application. (New Market 2004
Code § 1-6-4)
3-1-5: DEFERMENT TERMINATION:
   A.   The option to defer the payment of special assessments shall terminate
and all amounts accumulated plus applicable interest shall become due upon the
occurrence of any one of the following events:
      1.   The death of the owner when there is no spouse who is eligible for
deferment;
      2.   The sale, transfer or subdivision of all or any part of the
property;
      3.   Loss of homestead status on the property;
      4.   Determination by the council for any reason that there would be no
hardship to require immediate or partial payment; or
      5.   Failure to file a renewal application within the time prescribed by
section
3-1-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Upon the occurrence of one of the events specified in subsection A of
this section, the council shall terminate the deferment. Thereupon, the city
clerk shall notify the county assessor and the county auditor of the
termination, including the amounts accumulated on unpaid installments, plus
applicable interest, which shall become due and payable as a result of the
termination. (New Market 2004 Code § 1-6-5)
3-1-6: PROVISIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE:
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the city council from considering
an application of hardship on the basis of exceptional and unusual
circumstances which are not covered by the standards and guidelines as set
forth in this chapter. This consideration and determination must be made in a
nondiscriminatory manner so as not to give the applicant an unreasonable
preference or advantage over other applicants. (New Market 2004 Code § 1-6-6)
CHAPTER 2
ASSESSABLE CURRENT SERVICES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Definition
3-2-2: Snow, Ice, Dirt And Rubbish
3-2-3: Public Health And Safety Hazards
3-2-4: Installation And Repair Of Water Service Lines
3-2-5: Personal Liability
3-2-6: Damage To Public Property
3-2-7: Assessment
3-2-8: Misdemeanor Violation; Penalty
3-2-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
CURRENT SERVICE: One or more of the following: snow, ice, or rubbish removal
from sidewalks; weed elimination from street grass plots adjacent to sidewalks
or from private property; removal or elimination of public health or safety
hazards from private property, excluding any hazardous building included in
Minnesota statutes sections 463.15 through 463.26, as they may be amended from
time to time; installation or repair of water service lines; street sprinkling,
street flushing, light street oiling, or other dust treatment of streets;
repair of sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of trees and removal of
unsound and insect infected trees from the public streets or private property;
and the operation of a street lighting system. (Elko 2004 Code § 90.01)
3-2-2: SNOW, ICE, DIRT AND RUBBISH:
   A.   Duty Of Owners And Occupants: The owner and the occupant of any
property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use diligence to keep the walk
safe for pedestrians. No owner or occupant shall allow snow, ice, dirt or
rubbish to remain on the walk longer than twenty four (24) hours after its
deposit thereon. Failure to comply with this subsection shall constitute a
violation.
   B.   Removal By City: The city clerk or other person designated by the city
council may cause the removal from all public sidewalks of all snow, ice, dirt
and rubbish as soon as possible beginning twenty four (24) hours after any
matter has been deposited thereon or after the snow has ceased to fall. The
city clerk or other designated person shall keep a record showing the cost of
removal adjacent to each separate lot and parcel. (Elko 2004 Code § 90.01)
3-2-3: PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY HAZARDS:
When the city removes or eliminates public health or safety hazards from
private property under the provisions of this chapter, the administrative
officer responsible for doing the work shall keep a record of the cost of the
removal or elimination against each parcel of property affected and annually
deliver that information to the city clerk. (Elko 2004 Code § 90.01)
3-2-4: INSTALLATION AND REPAIR OF WATER SERVICE LINES:
Whenever the city installs or repairs water service lines serving private
property, the city clerk shall keep a record of the total cost of the
installation or repair against the property. (Elko 2004 Code § 90.01)
3-2-5: PERSONAL LIABILITY:
The owner of property on which or adjacent to which a current service has been
performed shall be personally liable for the cost of the service. As soon as
the service has been completed and the cost determined, the city clerk, or
other designated official, shall prepare a bill and mail it to the owner, and
thereupon, the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the
city clerk. (Elko 2004 Code § 90.01)
3-2-6: DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY:
Any person driving any vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance upon any
street, road, highway or structure shall be liable for all damages which the
surface or structure thereof may sustain as a result of any illegal operation,
or driving or moving of the vehicle, equipment or object or contrivance; or as
a result of operating, driving or moving any vehicle, equipment, object or
contrivance weighing in excess of the maximum weight permitted by statute or
this code. When the driver is not the owner of the vehicle, equipment, object
or contrivance, but is operating, driving or moving it with the express or
implied permission of the owner, then the owner and the driver shall be jointly
and severally liable for any such damage. Any person who wilfully acts or fails
to exercise due care and, by that act, damages any public property shall be
liable for the amount thereof, which amount shall be collectable by action or
as a lien under Minnesota statutes section 514.67, as it may be amended from
time to time. (Elko 2004 Code § 90.01)
3-2-7: ASSESSMENT:
On or before September 1 of each year, the city clerk shall list the total
unpaid charges for each type of current service and charges under this chapter
against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this
chapter. The city council may then spread the charges against property
benefited as a special assessment under the authority of Minnesota statutes
section 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and other pertinent
statutes for certification to the county auditor and collected along with
current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten
(10), as the city council may determine in each case. (Elko 2004 Code § 90.01)
3-2-8: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and
punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Elko 2004 Code § 90.99; amd. 2011 Code)
TITLE 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
General Licensing Provisions   1
Alcoholic Beverages   2
Elko Speedway Liquor Regulations   2A
Lawful Gambling   3
Peddlers, Solicitors And Transient Merchants   4
Outdoor Concerts And Events   5
Short Term Outdoor Sales Events   5A
Speedways (Rep. by Ord. 152, 3-23-2017)   6
Sexually Oriented Businesses   7
Cable Television System   8
Fireworks   9
Mobile Food Units   10
Pawnbrokers And Precious Metal Dealers   11
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
4-1-1: Applications
4-1-2: Persons Subject To License
4-1-3: Forms
4-1-4: Inspection Or Investigation
4-1-5: Signatures
4-1-6: Term Of License
4-1-7: Posting License
4-1-8: Transfer Of License
4-1-9: Building And Premises
4-1-10: Nuisance Businesses
4-1-11: Suspension Or Revocation Of License; Hearing
4-1-12: Appeals
4-1-13: Background Checks For Applicants For City Licenses
4-1-1: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for all licenses required by this code shall be made in writing to
the city clerk, unless otherwise specifically provided by law. Each application
shall state the name of the applicant, the license desired, the location to be
used, if any, the time covered and the fee to be paid; and each application
shall contain such additional information as may be required by the issuing
official. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-1-1)
4-1-2: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or
conduct of any business or establishment or for doing business or engaging in
any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to the
requirement if, individually or through an agent, employee or partner, the
individual holds himself or herself forth as being engaged in the business or
occupation; or solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs
or attempts to perform any part of such business or occupation in the city.
(New Market 2004 Code § 3-1-2)
4-1-3: FORMS:
Forms for all licenses, and applications therefor, shall be prepared and kept
on file by the city clerk. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-1-3)
4-1-4: INSPECTION OR INVESTIGATION:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license where laws of the city
necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such license,
the city clerk shall refer such application to the proper officer for making
such investigation within forty eight (48) hours of the time of such receipt.
The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection
shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days after
receiving the application or a copy thereof. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-1-5)
4-1-5: SIGNATURES:
Each license issued shall bear the signatures of the mayor and the city clerk
in the absence of any provision to the contrary. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-1-4)
4-1-6: TERM OF LICENSE:
Except as otherwise provided in this code, all annual licenses shall terminate
on December 31. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-1-6)
4-1-7: POSTING LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city
to keep the business license posted in a prominent place on the premises used
for such business at all times. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-1-10)
4-1-8: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Unless otherwise provided in this code, no license shall be transferable
without the authorization of the city council. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-1-8)
4-1-9: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business if the premises and
building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements
of this code, including zoning and subdivision ordinances. (New Market 2004
Code § 3-1-7)
4-1-10: NUISANCE BUSINESSES:
No business, licensed or not, shall be conducted or operated as to amount to a
nuisance in fact. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-1-9)
4-1-11: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; HEARING:
   A.   Authority: Any license, for a limited time, may be revoked by the mayor
and city council during the life of such license for the violation by the
licensee of any provision relating to the license, the subject of the license,
or the premises occupied. Such revocation may be in addition to any fine
imposed. The mayor and city council shall be authorized to summarily order the
cessation of business, the closing of the premises, and the suspension of any
business license for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days.
   B.   Hearing:
      1.   Within ten (10) days after the city officials have so acted, the
mayor shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the
license should be revoked.
      2.   Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time
and place of hearing. Such notice shall be sent to the licensee by certified
mail at his last known address or personally served at least five (5) days
prior to the date of the hearing.
      3.   At the hearing, the licensee shall be permitted counsel and shall
have the right to submit evidence and cross examine witnesses. The mayor shall
preside and shall render the decision and recommendation.
   C.   Grounds For Revocation: Business licenses issued under the ordinances
of the city, unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the mayor and city
council after notice and hearing as provided in subsection B of this section
for any of the following causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license.
      2.   Violation of any regulation or provision of the chapter applicable
to the activity for which the license has been granted, or any regulation or
law of the state so applicable.
      3.   Conviction of the licensee of any crime or misdemeanor pertaining
the license held or applied for subject to the provisions of Minnesota statutes
chapter 364, as amended.
      4.   Failure of the licensee to pay any fine or penalty owing to the
city.
      5.   Refusal to permit an inspection or investigation or any interference
with a duly authorized city officer or employee while in the performance of his
duties in making such inspection or investigation, as provided in this chapter.
      6.   Conducting such licensed activity in such manner as to constitute a
breach of the peace, or a menace to the health, safety and welfare of the
public, or a disturbance of the peace or comfort of the residents of the city,
upon recommendation of the appropriate city official.
      7.   Expiration or cancellation of any required bond or insurance, or
failure to notify the city within a reasonable time of changes in the terms of
the insurance or carriers.
      8.   Actions unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license.
      9.   Failure to continuously comply with all conditions required as
precedent to the approval of the license. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-1-11)
4-1-12: APPEALS:
   A.   Right To Appeal: Any applicant aggrieved by the refusal of the city to
issue a license or by the revocation of a license shall have the right to
appeal the city's decision to the city council. Such appeal shall be requested
by submitting a written request to the mayor within five (5) days of the action
of the city which is appealed.
   B.   City Council Consideration: The city council shall consider the appeal
at its next regularly scheduled meeting, at which time, the applicant shall be
entitled to present the applicant's appeal orally or in writing. The city
council shall act on the appeal within seven (7) days of the hearing and shall
either uphold the action of the city or shall direct the issuance of a license
which the city has denied or the reissuance of a license which the city has
revoked. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-1-12)
4-1-13: BACKGROUND CHECKS FOR APPLICANTS FOR CITY LICENSES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota bureau of
criminal apprehension's computerized criminal history information for specified
noncriminal purposes of licensing background checks.
   B.   Authority To Conduct: The Elko New Market police department is hereby
required, as the exclusive entity within the city, to do a criminal history
background investigation on the applicants for the following licenses within
the city:
      1.   Liquor, including managers of establishments;
      2.   Charitable gambling, when the licensee will operate in the city;
      3.   Peddler and transient merchant licenses;
      4.   Sexually oriented business licenses;
      5.   Pawnbroker and precious metal dealer licenses.
In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen
license applicants, the police department is authorized to access data
maintained in the Minnesota bureau of criminal apprehension's computerized
criminal history information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data
that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained in the police department
under the care and custody of the police chief or his or her designee. A
summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data may be
released by the police chief to the licensing authority, including the city
council, the city clerk, or other city staff involved in the license approval
process.
   C.   Procedures: Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the police department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
Minnesota statutes chapter 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of
the information. Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota statutes
section 364.09, the city will not reject an applicant for a license on the
basis of the applicant's prior conviction unless the crime is directly related
to the license sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or
misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the city rejects the applicant's request
on this basis, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
      1.   The grounds and reasons for the denial;
      2.   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in
Minnesota statutes section 364.06;
      3.   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the license;
      4.   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered
upon reapplication. (Ord. 107, 9-26-2013; amd. Ord. 236, 10-14-2021)
CHAPTER 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
4-2-1: State Regulations Adopted
4-2-2: Definitions
4-2-3: License And Permit Required
4-2-4: Types Of Licenses And Permits
4-2-5: Application For License
4-2-6: Fees
4-2-7: Insurance Requirements
4-2-8: Investigation Of Applicant; Denials
4-2-9: Hearing Required For New Licenses
4-2-10: Required Information For License Approval
4-2-11: Grant, Transfer And Amendment Of License
4-2-12: Conditions Of License And Permit Approval
4-2-13: Term And Expiration Of Licenses And Permits
4-2-14: Requirements For Corporations, Partnerships And Associations
4-2-15: Ineligibility For License
4-2-16: Conditions Of Licenses And Permits
4-2-17: Days And Hours Of Operation
4-2-18: Underage Persons
4-2-19: Open Containers In Public
4-2-20: Nudity
4-2-21: Additional Prohibitions
4-2-22: Compliance Checks
4-2-23: Right Of Inspection
4-2-24: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
4-2-25: Temporary Expansion Of Licensed Premises
4-2-26: Penalties
4-2-1: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
Except to the extent the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive, the
provisions of Minnesota statutes chapter 340A, as amended, regarding the terms,
licensing, consumption, sales, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining
to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption of intoxicating liquor and
3.2 percent malt liquor are adopted and made a part of this chapter as if set
out in full. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-1)
4-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions contained in Minnesota
statutes chapter 340A, as amended, shall control. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-
2)
4-2-3: LICENSE AND PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person, except as otherwise provided in Minnesota statutes chapter 340A,
shall, directly or indirectly, deal in, sell, keep for sale or deliver any
intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor, or wine as part of a commercial
transaction without first having received a license to do so as provided in
this chapter; nor shall any private club or public place, directly or
indirectly, or upon any pretense or by any devise, allow the consumption or
display of alcoholic beverages or serve any liquid for the purpose of mixing
with intoxicating liquor without first obtaining a permit from the city as
provided in this chapter. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-3)
4-2-4: TYPES OF LICENSES AND PERMITS:
The following types of licenses and permits are issued under this chapter: (New
Market 2004 Code § 3-2-4)
   A.   On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License: On-sale intoxicating liquor
licenses shall be issued only to hotels, clubs, restaurants, and exclusive
liquor stores. A license shall be issued to clubs and congressionally chartered
veterans' organizations, with the approval of the state commissioner of public
safety, if they have been in existence for at least three (3) years and liquor
sales will only be to members and bona fide guests; except, that a club may
permit the general public to participate in a winetasting conducted at the club
under Minnesota statutes section 340A.419. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-4; amd.
2011 Code)
   B.   Off-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License: Off-sale intoxicating liquor
licenses may be issued to an exclusive liquor store and shall permit off-sale
of intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor.
   C.   Combination License: A combination on-sale and off-sale intoxicating
liquor license may be issued to the same licensee in lieu of issuing an on-sale
license and off-sale license separately. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-4)
   D.   On-Sale Sunday Liquor License: On-sale Sunday liquor licenses may be
issued only to a restaurant, club, bowling center, or hotel with facilities for
serving not less than thirty (30) guests at one time, to which an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license has been issued. Such license may permit the sale
of liquor to be consumed on the premises between the hours of eight o'clock (8:
00) A.M. on Sunday and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on Monday in conjunction with
the serving of food; provided, that the licensee is in conformance with the
Minnesota clean air act 1 . No Sunday license is needed for on-sale wine
licenses. (Ord. 120, 6-11-2015)
   E.   On-Sale 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor License: On-sale 3.2 percent malt
liquor licenses may be issued to bona fide clubs, bowling centers, restaurants,
golf courses and hotels where food is prepared and served for consumption on
the premises only. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-4; amd. 2011 Code)
   F.   Off-Sale 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor License: Off-sale 3.2 percent malt
liquor licenses may be issued to general food stores and drugstores and shall
permit the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor at retail in the original package
for consumption off the premises only.
   G.   Wine License: On-sale wine licenses may be issued, with the approval of
the state commissioner of public safety, only to restaurants having facilities
for seating at least twenty five (25) people at one time for the sale of wine
not exceeding fourteen percent (14%) alcohol by volume and for consumption on
the licensed premises only in conjunction with the sale of food. The holder of
a wine license who is also licensed to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor on-sale and
whose gross receipts are at least sixty percent (60%) attributable to the sale
of food may also sell 3.2 percent malt liquor at on-sale without an additional
license.
   H.   Temporary On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License:
      1.   The city council may issue to a club or charitable religious or
nonprofit organization in existence for at least three (3) years or to a
political committee registered under Minnesota statutes section 10A.14 a
temporary license for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a
social event within the city sponsored by the licensee. The license may
authorize the on- sale of intoxicating liquor for not more than four (4)
consecutive days, and may authorize on-sales on premises other than premises
the licensee owns or permanently occupies. The license may provide that the
licensee may contract for intoxicating liquor catering services with the holder
of a full year on-sale liquor license issued by the city.
      2.   The licenses are subject to the terms, including license fee,
imposed by the city.
      3.   The licenses issued under this subsection are subject to all laws
and ordinances governing the sale of intoxicating liquor, except Minnesota
statutes section 340A.504, subdivision 3, paragraph (d), and the laws and
ordinances which, by their nature, are not applicable.
      4.   The city shall notify the state commissioner within ten (10) days of
issuing a temporary license. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-4)
      5.   No more than three (3) 4-day, four (4) 3-day, six (6) 2-day, or one
12-day temporary licenses, in any combination not to exceed twelve (12) days
per year, may be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages to any one
organization or registered political committee, or for any one location, within
a twelve (12) month period, unless the licenses are issued in connection with
an event officially designated a community festival by the city:
         a.   No entity may be issued a temporary liquor license for more than
three (3) events per year or more than one event within a thirty (30) day
period; and
         b.   No more than three (3) licenses may be issued to a single entity
for an event and no more than three (3) licenses may be issued for any one
location within a thirty (30) day period.
Once the city reaches a population of five thousand (5,000), not more than one
temporary license may be issued to any one organization or registered political
committee, or for any one location, within any thirty (30) day period, unless
the licenses are issued in connection with an event officially designated a
community festival by the municipality. (Ord. 109, 4-24-2014)
   I.   Temporary On-Sale 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor License: Temporary on-sale
3.2 percent malt liquor licenses may be issued to a club or charitable,
religious, or nonprofit organization in existence for at least three (3) years.
The license may authorize the on- sale of 3.2 malt liquor for not more than
three (3) consecutive days, and may authorize on-sales on premises other than
premises the licensee owns or permanently occupies. The license may provide
that the licensee may contract for 3.2 malt liquor with the holder of a full
year on-sale liquor license issued by the City. The licenses are subject to the
terms, including the license fee, normally imposed by the City. (New Market
2004 Code § 3-2-4)
   J.   Consumption And Display Permits: Consumption and display permits may be
issued to a bottle club which complies with the requirements of Minnesota
Statutes section 340A.414 and which has obtained a permit from the State
Commissioner of Public Safety. Consumption and display permits shall not be
issued in the City except to establishments that have been issued such a permit
on or prior to the effective date hereof. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-4; amd.
2011 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 144.411 et seq.
4-2-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Completion Of Application; Waivers: A license applicant shall complete
the applicable application form provided by the City Clerk. The City Clerk may
waive completion of any part of the form that is inappropriate or unnecessary.
   B.   Signatures Required; False Information Prohibited: If the application
is by an individual, it shall be signed and sworn to by such person; if by a
corporation, by an officer thereof; if by a partnership, by one of the
partners; if by an incorporated association, by the operating officer or
managing officer thereof. If the applicant is a partnership, the application,
license, and insurance policy shall be made and issued in the name of all
partners. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement in an application.
(New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-5)
   C.   Renewal Applications: Applications for the renewal of an existing
license shall be made at least forty five (45) days prior to the date of
expiration of the license, and shall state that everything in the prior
application remains true and correct except as otherwise indicated. (Ord. 200,
9-12-2019)
4-2-6: FEES:
   A.   License Fees:
      1.   Annual Fees: The annual fees for all licenses and temporary licenses
shall be as determined by City Council ordinance in amounts no greater than
those amounts provided under Minnesota Statutes section 340A.408. (Ord. 40, 5-
14-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
      2.   Fee Reduction:
         a.   The off-sale intoxicating liquor license fee shall be reduced by
one hundred dollars ($100.00), provided, at the time of initial application and
renewal, the licensee agrees to the following and complies with the following
during the term of the license:
            (1)   Agrees to have a private vendor approved by the City train
all employees within sixty (60) days of hire and annually thereafter in laws
pertaining to the sale of alcohol, the rules for identification checks, and the
responsibilities of establishments serving intoxicating liquors;
            (2)   Posts a policy requiring identification checks for all
persons appearing to be thirty (30) years old or less; and
            (3)   Establishes a written cash award and incentive program to
award employees who catch underage drinkers and a written penalty program to
punish employees in the event of a failed compliance check.
         b.   Failure to comply with this subsection A2 will result in the
denial of the license fee reduction. During the term of the license, a licensee
who agrees to the foregoing shall provide verification of compliance with the
conditions of this subsection A2 upon request by the City. If a licensee
receives a fee reduction and fails to comply with the foregoing conditions, the
licensee shall reimburse the City for the amount of the fee reduction.
      3.   Prorated Fees: If a license application is made during the license
year, the license shall be issued for the remainder of the year and, except in
the case of wine licenses and off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, the
license fee shall be prorated, with any unexpired fraction of a month being
counted as one month.
      4.   Refunds: License fees shall be refunded if an application for a
license is denied by the City Council, except where rejection is for a wilful
misstatement in the license application. No part of the fee paid for any issued
license shall be refunded except as authorized under Minnesota Statutes section
340A.408, subdivision 5, upon application to the City Clerk within twenty (20)
days of the happening of any event provided under Minnesota Statutes section
340A.408, subdivision 5. (Ord. 40, 5-14-2009)
   B.   Investigation Fees: Investigation fees shall be determined by City
Council ordinance. Investigation fees are nonrefundable. No investigation fee
shall be charged for a renewal application. At any time that an additional
investigation is required because of a change in the control of a corporate
license, change in manager, change in location, or enlargement of the premises,
the licensee shall pay an additional investigation fee. Where a new application
is filed as a result of incorporation or a change of name by an existing
licensee and the ownership control and interest in the license are unchanged,
no additional investigation fee will be required. (Ord. 40, 5-14-2009; amd.
2011 Code)
4-2-7: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Except as provided in Minnesota statutes section 340A.409, subdivision 4, all
applicants for any liquor license or consumption and display permit must, as a
condition to the issuance of the license, demonstrate proof of financial
responsibility with regard to liability imposed by Minnesota statutes section
340A.801 to the city by providing proof of liquor liability/dramshop, general
liability, and workers' compensation insurance coverage.
   A.   Liability Insurance: Proof of financial responsibility shall be given
by filing one of the following: (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-7)
      1.   A certificate that there is in effect for the license period an
insurance policy issued by an insurer required to be licensed under Minnesota
statutes section 60A.07, subdivision 4, or by an insurer recognized as an
eligible surplus lines carrier pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 60A.206
or pool providing at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) of
coverage because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence,
three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) because of bodily injury to two
(2) or more persons in any one occurrence, fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00)
because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one
occurrence, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for loss of means of
support of any one person in any one occurrence, three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) for loss of means of support of two (2) or more persons in any
one occurrence, fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for the pecuniary loss of
any one person in any one occurrence and one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) for other pecuniary loss of two (2) or more persons in any one
occurrence. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-7; amd. 2011 Code)
      2.   A certificate of the state commissioner of finance that the licensee
has deposited with the state commissioner of finance one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) in cash or securities which may legally be purchased by
savings banks or trust funds having a market value of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00).
   B.   Dramshop Insurance: An annual aggregate insurance policy for dramshop
insurance of not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per
policy year to cover each person, each occurrence; property damage, each
occurrence; loss of means of support, per person; loss of means of support,
each occurrence; and policy, aggregate.
   C.   Workers' Compensation Insurance: The policy limits for workers'
compensation insurance shall be as provided by state law. (New Market 2004 Code
§ 3-2-7)
   D.   Additional Requirements: For purposes of subsections A and B of this
section, the city shall be named as additional insured on the liability
insurance policy. The liability insurance required by this section must provide
that it may not be canceled for: 1) any cause, except for nonpayment of premium
by either the insured or the insurer unless the canceling party has first given
sixty (60) days' notice in writing to the issuing authority of intent to cancel
the policy; and 2) nonpayment of premium, unless the canceling party has first
given ten (10) days' notice in writing to the city of intent to cancel the
policy. The insurance limits outlined in this section shall be effective for
license renewals and immediately on any new applications. (New Market 2004 Code
§ 3-2-7; amd. 2011 Code)
4-2-8: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; DENIALS:
   A.   Grant Of Investigative Authority And Release Of Information: At the
time of making an initial application, renewal application, transfer
application or request for approval for a new manager, the applicant shall, in
writing, authorize the city to investigate all facts set out in the application
and do a personal background and criminal record check on the applicant and
operating manager. The applicant shall further authorize the city to release
information received from such investigation to the city council.
   B.   Denial Of Application; Grievance Procedure: Should the city council
deny the applicant's request for a license, due partially or solely to the
applicant's prior conviction of a crime, the city council shall notify the
applicant of the grounds and reasons for the denial, the applicable complaint
and grievance procedure as set forth in Minnesota statutes section 364.06, the
earliest date the applicant may reapply for a license, and that all competent
evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication. (New Market
2004 Code § 3-2-8)
4-2-9: HEARING REQUIRED FOR NEW LICENSES:
A public hearing for the issuance of a license for a new premises or for a
different licensee at the same premises shall be preceded by ten (10) days'
published notice. In addition, the public hearing for the issuance of a license
for a new premises shall also be preceded by a ten (10) days' mailed notice to
all owners of property located within five hundred feet (500') of the
boundaries of the property on which the business that is the subject of the
application is located. A public hearing is not required for temporary license
applications. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-9)
4-2-10: REQUIRED INFORMATION FOR LICENSE APPROVAL:
The city council shall consider the following, in addition to conformity with
state statutes and city ordinances, in determining whether a new or renewal
license shall be granted:
   A.   The investigative and staff report submitted by the city clerk.
   B.   Information received through the public hearing process.
   C.   Whether the applicant has or will take affirmative action to minimize
public safety problems commonly associated with on-sale liquor establishments
including, but not limited to, DWI drivers, illegal sale to minors, and
disturbing the peace.
   D.   Any other relevant information. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-10)
4-2-11: GRANT, TRANSFER AND AMENDMENT OF LICENSE:
   A.   Issuance To Applicant Only: A license shall be issued to the applicant
only, and no license shall be transferred except as provided in this chapter.
   B.   Issuance For Specific Premises; Changes:
      1.   Specific Premises: Each license shall be issued only for the exact
rooms and square footage described in the application. A license is valid only
in the compact and contiguous building or structure situated on the premises
described in the license, and all transactions relating to a sale under such
license must take place within such building or structure. In the case of a
restaurant, club, or exclusive liquor store licensed for on-sales of alcoholic
beverages and located on a golf course, "licensed premises" means the entire
golf course except for areas where motor vehicles are regularly parked or
operated.
      2.   Building Under Construction: When a license is granted for a
premises where the building is under construction or otherwise not ready for
occupancy, the city clerk shall not issue the license until notified by the
building official that the building is ready for occupancy.
      3.   Building Changes: Proposed enlargement or substantial alteration
which changes the character of the establishment or extension of premises
previously licensed shall be reported to the city clerk at or before the time
application is made for a building permit for any such change. The enlargement,
substantial alteration or extension shall not be allowed unless the council
approves an amendment to the license.
   C.   Death Of Licensee: In the event of the death of a person holding a
license, the personal representative of that person shall be allowed to
continue to operate the business within the terms of the license for a period
not to exceed ninety (90) days after the death of the licensee. (New Market
2004 Code § 3-2-11)
4-2-12: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE AND PERMIT APPROVAL:
At the time a license is issued pursuant to this chapter or a consumption and
display permit is approved, the city council may attach special conditions to
the approval based upon the nature of the business, the location of the
business, and verified complaints, if any, to protect the health, safety,
welfare, and quietude of the community and ensure harmony with the location
where the business is located. Violation of any of the conditions shall be
grounds for revocation of the license. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-14)
4-2-13: TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES AND PERMITS:
Each renewal license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year.
Temporary licenses shall expire according to their terms. All intoxicating
liquor licenses and 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses shall expire on October 31
of each year. (Ord. 11, 8-9-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
4-2-14: REQUIREMENTS FOR CORPORATIONS, PARTNERSHIPS AND ASSOCIATIONS:
   A.   Operating Manager Required: All corporations, partnerships, and
associations must designate an operating manager. The operating manager must be
a person primarily responsible at the licensed premises who is in charge of day
to day liquor sales. (Ord. 99, 9-27-2012)
   B.   Changes In Organization:
      1.   Licenses issued to corporations shall be valid only so long as there
is no change in the officers or ownership interest of the corporation, unless
such change is approved by the council. The requirement concerning change in
officers does not apply to corporations whose stock is traded on the New York
or American Stock Exchange. For purposes of this section, "interest" includes
any pecuniary interest in the ownership, operation, management or profits of a
liquor establishment, but does not include: bona fide loans; bona fide fixed
sum rental agreements; bona fide open accounts or other obligations held with
or without security arising out of the ordinary and regular course of business
or selling or leasing merchandise, fixtures or supplies to such establishment;
or any interest of five percent (5%) or less in any corporation holding a city
liquor license. A person who receives monies, from time to time, directly or
indirectly, from a licensee in the absence of a bona fide consideration
therefor, and excluding bona fide gifts or donations, shall be deemed to have a
pecuniary interest in such retail license. In determining "bona fide", the
reasonable value of the goods or things received as consideration for the
payment of the licensee and all other facts reasonably tending to prove or
disprove the existence of any purposeful scheme or arrangement to evade any
prohibitions under this chapter shall be considered.
      2.   Licenses issued to associations or partnerships shall be valid only
so long as there is no change in the partnership or association, unless such
change is approved by the council.
      3.   Corporations, partnerships, or associations holding licenses shall
submit written notice to the city clerk of any changes described herein on or
before thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of any such change. The
licensee shall notify the city clerk when a person not listed in the
application acquires an interest that, when combined with that of a spouse,
parent, brother, sister, or child, exceeds five percent (5%), and shall give
all information about said person as is required of a person pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Change In Operating Manager:
      1.   Corporations holding licenses shall submit written notice to the
city clerk of any change in operating managers prior to the effective date of
such change. The written notice shall designate the new operating manager. The
new operating manager shall be subject to the investigation required by this
chapter.
      2.   The designation of a new operating manager shall not cause the
corporation's license to become invalid before a decision is rendered by the
city council, provided proper notice and application are made by the applicant.
A proposed new operating manager shall be referred to as the "interim operating
manager". In the event an interim operating manager is rejected by the city
council, the corporation shall designate another interim operating manager and
make the required application within fifteen (15) days of the decision by the
city council. In any event, a corporation shall be limited to two (2)
successive interim operating managers. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-15)
4-2-15: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
   A.   State Law; No Background Information; Prior Criminal Record: No license
shall be granted to or held by any person:
      1.   Made ineligible by state law;
      2.   Upon whom it is impractical to conduct a background and financial
investigation due to the unavailability of information; or
      3.   Who, within five (5) years of the license application, has been
convicted of a felony or a wilful violation of a federal or state law or local
ordinance governing the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession for sale
or distribution of an alcoholic beverage and who cannot show competent evidence
under Minnesota statutes section 364.03 of sufficient rehabilitation and
present fitness to perform the duties of a licensee.
   B.   No Manager: No licenses shall be granted to a corporation that does not
have an operating manager.
   C.   Not The Real Party In Interest: No license shall be granted to a person
who, in the judgment of the council, is not the real party in interest or
beneficial owner of the business operated, or to be operated, under the
license.
   D.   Delinquent Taxes Or Charges: No license shall be granted for operation
on any premises on which state, city or county taxes, assessments, or other
financial claims of the state, city, or county are delinquent and unpaid.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the delinquent taxes, assessments, or
financial claims are against a landowner, and the licensee is a tenant of the
landowner and has no financial interest in the landowner, then the city council
may, in its discretion, but shall not be required to, grant a license to an
applicant so long as the applicant is not delinquent on any taxes, assessments,
or financial claims as set forth herein.
   E.   Residency Requirements For Renewal Licenses: A license will not be
renewed if, in the case of an individual, the licensee is not a resident of the
state at the time of the date for renewal; if, in the case of a partnership,
the managing partner is not a resident of the state at the time of the renewal;
or in the case of a corporation, if the operating manager is not a resident of
the state at the time of the date of renewal. The time for establishing
residency within the state may, for good cause, be extended by the council.
(New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-13)
   F.   Instructional Program; Training: No license or renewal license shall be
issued to sell alcoholic beverages under this chapter unless an applicant or
license holder has an approved program for instructing all employees at the
business premises for which the license was issued, in the legal requirements
pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages including, but not limited to,
reviewing the law on the sale of alcoholic beverages, providing information on
the health risks of using alcoholic beverages, and requiring employees to
request identification from every customer who appears to be thirty (30) years
old or less. No license shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant or
license holder signs a city form attesting that each employee of the applicant
or license holder has received training and instruction on the sale of
alcoholic beverages and the date such training occurred. Training must be
completed before an employee commences work in a licensed establishment. The
training shall include information that the sale of alcoholic beverages to
minors is illegal, explains what proof of age is legally acceptable, and that a
sale to a minor can subject the applicant or license holder and the employees
thereof to criminal liability. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-13; amd. 2011 Code)
4-2-16: CONDITIONS OF LICENSES AND PERMITS:
   A.   Federal Stamps: No licensee shall possess a federal wholesale liquor
dealer's special tax stamp or a federal gambling stamp.
   B.   License And Permit To Be Posted: All liquor licenses and permits shall
be posted in a conspicuous place that is visible to the public in the licensed
establishment at all times.
   C.   Conduct Of Business: Every licensee shall be responsible for the
conduct on the licensee's place of business including conduct and activity
attributable to the business on property owned or controlled by the licensee.
Every licensee shall also cooperate with the city in controlling activity
attributable to the business in surrounding areas.
   D.   Liability Of Licensee For Employee: The act of any employee in
violation of this chapter on the licensed premises is deemed the act of the
licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable for all penalties provided
by this chapter and other laws equally with the employee.
   E.   Ownership Of Equipment: No equipment or fixture in any licensed place
shall be owned in whole or in part by any manufacturer or distiller except such
as shall be expressly permitted by state law.
   F.   Display Of Liquor: No on-sale liquor establishment shall display liquor
to the public during the hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.
   G.   Samples: Off-sale licensees may provide samples of malt liquor, wine,
liqueurs, cordials, and distilled spirits which the licensee currently has in
stock and is offering for sale to the general public without obtaining an
additional license, provided the wine, liqueur, cordial, and distilled spirits
samples are dispensed at no charge and consumed on the licensed premises during
the permitted hours of off-sale in a quantity less than one hundred milliliters
(100 ml) of malt liquor per variety, per customer, fifty milliliters (50 ml) of
wine per customer, twenty five milliliters (25 ml) of liqueur or cordial, and
fifteen milliliters (15 ml) of distilled spirits per variety, per customer.
(New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-17)
4-2-17: DAYS AND HOURS OF OPERATION:
   A.   Hours And Days Of Sales: Hours and days of sale shall be as allowed by
state law. There shall be no consumption or display of alcoholic beverages
during the hours that sale is prohibited by state law.
   B.   Nonemployees On Premises: A liquor licensee shall not allow
nonemployees on the business premises from thirty (30) minutes after the sale
of intoxicating liquor is prohibited until the sale is again permitted, except
as hereinafter provided. On-sale intoxicating liquor licensees and on-sale 3.2
percent malt liquor licensees may permit nonemployees on the premises during
its normal hours of operation when the sale of intoxicating liquor and 3.2
percent malt liquor is prohibited; provided, that there is no sale,
consumption, or display of alcoholic beverages during the hours in which the
sale or consumption of liquor is prohibited; and provided, that the licensee
has closed off all access to the bar area in a manner approved by the city.
(New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-16)
4-2-18: UNDERAGE PERSONS:
   A.   Sales To; Possession Or Consumption In Licensed Premises: No licensee,
licensee's agent, or employee shall serve or dispense upon the licensed
premises any alcoholic beverages to a person under the legal drinking age; nor
shall such licensee, or his agent or employee, permit any such person to be
furnished or allowed to consume any such liquors on the licensed premises; nor
shall such licensee, licensee's agent, or employee permit any such person to be
delivered any such liquors.
   B.   Presence On Licensed Premises: No person under the legal drinking age
shall enter a licensed premises for the purpose of purchasing or consuming any
alcoholic beverage. It is lawful for any person who has attained the age of
eighteen (18) years to enter licensed premises for the following purposes:
      1.   To perform work for the establishment, including the serving of
alcoholic beverages, unless otherwise prohibited by statute;
      2.   To consume meals; and
      3.   To attend social functions that are held in a portion of the
establishment where liquor is not sold. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-18)
   C.   Possession Prohibited: No person under the legal drinking age shall
possess any alcoholic beverages. Possession of an alcoholic beverage by a
person under the legal drinking age at a place other than the household of the
parent or guardian creates a rebuttable presumption of intent to consume such
alcoholic beverage at a place other than the household of the person's parent
or guardian. This presumption may be rebutted by a preponderance of the
evidence. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-18; amd. 2011 Code)
   D.   Misrepresentation Of Age And Purchase Prohibited: No underage person
shall misrepresent the person's age for the purpose of obtaining alcoholic
beverages, nor shall the person enter any premises licensed for the retail sale
of alcoholic beverages for the purposes of purchasing or having served or
delivered any alcoholic beverage; nor shall any such person purchase, attempt
to purchase, consume, or have another person purchase for the underage person
any alcoholic beverages.
   E.   Identification Requirements:
      1.   Identification Required: Any person shall, upon demand of the
licensee, his employee, or agent, produce and permit to be examined one of the
forms of identification provided under Minnesota statutes section 340A.503,
subdivision 6.
      2.   Prima Facie Evidence: In every prosecution for a violation of the
provisions of this section relating to the sale or furnishing of alcoholic
beverages to underage persons and in every proceeding before the council with
respect thereto, the fact that the underage person involved has obtained and
presented to the licensee, his employee or agent a driver's license, passport
or identification card from which it appears that said person was not an
underage person and was regularly issued such identification card, shall be
prima facie evidence that the licensee, his agent or employee is not guilty of
a violation of such a provision and shall be conclusive evidence that a
violation, if one has occurred, was not wilful or intentional.
   F.   Employment: No person under eighteen (18) years of age may serve or
sell intoxicating liquor in a retail intoxicating liquor establishment. (New
Market 2004 Code § 3-2-18)
4-2-19: OPEN CONTAINERS IN PUBLIC:
No alcoholic beverage shall be sold or consumed or possessed in an unsealed
container on a public highway or street, sidewalk, or private parking area to
which the public has access, except on such premises or location when and where
permission has been specifically granted by the council. (Ord. 40, 5-14-2009)
4-2-20: NUDITY:
   A.   Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person on premises licensed under
this chapter to:
      1.   Employ or use any person in the sale or service of alcoholic
beverages in or upon the licensed premises while such person is unclothed or in
such attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any portion of the
female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the pubic hair,
anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals.
      2.   Employ or use services of any host or hostess while such host or
hostess is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as described in
subsection A1 of this section.
      3.   Employ or use any dancers, musicians, or other performers or
entertainers who are unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as
described in subsection A1 of this section.
      4.   Directly or indirectly sponsor any contests which may foreseeably
cause, result in, or lead to the occurrence of the acts or incidents described
in subsection A6 of this section.
      5.   Encourage or permit any person on the licensed premises to touch,
caress or fondle breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any employee of the
licensee or any performers or entertainers who are employed or whose services
are used by the licensee.
      6.   Permit any person to perform acts of or acts which simulate:
         a.   With or upon another person, sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law.
         b.   Masturbation or bestiality.
         c.   With or upon another person, the touching, caressing or fondling
of the buttocks, anus, genitals, or female breasts.
         d.   The displaying of pubic hair, anus, vulva, genitals or female
breasts below the top of the areola.
      7.   Permit any person to use artificial devices or inanimate objects
depicting any of the prohibited activities described.
      8.   Permit any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises, or any
area owned or controlled by the licensee upon the licensee's premises, who
permits the public to view any portion of his genitals or anus.
      9.   Permit the showing of film, still pictures, electronic reproduction
or other visual reproduction depicting:
         a.   Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation,
sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is
prohibited by law.
         b.   Any person being touched, caressed or fondled on the breast,
buttock, anus, or genitals.
         c.   Scenes wherein a person displays the vulva, the anus or the
genitals.
         d.   Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are
employed to depict, or drawings are employed to portray, any of the prohibited
activities described in this subsection.
   B.   Exemptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
theatrical production performed in a theater by a professional theatrical or
musical company which has serious artistic merit.
   C.   Liability For Violations; Penalty: Both the licensee and the person(s)
actually engaging in any of the acts prohibited by subsection A of this section
shall be criminally liable. Any violation of this section shall also constitute
grounds for revocation or suspension of the licensee's license. (New Market
2004 Code § 3-2-19)
4-2-21: ADDITIONAL PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Prostitution: No licensee shall knowingly permit the licensed premises
or any room in those premises or any adjoining building directly under the
licensee's control to be used by prostitutes.
   B.   Controlled Substances: No licensee shall knowingly permit the sale,
possession or consumption of controlled substances on the licensed premises in
violation of state law.
   C.   Gambling: Gambling and gambling devices are not permitted on licensed
premises. State lottery tickets may be purchased and sold within licensed
premises as authorized by the director of the state lottery. (New Market 2004
Code § 3-2-20)
4-2-22: COMPLIANCE CHECKS:
   A.   Compliance Checks Authorized: From time to time, the city may conduct
compliance checks. Such compliance checks may involve, but are not limited to,
engaging underage persons to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase
alcohol and alcohol related products.
   B.   Use Of Underage Persons: If underage persons are used for compliance
checks, they shall not be guilty of unlawful possession of alcohol when such
items are obtained as a part of a compliance check. No underage person used in
compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting
the person's age, and all underage persons lawfully engaged in a compliance
check shall answer all questions about the person's age asked by the licensee
or his or her employee and shall produce any identification for which he or she
is asked. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-21)
4-2-23: RIGHT OF INSPECTION:
   A.   Premises: Any city designated police officer displaying proper
identification shall have the unqualified right to enter, inspect, and search
the premises of any licensee hereunder without a warrant, during business hours
or when owners, managers, or other employees are located on the premises.
   B.   Records: The business records of the licensee, including federal and
state tax returns, shall be available for inspection by the city at all
reasonable times upon written request. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-22)
4-2-24: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Grounds For Suspension Or Revocation: The council may suspend or revoke
any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for any of the following
reasons:
      1.   False or misleading statements made on a license application or
renewal, or failure to abide by the commitments, promises or representations
made to the city council.
      2.   Violation of any special conditions under which the license was
granted including, but not limited to, the timely payment of real estate taxes
and all other charges.
      3.   Violation of any federal, state, or local law regulating the sale of
alcoholic beverages or controlled substances.
      4.   Creation of a nuisance on the premises or in the surrounding area.
      5.   That the licensee suffered or permitted illegal acts upon the
licensed premises or on property owned or controlled by the licensee adjacent
to the licensed premises, unrelated to the sale of alcoholic beverages.
      6.   That the licensee had knowledge of illegal acts upon or attributable
to the licensed premises but failed to report the same to the police.
      7.   Expiration or cancellation of any required insurance, or failure to
notify the city within a reasonable time of changes in the term of the
insurance or the carriers.
   B.   Revocation For Inactive License: The city council may revoke the
alcoholic beverage license of any establishment granted a license that is not
under construction and exhibiting satisfactory progress toward completion
within six (6) months from its issuance, or any establishment that ceases
operation for a period of six (6) months. A hearing shall be held to determine
what progress has been made toward opening or reopening the establishment, and
if satisfactory progress is not demonstrated, the council may revoke the
license.
   C.   Hearing And Notice Provisions: Revocation or suspension of a license by
the city council shall be preceded by public hearing conducted in accordance
with Minnesota statutes sections 14.57 to 14.69. The city council may appoint a
hearing examiner or may conduct a hearing itself. The hearing notice shall be
given at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, include notice of the time
and place of the hearing, and state the nature of the charges against the
licensee. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-23)
4-2-25: TEMPORARY EXPANSION OF LICENSED PREMISES:
The purpose of this section is to allow temporary expansion of the licensed
premises of on-sale liquor, wine and beer licensees, to temporarily include
limited outdoor areas directly adjacent to and contiguous with the permanently
licensed premises, subject to such conditions as the council determines will
protect the public health, safety and welfare. The city council finds that
allowing outdoor sales and service in commercial areas is beneficial to the
creation of a vibrant and prosperous business community so long as adequate
review, controls and accountability are in place.
Therefore, the holder of any retail liquor license for premises located in the
city may apply for a permit for temporary expansion of its licensed premises
for an area directly adjacent to and contiguous with the permanently licensed
premises. The city council may grant such a permit on the terms and conditions
specified in this section and such other terms and conditions as the city
council may determine are necessary or advisable to protect the public health,
safety and welfare. Application for a permit for temporary expansion of a
licensed premises shall be subject to the following requirements and
procedures:
   A.   Application: Application for a permit for temporary expansion of a
licensed premises shall be made on a form provided by the city and shall
contain the following information and such other information as the city may
require from time to time:
      1.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the license holder,
its owners, officers, partners, and of all managers of the licensed
establishment.
      2.   A specific description and diagram of the area in which the
temporary expansion activity is to occur. The description and diagram must
include location, dimensions, barriers proposed to be used, ingress and egress
arrangements, seating capacity, and other pertinent information. The area must
be compact and contiguous to the permanently licensed premises, and be
contained by physical enclosure devices.
      3.   Written consent of the owner of the expansion area or of a person
with lawful responsibility for the expansion area, if the owner is someone
other than the licensee.
      4.   The purpose for which the temporary expansion is sought, a
description of planned activities, including food and beverage service,
entertainment, if any, security plans (including lighting, sanitation, liquor
control, etc.) and days and hours of operation including beginning and ending
dates.
      5.   Proof that any necessary auxiliary permits have been obtained, such
as an outdoor event permit.
      6.   A detailed description of the planned staffing of the temporary
expansion area during hours of operation, and methods the licensee will use to
ensure that consumption of alcoholic beverages is restricted to the licensed
premises and the temporary expansion area and that alcoholic beverages are not
removed from those areas.
      7.   Such other information that the city may deem necessary.
   B.   Number Of Permits: No individual licensee shall be granted such
temporary expansion of the license premises for more than three (3)
nonconsecutive events in any calendar year period.
   C.   Fees: Each application shall be accompanied by an application fee in
such amount as may be determined by the city council ordinance establishing
fees.
   D.   Review: Applications shall be submitted to the city clerk and shall be
reviewed by the city clerk, city engineer, zoning administrator, chief of
police and fire chief, prior to issuance of a permit by the city council.
Review of applications shall include consideration of all pertinent building
code, fire code, other life safety issues, applicable zoning ordinances,
history of the licensee with regard to maintaining order on the licensed
premises and complying with applicable laws, potential impact of proposed
outdoor service on adjoining and surrounding properties in terms of light,
noise and liquor control, and other considerations.
   E.   Denial, Suspension, Revocation: The city council may deny, revoke, and
suspend a license for any of the following reasons:
      1.   The existence of a temporary expansion disturbs the peace, quiet or
repose of surrounding residential or commercial areas.
      2.   The existence of a temporary expansion contributes to crime,
disorderly behavior, noise, traffic, litter or parking problems in the area
near the establishment.
      3.   Any violation of the laws relating to the sale or service of
alcoholic beverages.
      4.   Any violation of the terms of this section.
      5.   Any other good cause related to the operation of the establishment.
   F.   Conditions: Approval of an application may be made subject to any
appropriate restrictions or conditions, which may vary from establishment to
establishment depending on the circumstances. At a minimum, the following
restrictions and conditions shall apply:
      1.   A temporary expansion area must be compact and contiguous to the
permanently licensed premises and must be contained by approved physical
enclosure devices.
      2.   Hours of operation shall not exceed those hours authorized at the
permanent premises, or any lesser hours specified as a condition of the
temporary expansion of premises license.
      3.   Days or dates of operation shall be as specified in the permit.
      4.   The city council may specify the type of beverage containers which
may be used in a temporary expansion area, may require a specific type and
number of refuse containers to be provided within the area, and may require
sanitary facilities in addition to the facilities located within the
permanently licensed premises.
      5.   An approved barrier at least thirty six inches (36") in height shall
be in place between the temporary expansion area and any other public or
private property during all hours of operation, provided that the city council
may require a higher and more secure barrier depending upon the circumstances.
      6.   The city council may require access to and egress from a temporary
expansion area be only through a door connecting it to the permanently licensed
premises or to other property controlled by the licensee.
      7.   The licensee shall have submitted adequate plans addressing liquor
control and other public safety concerns and shall at all times comply with all
such plans which have been approved by the city in issuing a permit under this
section.
      8.   All temporary barriers, tables, chairs and other property of the
licensee shall be removed from any temporary licensed premises upon expiration
of the permit.
      9.   The licensee shall be responsible for picking up trash and litter
resulting from activity within the temporary expansion area both within the
temporary expansion area and within a reasonable distance outside of the
temporary expansion area.
      10.   All applicable liquor laws shall be faithfully observed by the
licensee and the licensee's employees.
      11.   The licensee shall have secured any other permit or license which
may be required for the use and period of time proposed.
      12.   The council may prohibit or authorize entertainment to be conducted
in an outdoor expansion area, in the discretion of the council, and may
restrict any authorized entertainment as necessary or desirable for the
protection of the repose and welfare of the public and adjoining and
surrounding property owners.
      13.   The licensee shall file with the city proof that the liability
insurance required by this code and by Minnesota statutes chapter 340A apply to
the expanded area.
      14.   Concurrence of previously scheduled authorized outdoor events that
are: a) in close proximity to the outdoor expansion area or b) that will
negatively impact similar properties affected by the event at the outdoor
expansion area will be a basis for a denial of the application or appropriate
restrictions on the outdoor expansion area.
   G.   Denial, Suspension Or Revocation: Denial, suspension or revocation of a
temporary expansion of liquor license premises shall be subject to appeal and
review in accordance with the procedures provided under this chapter in the
case of suspensions and revocations of liquor licenses. (Ord. 69, 7-14-2011;
amd. Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
4-2-26: PENALTIES:
   A.   Purpose And Scope: The purpose of this section is to establish criteria
by which the city council determines the length of license suspensions and the
propriety of revocations, and shall apply to all premises licensed under this
chapter. These penalties are the minimum penalties appropriate for most
situations; however, the council may deviate in an individual case where the
council finds that there exist reasons making it more appropriate to deviate,
such as, but not limited to, a licensee's efforts in combination with the state
or city to prevent the sale of alcohol to minors. When deviating from these
standards, the council will provide written findings that support the penalty
selected.
   B.   Minimum Civil Penalties: The minimum penalties for convictions of
violations are as follows (unless specified, numbers below indicate consecutive
days' suspension):
                  Appearance
Type Of Violation First Second Third Fourth
                                        Appearance
Type Of Violation                       First      Second Third      Fourth
1.  Commission of a felony related to   Revocation n/a    n/a        n/a
    the licensed activity
2.  Sale of alcoholic beverages while   Revocation n/a    n/a        n/a
    license is under suspension
3.  Sale of alcoholic beverages to      3          6      18         Revocation
    underage person
4.  Sale of alcoholic beverages to      3          6      18         Revocation
    obviously intoxicated person
5.  After hours sale of alcoholic       3          6      18         Revocation
    beverages
6.  After hours display or consumption  3          6      18         Revocation
    of alcoholic beverages
    Refusal to allow city inspectors or
7.  police admission to inspect         5          15     Revocation n/a
    premises
8.  Illegal gambling on the premises    3          6      18         Revocation
    Failure to take reasonable steps to
9.  stop a person from leaving the      3          6      18         Revocation
    premises with alcoholic beverages
    Sale of intoxicating liquor where
10. the license is only for 3.2 percent Revocation n/a    n/a        n/a
    malt liquor
 
   C.   Multiple Violations: At a licensee's first appearance before the
council, the council must act upon all of the violations that have been alleged
in the notice sent to the licensee. The council, in that case, must consider
the minimum penalty for each violation under the first appearance column in
subsection B of this section. The occurrence of multiple violations is grounds
for deviation from the minimum penalties in the council's discretion.
   D.   Subsequent Violations: Violations occurring after the notice of hearing
has been mailed, but prior to the hearing, must be treated as a separate
violation and dealt with as a second appearance before the council, unless the
city clerk and licensee agree in writing to add the violation to the first
appearance. The same procedure applies to a second, third, or fourth appearance
before the council.
   E.   Subsequent Appearances: Upon a second, third, or fourth appearance
before the council by the same licensee, the council must impose the minimum
penalty for the violation or violations giving rise to the subsequent
appearance without regard to the particular violation or violations that were
the subject of the first or prior appearance. However, the council may consider
the amount of time elapsed between appearances as a basis for deviating from
the minimum penalty imposed by this section.
   F.   Computation Of Appearances: After the first appearance, a subsequent
appearance by the same licensee will be determined as follows:
      1.   If the first appearance was within three (3) years of the current
violation, the current violation will be treated as a second appearance.
      2.   If a licensee has appeared before the council on two (2) previous
occasions, and the current violation occurred within five (5) years of the
first appearance, the current violation will be treated as a third appearance.
      3.   If a licensee has appeared before the council on three (3) previous
occasions, and the current violation occurred within seven (7) years of the
first appearance, the current violation will be treated as a fourth appearance.
      4.   Any appearance not covered by subsection F1, F2 or F3 of this
section will be treated as a first appearance.
   G.   Other Penalties: Nothing in this section shall restrict or limit the
authority of the council to suspend the license up to sixty (60) days, revoke
the license, impose a civil fine not to exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00), impose conditions, or take any other action in accordance with
law; provided, that the license holder has been afforded an opportunity for a
hearing in the manner provided in this chapter. (New Market 2004 Code § 3-2-24;
amd. Ord. 68, 7-14-2011)
EL836   4-2A.txt
ARTICLE A. ELKO SPEEDWAY LIQUOR REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-2A-1: Definitions
4-2A-2: License Authorized
4-2A-3: Conditions Of Elko Speedway Facility License
4-2A-4: General Requirements And Restrictions
4-2A-5: License Fees
4-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
Terms used in this chapter shall mean:
ELKO SPEEDWAY FACILITY: The Elko Speedway facility located within the city that
includes racetracks and may also include additional entertainment venues such
as a drive-in and a restaurant/bar/banquet facility. (Ord. 144, 12-1-2016)
4-2A-2: LICENSE AUTHORIZED:
The city council may issue an on sale intoxicating liquor license and on sale
Sunday liquor license for the Elko Speedway facility for a space that is not
compact and contiguous, provided that the licensed premises may include only
the space within the fenced areas described in the approved license
application. (Ord. 144, 12-1-2016)
4-2A-3: CONDITIONS OF ELKO SPEEDWAY FACILITY LICENSE:
A holder of an on sale license issued for the Elko Speedway facility shall meet
the following requirements:
   A.   Whenever alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed at the Elko Speedway
facility, the licensee shall provide the level of security for each secured
area of the Elko Speedway facility where alcoholic beverages are served or
consumed as required by the city council in the license approval. (Ord. 144,
12-1-2016)
4-2A-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
The following general conditions shall apply to all licenses issued under this
article:
   A.   A license issued under this article shall comply with all requirements
of this chapter. (Ord. 144, 12-1-2016)
4-2A-5: LICENSE FEES:
The city council shall set the fee for the licenses issued for the Elko
Speedway facility. (Ord. 144, 12-1-2016)
CHAPTER 3
LAWFUL GAMBLING
SECTION:
4-3-1: Purpose
4-3-2: State Regulations Adopted; City May Be More Restrictive
4-3-3: Definitions
4-3-4: Application Of Provisions
4-3-5: Lawful Gambling Permitted; Council Approval Required
4-3-6: Authorized Organizations
4-3-7: Premises Permits And Bingo Hall Licenses
4-3-8: Local Permits
4-3-9: Change In Application Information
4-3-10: Display Of Permits
4-3-11: Lawful Purpose Expenditures In Designated Trade Area
4-3-12: Records And Reports
4-3-13: Distribution Of Proceeds
4-3-14: Hours Of Operation
4-3-15: Misdemeanor Violations; Penalty
4-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate lawful gambling within the city, to
prevent its commercialization, to ensure the integrity of operations, and to
provide for the use of net profits only for lawful purposes. (Elko 2004 Code §
112.03)
4-3-2: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED; CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE:
The provisions of Minnesota statutes chapter 349, as they may be amended from
time to time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of
operation, provisions relating to sales, and all other matters pertaining to
lawful gambling, are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this
chapter as if set out in full. It is the intention of the council that all
future amendments of Minnesota statutes chapter 349 are hereby adopted by
reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the effective date
hereof. The council is authorized by the provisions of Minnesota statutes
section 349.213, as it may be amended from time to time, to impose, and has
imposed in this chapter, additional restrictions on gambling within its limits
beyond those contained in Minnesota statutes chapter 349, as it may be amended
from time to time. (Elko 2004 Code §§ 112.01, 112.02)
4-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
In addition to the definitions contained in Minnesota statutes section 349.12,
as it may be amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for
purposes of this chapter:
BOARD: The state of Minnesota gambling control board.
LICENSED ORGANIZATION: An organization licensed by the board.
LOCAL PERMIT: A permit issued by the city.
TRADE AREA: This city, each city and township contiguous to this city,
including the cities of New Prague and Lakeville. (Elko 2004 Code § 112.04;
amd. Ord. 100, 12-20-2012)
4-3-4: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall be construed to regulate all forms of lawful gambling within
the city except:
   A.   Bingo conducted within a nursing home or a senior citizen housing
project or by a senior citizen organization if:
      1.   The prizes for a single bingo game do not exceed ten dollars
($10.00);
      2.   Total prizes awarded at a single bingo occasion do not exceed two
hundred dollars ($200.00);
      3.   No more than two (2) bingo occasions are held by the organization or
at the facility each week;
      4.   Only members of the organization or residents of the nursing home or
housing project are allowed to play in a bingo game;
      5.   No compensation is paid for any persons who conduct the bingo; and
      6.   A manager is appointed to supervise the bingo. (Elko 2004 Code §
112.05)
   B.   Raffles, if the value of all prizes awarded by the organization in a
calendar year does not exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
(Elko 2004 Code § 112.05; amd. 2011 Code)
4-3-5: LAWFUL GAMBLING PERMITTED; COUNCIL APPROVAL REQUIRED:
Lawful gambling is permitted within the city if the council, by resolution
adopted by a majority of its members, authorizes lawful gambling to occur,
provided it is conducted in accordance with Minnesota statutes sections 609.75
to 609.763, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time, Minnesota
statutes sections 349.11 to 349.23, inclusive, as they may be amended from time
to time, and this chapter. Lawful gambling authorized by Minnesota statutes
sections 349.11 to 349.23, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time,
shall not be conducted unless approved by the council, subject to the
provisions of this chapter and state law. (Elko 2004 Code §§ 112.06, 112.07)
4-3-6: AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATIONS:
An organization shall not be eligible to conduct lawful gambling in the city
unless it meets the qualifications in Minnesota statutes section 349.16,
subdivision 2, as it may be amended from time to time, and also meets at least
one of the following conditions:
   A.   The organization has at least fifteen (15) members that are residents
of the city; or (Elko 2004 Code § 112.18)
   B.   The physical site for the organization's headquarters or the registered
business office of the organization is located within the city's trade area and
has been located within the city's trade area for at least two (2) years
immediately preceding the application for a license; or (Ord. 100, 12-20-2012)
   C.   The organization owns real property within the city and the lawful
gambling is conducted on the property owned by the organization within the
city; or
   D.   The physical site where the organization regularly holds its meetings
and conducts its activities, other than lawful gambling and fundraising, is
within the city and has been located within the city for at least two (2) years
immediately preceding application for a license; or
   E.   The organization is a fire or police relief organization that provides
services to the city. (Elko 2004 Code § 112.18)
4-3-7: PREMISES PERMITS AND BINGO HALL LICENSES:
   A.   Application; Procedure For Approval Or Disapproval:
      1.   Any organization seeking to obtain a premises permit or bingo hall
license or renewal of a premises permit or bingo hall license from the board
shall file with the city clerk an executed, complete duplicate application,
together with all exhibits and documents accompanying the application as filed
with the board. The application and accompanying exhibits and documents shall
be filed not later than three (3) days after they have been filed with the
board. (Elko 2004 Code § 112.08)
      2.   Upon receipt of an application for issuance or renewal of a premises
permit or bingo hall license, the city clerk shall transmit the application to
the chief of police or the sheriff of the county for review and recommendation.
At the time of making an initial application, renewal application, or transfer
application, the applicant shall, in writing, authorize the city to investigate
all facts set out in the application and do a personal background and criminal
record check on the applicant. The applicant shall further authorize the city
to release information received from such investigation to the city council.
(Ord. 100, 12-20-2012)
      3.   The chief of police or sheriff shall investigate the matter and make
a review and recommendation to the city council as soon as possible, but in no
event later than forty five (45) days following receipt of the notification by
the city. (Elko 2004 Code § 112.08)
      4.   Organizations or bingo halls applying for a state issued premises
permit or bingo hall license shall pay the city a fee as established by
ordinance of the city council. This fee shall be refunded if the application is
withdrawn before the investigation is commenced. If approved by the city
council and the board, a licensed organization will be responsible for an
annual investigative fee for conducting lawful gambling within the city. (Ord.
100, 12-20-2012)
      5.   The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date on which the
council will consider the recommendation.
      6.   The council shall receive the police chief's or sheriff's report and
consider the application within forty five (45) days of the date the
application was submitted to the city clerk.
      7.   The council shall, by resolution, approve or disapprove the
application within sixty (60) days of receipt of the application. (Elko 2004
Code § 112.08)
      8.   The council shall disapprove an application for issuance or renewal
of a premises permit for any of the following reasons. Otherwise, the council
shall pass a resolution approving the application.
         a.   Violation by the gambling organization of any state statute,
state rule or city ordinance relating to gambling within the last three (3)
years.
         b.   Violation by the on-sale establishment or organization leasing
its premises for gambling of any state statute, state rule or city ordinance
relating to the operation of the establishment, including, but not limited to,
laws relating to alcoholic beverages, gambling, controlled substances,
suppression of vice, and protection of public safety within the last three (3)
years.
         c.   Lawful gambling would be conducted at premises other than those
for which an on-sale liquor license has been issued. (Elko 2004 Code § 112.08;
amd. 2011 Code)
         d.   An organization would be permitted to conduct lawful gambling
activities at no more than four (4) premises in the city. (Ord. 105, 4-11-2013)
         e.   More than one licensed organization would be permitted to conduct
lawful gambling activities at one premises.
         f.   Failure of the applicant to pay any investigation fee provided by
subsection A4 of this section within the prescribed time limit.
         g.   Operation of gambling at the site would be detrimental to the
health, safety, and welfare of the community. (Elko 2004 Code § 112.08; amd.
2011 Code)
   B.   Ineligibility For Permit Or License: The city council shall not adopt a
resolution approving a premises permit or bingo hall license from any
applicant: (Elko 2004 Code § 112.19)
      1.   Which has an officer, director, or other person in a supervisory or
management position who:
         a.   Has been convicted of a felony or gross misdemeanor involving
theft or fraud;
         b.   Has ever been convicted of a crime involving gambling; or
         c.   Has had a license issued by the board or director permanently
revoked for violation of law or board rule. (Ord. 88, 12-15-2011)
      2.   Which owes, or which has an officer, director, or other person in a
supervisory or management position who owes, delinquent local, state, or
federal taxes, or is delinquent on any other city bill.
      3.   Is in violation of any land use or zoning ordinance including the
premises proposed to be licensed. (Elko 2004 Code § 112.19)
   C.   Location Restrictions: No premises permit shall be issued for any
location within three hundred fifty feet (350') of any school. The distance
imposed in this subsection may be waived at the discretion of the council,
provided a notice of the time and place of the council meeting at which the
application will be considered shall be mailed at least ten (10) days before
the date of the council meeting to all property owners of record located wholly
or partly within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the site where the lawful
gambling is proposed. The applicant shall supply mailing labels obtained from
the county auditor's office listing the names/addresses of owners within the
three hundred fifty feet (350'), and the cost of mailing the notices shall be
paid by the applicant. This notice and the list of owners to whom it was sent
will be made a part of the record of the proceedings. This notice will advise
the owners they may file any objections with the city clerk prior to the
council meeting or they may attend the meeting and be heard. (Ord. 100, 12-20-
2012)
4-3-8: LOCAL PERMITS:
   A.   Permit Required; Exemptions: No organization shall conduct lawful
gambling excluded or exempted from state licensure requirements by Minnesota
statutes section 349.166, as it may be amended from time to time, without a
valid local permit. This subsection shall not apply to lawful gambling exempted
from local regulation by section
4-3-4 of this chapter.
   B.   Application For Permit; Procedure For Approval Or Disapproval:
      1.   Applications for issuance or renewal of a local permit shall be on a
form prescribed by the city. The application shall contain the following
information:
         a.   Name and address of the organization requesting the permit.
         b.   Name and address of the officers and person accounting for
receipts, expenses, and profits for the event.
         c.   Dates of the gambling occasion for which the permit is requested.
         d.   Address of premises where the event will occur.
         e.   Copy of rental or leasing arrangement, if any, connected with the
event, including rental to be charged to the organization.
         f.   Estimated value of prizes to be awarded. (Elko 2004 Code §
112.09)
      2.   The fee for a local permit shall be as established by ordinance. The
fee shall be submitted with the application for a local permit. This fee shall
be refunded if the application is withdrawn before the investigation is
commenced. (Elko 2004 Code § 112.09; amd. 2011 Code)
      3.   Upon receipt of an application for issuance or renewal of a local
permit, the city clerk shall transmit the notification to the chief of police
or sheriff for review and recommendation. At the time of making an initial
application, renewal application, or transfer application, the applicant shall,
in writing, authorize the city to investigate all facts set out in the
application and do a personal background and criminal record check on the
applicant. The applicant shall further authorize the city to release
information received from such investigation to the city council. (Ord. 100,
12-20-2012)
      4.   The chief of police or sheriff shall investigate the matter and make
review and recommendation to the city council as soon as possible, but in no
event later than forty five (45) days following receipt of the notification by
the city.
      5.   The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date on which the
council will consider the recommendation.
      6.   The council shall receive the police chief's or sheriff's report and
consider the application within forty five (45) days of the date the
application was submitted to the city clerk.
      7.   The council shall disapprove an application for issuance or renewal
of a premises permit for any of the following reasons. Otherwise, the council
shall approve the application.
         a.   Violation by the gambling organization of any state statute,
state rule or city ordinance relating to gambling within the last three (3)
years.
         b.   Violation by the on-sale establishment or organization leasing
its premises for gambling of any state statute, state rule or city ordinance
relating to the operation of the establishment, including, but not limited to,
laws relating to the operation of the establishment and laws relating to
alcoholic beverages, gambling, controlled substances, suppression of vice, and
protection of public safety within the last three (3) years.
         c.   The organization has not been in existence in the city for at
least three (3) consecutive years prior to the date of application.
         d.   The organization does not have at least thirty (30) active
members.
         e.   Exempted or excluded lawful gambling will not take place at a
premises the organization owns or rents.
         f.   Exempted or excluded lawful gambling will not be limited to a
premises for which an on-sale liquor license has been issued.
         g.   An organization will have a permit to conduct exempted or
excluded lawful gambling activities on more than one premises in the city.
         h.   More than one licensed, qualified organization will be conducting
exempted or excluded lawful gambling activities at any one premises.
         i.   Failure of the applicant to pay the permit fee provided by
subsection B2 of this section within the prescribed time limit.
         j.   Operation of gambling at the site would be detrimental to health,
safety, and welfare of the community.
   C.   Term Of Permit: Local permits shall be valid for one year after the
date of issuance unless suspended or revoked. (Elko 2004 Code § 112.09)
   D.   Revocation Or Suspension Of Permit:
      1.   A local permit may be revoked or temporarily suspended for a
violation by the gambling organization of any state statute, state rule or city
ordinance relating to gambling. (Elko 2004 Code § 112.10)
      2.   A local permit shall not be revoked or suspended until notice and an
opportunity for a hearing have first been given to the permitted person. The
notice shall be personally served and shall state the provision reasonably
believed to be violated. The notice shall also state that the permitted person
may demand a hearing on the matter, in which case, the permit will not be
suspended until after the hearing is held. If the permitted person requests a
hearing, the council shall hold a hearing on the matter at least one week after
the date on which the request is made. If, as a result of the hearing, the
council finds that an ordinance violation exists, then the council may suspend
or revoke the permit. (Elko 2004 Code § 112.10; amd. 2011 Code)
4-3-9: CHANGE IN APPLICATION INFORMATION:
An organization holding a state issued premises permit or a local permit shall
notify the city in writing whenever any material change in the information
submitted in the application occurs within ten (10) days of the change. (Elko
2004 Code § 112.12)
4-3-10: DISPLAY OF PERMITS:
All permits issued under state law or this chapter shall be prominently
displayed during the permit year at the premises where gambling is conducted.
(Elko 2004 Code § 112.11)
4-3-11: LAWFUL PURPOSE EXPENDITURES IN DESIGNATED TRADE AREA:
Each organization licensed to conduct gambling within the city shall expend one
hundred percent (100%) of its lawful purpose expenditures on lawful purposes
conducted within the city's trade area. This section applies only to lawful
purpose expenditures of gross profits derived from gambling conducted at a
premises within the city's jurisdiction. (Elko 2004 Code § 112.14)
4-3-12: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
   A.   Organizations conducting lawful gambling shall file with the city clerk
one copy of all records and reports required to be filed with the board,
pursuant to Minnesota statutes chapter 349, as it may be amended from time to
time, and rules adopted pursuant thereto, as they may be amended from time to
time. The records and reports shall be filed on or before the day they are
required to be filed with the board.
   B.   Organizations licensed by the board shall file a report with the city
proving compliance with the trade area spending requirements imposed by section
4-3-11 of this chapter. Such report shall be made on a form prescribed by the
city and shall be submitted annually and in advance of application for renewal.
(Elko 2004 Code § 112.15)
4-3-13: DISTRIBUTION OF PROCEEDS:
Each organization licensed to conduct gambling within the city shall contribute
to a fund administered and regulated by the city, for distribution by the city
for purposes authorized under Minnesota statutes section 349.213, subdivision
1, as it may be amended from time to time, an amount equal to five percent (5%)
of the organization's net profits derived from lawful gambling. For purposes of
this section, "net profits" are profits, less amounts expended for allowable
expenses. Payments to the fund shall be calculated annually for the period
ending on December 31 of each year. Annual payments shall be submitted,
together with verifiable supporting documentation, not later than the twentieth
day of the month following the end of the annual period. (Ord. 100, 12-20-2012)
4-3-14: HOURS OF OPERATION:
Lawful gambling shall not be conducted between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on any day of the week. (Ord. 100, 12-20-2012)
4-3-15: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person who violates:
   A.   Any provision of this chapter;
   B.   Minnesota statutes sections 609.75 to 609.763, inclusive, as they may
be amended from time to time; or
   C.   Minnesota statutes sections 349.11 to 349.21, as they may be amended
from time to time, or any rules promulgated under those sections, as they may
be amended from time to time;
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Elko 2004 Code § 112.99)
CHAPTER 4
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Exemptions From Provisions
4-4-3: County And City Licenses Required; Exemptions
4-4-4: Ineligibility For License
4-4-5: Application For License
4-4-6: License Fee
4-4-7: Procedure For Approval Or Denial Of License
4-4-8: Term Of License
4-4-9: Nontransferability Of License
4-4-10: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
4-4-11: Registration Requirements
4-4-12: Prohibited Activities
4-4-13: Uninvited Peddling And Soliciting
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
PEDDLER: A person who goes from house to house, door to door, business to
business, street to street, or any other type of place to place for the purpose
of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or attempting to
sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares, products,
merchandise or other personal property that the person is carrying or otherwise
transporting. The term peddler shall mean the same as the term hawker.
PERSON: Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation, partnership
or association. As applied to groups, organizations, corporations, partnerships
and associations, the term shall include each member, officer, partner,
associate, agent or employee.
REGULAR BUSINESS DAY: Any day during which the City Hall is normally open for
the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by State law shall
not be counted as regular business days.
SOLICITOR: A person who goes from house to house, door to door, business to
business, street to street, or any other type of place to place for the purpose
of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products,
merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she may be
carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by
other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later time.
The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the scope of
this definition if the actual purpose of the person's activity is to obtain or
attempt to obtain orders as discussed herein.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: A person who temporarily sets up business out of a vehicle,
trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty storefront for the
purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to sell and
delivering goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property and
who does not remain or intend to remain in any one location for more than
fourteen (14) consecutive days. (Elko 2004 Code § 110.01; amd. Ord. 194, 8-8-
2019)
4-4-2: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
   A.   For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms
"peddler", "solicitor", and "transient merchant" shall not apply to any person
selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products,
merchandise or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold by
the wholesaler. The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes initial
contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying to
establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable food
and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any
person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the customers
on his or her established regular delivery route.
   B.   In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as
garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales, as well as those persons
participating in an organized multiperson bazaar or flea market, shall be
exempt from the definitions of "peddlers", "solicitors", and "transient
merchants", as shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed
auctioneer, or any officer of the court conducting a court ordered sale.
Exemption from the definitions for the scope of this chapter shall not excuse
any person from complying with any other applicable statutory provision or
local ordinance.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit or restrict
door to door advocacy. Persons engaging in door to door advocacy shall not be
required to register as solicitors under section
4-4-11 of this chapter. The term "door to door advocacy" includes door to door
canvassing and pamphleteering as vehicles for the dissemination of religious,
political and other ideas. (Elko 2004 Code § 110.02)
   D.   Persons making deliveries of newspapers, newsletters, or other similar
publications on an established customer delivery route, when attempting to
establish a regular delivery route, or when publications are delivered to the
community at large shall be exempt from the definitions of "peddlers",
"solicitors", and "transient merchants".
   E.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any canvassing or
soliciting for a charitable, religious, political or educational organization
if such organization is registered with the Secretary of State pursuant to the
provisions of Minnesota Statutes Section 309.52 as a charitable organization or
is exempted therefor pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes Section
309.515.
   F.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to minors operating a
lemonade stand. (Ord. 132, 5-12-2016; amd. Ord. 194, 8-8-2019)
4-4-3: COUNTY AND CITY LICENSES REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   County License: No person shall conduct business as a peddler,
solicitor or transient merchant within the City limits without first having
obtained the appropriate license from the County as required by Minnesota
Statutes chapter 329, as it may be amended from time to time, if the County
issues a license for the activity.
   B.   City License: Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, no person
shall conduct business as either a peddler or a transient merchant without
first having obtained a license from the City. Solicitors need not be licensed
but are still required to register pursuant to section
 4-4-11 of this chapter.
   C.   Exemptions And Limitations On Exemptions:
      1.   No license shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to
sell or to take or attempt to take orders for any product grown, produced,
cultivated, or raised on any farm.
      2.   No license or registration shall be required of any person going
from house to house, door to door, business to business, street to street, or
other type of place to place when the activity is for the purpose of exercising
that person's State or Federal constitutional rights such as the freedom of
speech, press, religion and the like; except, that this exemption may be lost
if the person's exercise of constitutional rights is merely incidental to a
commercial activity. (Ord. 194, 8-8-2019)
4-4-4: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:
   A.   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having
obtained any required County license.
   B.   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the City as a part of the application, or the failure
to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of
application.
   C.   The conviction of the applicant within the previous five (5) years from
the date of application for any violation of any Federal or State Statute or
regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person's
ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an
honest and legal manner. Those violations shall include, but not be limited to,
burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and
any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person.
   D.   The revocation, within the past five (5) years, of any license issued
to the applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler or
transient merchant.
   E.   The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of a
bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the existence of
more than three (3) complaints against the applicant with the Better Business
Bureau, the Attorney General's Office, or other similar business or consumer
rights office or agency, within the preceding twelve (12) months, or three (3)
complaints filed against the applicant within the preceding five (5) years.
(Ord. 194, 8-8-2019)
4-4-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a City license to conduct business as a peddler or transient
merchant shall be made at least fourteen (14) regular business days before the
applicant desires to begin conducting business. Application for a license shall
be made on a form approved by the City Council and available from the Office of
the City Clerk. All applications shall be signed by the applicant. All
applications shall include the following information:
   A.   Applicant's full legal name.
   B.   All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to which
the applicant officially answers.
   C.   A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color, height,
weight, distinguishing marks and features, and the like).
   D.   Full address of the applicant's permanent residence.
   E.   Telephone number of the applicant's permanent residence.
   F.   Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed or
operated by the applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or agent.
   G.   Full address of the applicant's regular place of business (if any).
   H.   Any and all business related telephone numbers of the applicant.
   I.   The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a license.
   J.   Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license.
   K.   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business, and
if the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of days he or she
will be conducting business in the City (maximum 14 consecutive days).
   L.   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant can be
reached while conducting business within the City, including the location where
a transient merchant intends to set up business.
   M.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
within the last five (5) years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor
for violation of any State or Federal Statute or any local ordinance, other
than traffic offenses.
   N.   A list of the three (3) most recent locations where the applicant has
conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant.
   O.   Proof of any requested County license.
   P.   Written permission of the property owner or the property owner's agent
for any property to be used by a transient merchant.
   Q.   A general description of the items to be sold or services to be
provided.
   R.   All additional information deemed necessary by the City Council.
   S.   The applicant's driver's license number or other acceptable form of
identification.
   T.   The license plate number, registration information and vehicle
identification number for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the
licensed business and a description of the vehicle. (Elko 2004 Code § 110.03)
4-4-6: LICENSE FEE:
All applications for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by the
fee established by ordinance, as it may be amended from time to time. (Elko
2004 Code § 110.03)
4-4-7: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of the license fee, the
City Clerk, within two (2) regular business days, must determine if the
application is complete. An application is determined to be complete only if
all required information is provided. If the City Clerk determines that the
application is incomplete, the City Clerk must inform the applicant of the
required necessary information that is missing. If the application is complete,
the City Clerk must order any investigation, including background checks,
necessary to verify the information provided with the application. Within ten
(10) regular business days of receiving a complete application, the City Clerk
must issue the license unless there exist grounds for denying the license under
section
4-4-4 of this chapter, in which case, the Clerk must deny the license. If the
City Clerk denies the license, the applicant must be notified in writing of the
decision, the reason for denial, and of the applicant's right to appeal the
denial by requesting, within twenty (20) days of receiving notice of rejection,
a public hearing before the City Council. The City Council shall hear the
appeal within twenty (20) days of the date of the request. The decision of the
City Council following the public hearing can be appealed by petitioning the
Minnesota Court of Appeals for a writ of certiorari. (Elko 2004 Code § 110.03)
4-4-8: TERM OF LICENSE:
An annual license granted under this chapter shall be valid for one calendar
year from the date of issue. All other licenses granted under this chapter
shall be valid only during the time period indicated on the license. (Elko 2004
Code § 110.03)
4-4-9: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE:
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person other
than the person to whom the license was issued. (Elko 2004 Code § 110.06)
4-4-10: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Grounds For Suspension Or Revocation: Any license issued under this
chapter may be suspended or revoked at the discretion of the City Council for
violation of any of the following:
      1.   Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements on the application
form.
      2.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course
of the licensed activity.
      3.   Conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could have
been denied under section
4-4-4 of this chapter.
      4.   Violation of any provision of this chapter.
   B.   Multiple Persons Under One License: The suspension or revocation of any
license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct
business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee shall
serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person's authority to
conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee
whose license is suspended or revoked.
   C.   Notice: Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this
chapter, the City shall provide the license holder with written notice of the
alleged violation and inform the licensee of his or her right to a hearing on
the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the
permanent residential address listed on the license application, or if no
residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the license
application.
   D.   Public Hearing: Upon receiving the notice provided in subsection C of
this section, the licensee shall have the right to request a public hearing. If
no request for a hearing is received by the City Clerk within ten (10) regular
business days following the service of the notice, the City may proceed with
the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of mailed notices, service shall
be considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a
public hearing is requested within the stated time frame, a hearing shall be
scheduled within twenty (20) days from the date of the request. Within three
(3) regular business days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the
licensee of its decision.
   E.   Emergency: If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to
the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a
peddler or transient merchant licensed under this chapter, the City Council may
immediately suspend the person's license and provide notice of the right to
hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in subsection C of this section.
   F.   Appeals: Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this
section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court. (Elko 2004 Code
§ 110.05)
4-4-11: REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS:
All solicitors shall be required to register with the City. Persons engaging in
door to door advocacy shall not be required to register. The term "door to door
advocacy" includes door to door canvassing and pamphleteering as vehicles for
the dissemination of religious, political and other ideas. No registration fee
shall be required. Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the
City Clerk shall issue to the registrant a certificate of registration as proof
of the registration. Certificates of registration shall be nontransferable.
(Ord. 194, 8-8-2019)
4-4-12: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall conduct business in any of
the following manners:
   A.   Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means
of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other
noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure.
   B.   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right- of-way.
   C.   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health,
safety and welfare of any individual or the general public.
   D.   Conducting business before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or after nine
o'clock (9:00) P.M.
   E.   Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and
identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of another
person.
   F.   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service
being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor
or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the City solely
based on the City having issued a license or certificate of registration to
that person.
   G.   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to
otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene,
threatening, intimidating or abusive. (Elko 2004 Code § 110.08)
4-4-13: UNINVITED PEDDLING AND SOLICITING:
No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the
property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose
of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant when the
property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches (4") long and
four inches (4") wide with print of at least 48-point size stating "No
Peddlers, Solicitors Or Transient Merchants", or "Peddlers, Solicitors, And
Transient Merchants Prohibited", or other comparable statement. No person other
than the property owner or tenant shall remove, deface or otherwise tamper with
any sign or placard under this section. (Elko 2004 Code § 110.09)
CHAPTER 5
OUTDOOR CONCERTS AND EVENTS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Permit Required
4-5-2: Permit Applications
4-5-3: Permit Conditions
4-5-4: Permit Fees
4-5-5: Permit Duration
4-5-6: Public Services And Security
4-5-7: Exemptions
4-5-8: Violations
4-5-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct an outdoor concert or other event without first
obtaining the permit required under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 70,
7-14-2011)
4-5-2: PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   An application for a permit to hold an event under this chapter shall
be made by completing an application form provided by the city clerk, and
submitting the completed application to the city clerk at least thirty (30)
days prior to the date of the event. The application form shall be signed by
the applicant and the owner of the property where the event will be held.
   B.   The application shall contain at least the following information:
      1.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the applicants, as
well as any person, group or entity responsible for the sponsorship of the
event.
      2.   The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the owners of the
land where the event will be held.
      3.   The dates and times of the event, the nature of the event, the
expected number of persons to attend the event, the proposed attendance
controls if any, and whether camping or other temporary housing will be allowed
or provided.
      4.   A statement indicating the nature and means of any food and/or
beverage service or sales, as well as whether alcohol products are intended to
be sold or allowed to be consumed at the event.
      5.   The means and extent of temporary structures, lighting or sound
amplification to be employed at the event.
      6.   The means, number, and location of emergency services to be
available or provided at the event, including rescue, medical, fire and police
services.
      7.   Plan for any cleanup or restoration after the event.
      8.   The number and identity of security personnel.
      9.   A description of parking areas for event attendees and participants
and arrangements/contracts for parking, including a proposed parking plan.
      10.   The location and nature of possible interference with the normal
flow or regulation of traffic within the city as a result of the outdoor
entertainment event.
      11.   Dates and times of the setup and breakdown of the event.
      12.   Information regarding any licenses or permits revoked in the last
five (5) years for the applicant or any entity providing entertainment at the
event, including an explanation regarding the type of the license/permit, the
entity that revoked the license/permit, the reason for the revocation, and the
date the license/permit was revoked.
      13.   A plan of the event showing the location of event participants,
temporary facilities, sanitation areas, parking areas, drinking water supplies,
traffic flow, and showing the nearest residential areas to the event with an
estimate of distance between property lines of the event to residential areas,
and a plan for managing the foregoing items.
      14.   For music events, the following additional information shall be
provided:
         a.   The name of the music group and the name, address and telephone
number of the individual who represents the group who will be attending the
event and responsible for all issues associated with the event;
         b.   The name, address and telephone number of the group's sound
technician that will be operating the amplification equipment;
         c.   A plan for the location of: the band on the property, the
direction that the band will be playing, bar location(s), food and beverage
vendors, entrance and exit gates, perimeter fences, relationship to existing
buildings, and restroom facilities. (Ord. 70, 7-14-2011)
4-5-3: PERMIT CONDITIONS:
   A.   General Conditions: The permit to hold an event under this chapter may
be issued by the clerk upon the approval of the council, subject to any
restrictions or conditions imposed by the council. In evaluating the issuance
of the permit, and the conditions, fees, or restrictions to be imposed on the
applicants and/or the property owners, the council shall consider the
following:
      1.   Whether the applicant can show that the event will not interfere
with the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighborhood or be detrimental to
the health, welfare, or safety of the citizens of Elko New Market;
      2.   Whether the proposed event complies with all applicable state and
city zoning, building, fire, health, and sanitation regulations, and if the
applicants have adequate plans and procedures in place to ensure the health,
comfort and safety of persons in attendance and the other members of the public
which may be affected by the event;
      3.   Whether the applicant has demonstrated adequate plans for ensuring
compliance with the regulations of this chapter.
   B.   Seasonal Or Multiday Event: When an event is recurring throughout a
season or occurs over multiple days, the city may issue a seasonal or multiday
permit in accordance with subsection A of this section, provided the following
conditions are met:
      1.   A single event occurs over consecutive days, not to exceed four (4)
days or, if occurring on nonconsecutive days throughout a season, the events
are substantially similar in nature and do not occur on more than five (5) days
over a ninety (90) day period;
      2.   The outdoor events do not require the need for additional public
services;
      3.   The event is held on property owned or leased by the applicant and
is directly related to the ongoing business or activity engaged in by the
applicant;
      4.   Each event contemplates no more than two hundred fifty (250) members
of the public in attendance at the event.
   C.   Written Notice: The city shall provide written notice of the event to
all properties located within five hundred feet (500') of the property where
the event will be located a minimum of seven (7) days prior to the event.
Applicant shall provide the city with the following information for the notice:
      1.   Date;
      2.   Times during which the event will take place;
      3.   Location of the event;
      4.   Description of the event and whether amplified music will be played
at the event;
      5.   Names and telephone numbers of persons in charge of the event.
The applicant shall provide to the city clerk a list of the residents notified
and a copy of the notification prior to the date of the event. (Ord. 70, 7-14-
2011)
4-5-4: PERMIT FEES:
   A.   Each event held by the applicant for which a permit is required under
this chapter shall be subject to the imposition of a fee, which shall be set
from time to time by ordinance of the city council. Additional fees or costs
shall be established commensurate with city services required under section
 4-5-2 of this chapter. The permit fees may include a nonrefundable permit
review fee and an administrative fee which shall fully compensate the city for
monitoring and enforcing the permit conditions.
   B.   The City may establish a reduced fee for minor events that will
generate little or no impact on the surrounding community and will provide
minimal impact on City services. A "minor event" is a single day event that
meets the following criteria:
      1.   Provides for an estimated attendance of no more than 1.5 times the
occupancy load for the premises at which the outdoor event is held at any given
time during the event.
      2.   Does not include the use of sound amplification equipment.
      3.   Occurs only between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and
eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
      4.   Meets all other requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 91, 1-12-2012)
4-5-5: PERMIT DURATION:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided for a seasonal or multiday event permit, a
permit to hold an event under this chapter may be limited to a specific
duration, or in the discretion of the Council, may allow for flexibility in
scheduling or rescheduling the event due to certain circumstances, which may or
may not be limited by the Council. Unless specified otherwise by the permit, no
outdoor concert may be conducted between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
   B.   A seasonal or multiday event permit may be terminated or suspended by
the City for a violation of this chapter or a condition under which the permit
is issued following a public hearing before the City Council preceded by a ten
(10) day advance notice to the permit holder. (Ord. 70, 7-14-2011)
4-5-6: PUBLIC SERVICES AND SECURITY:
If the City determines that adequate public services as specified in section
4-5-2 of this chapter are necessary for the safe and proper conduct of the
event, the Council may condition the permit on the applicant providing the City
with adequate security in the form of a cash deposit, bond, insurance, letter
of credit or other means by which to ensure that the permit conditions will be
met. (Ord. 70, 7-14-2011)
4-5-7: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The following are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:
      1.   City Sponsored Events: City sponsored events.
      2.   Private Parties: A private party is any party held on private
property in which members of the general public are not invited. However,
permits may be required pursuant to other provisions of this Code or zoning
ordinance.
      3.   Good Cause: The City Council may determine that good cause exists to
exempt any person, business, or individual from the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 70, 7-14-2011)
      4.   Small Acoustic Events: A "small acoustic event" shall mean a
combination of no more than four (4) vocalists or string instrumentalists that
does not include the use of sound amplification equipment. (Ord. 139, 8-25-
2016)
      5.   Outdoor Concerts And Events: Outdoor concerts and events approved
under the terms of a planned unit development ordinance, except as otherwise
required to comply with the terms of this chapter under the planned unit
development ordinance. (Ord. 151, 3-23-2017)
4-5-8: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and may be punishable
by a fine up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment up to
ninety (90) days. (Ord. 70, 7-14-2011)
ARTICLE A. SHORT TERM OUTDOOR SALES EVENTS
SECTION:
4-5A-1: Purpose; General Requirements
4-5A-2: Definition
4-5A-3: Permit Required; Application
4-5A-4: Processing Procedure
4-5A-5: Conditions For Permit Approval
4-5A-6: Enforcement
4-5A-1: PURPOSE; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
It is the intent of this article to provide for very short term outdoor sales
in connection with an approved community event which are distinguished from
permanent outside business activities and temporary/seasonal outdoor sales that
are allowed under the city zoning ordinance. It is the intent of this article
to promote the health, safety, general welfare, aesthetics and image of the
community by regulating short term outdoor sales events in the manner
established in this article. Short term outdoor sales events are subject to the
issuance of an administrative permit and the requirements of this article.
(Ord. 64, 4-28-2011)
4-5A-2: DEFINITION:
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise indicates, the term
"short term outdoor sales event" shall be defined to mean outdoor sales by a
business on the business' property with a term of less than three (3) days that
is held in connection with a community wide event sanctioned by the Elko New
Market chamber of commerce or the city. (Ord. 64, 4-28-2011)
4-5A-3: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
No person shall engage in any short term outdoor sales event without an
administrative permit issued pursuant to this article. The application for a
permit shall be made as follows:
   A.   Application for an administrative permit shall be made by the property
owner to the city clerk on forms to be provided by the city, at least two (2)
weeks prior to the date of the requested activity. A single application for an
administrative permit may be made on behalf of all businesses participating in
the community wide event.
   B.   A written description of the proposed activity, including the days and
hours of operation shall be included on the application.
   C.   A diagram detailing the location of the outdoor sales areas and a
description of the types of equipment associated with the sale, together with a
general description of the items to be provided for sale shall be included with
the application, together with any additional information required by the city
administrator necessary to fully evaluate the application under the terms of
this article. (Ord. 64, 4-28-2011)
4-5A-4: PROCESSING PROCEDURE:
The application will be processed as follows:
   A.   Applications must be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee
which shall be imposed in accordance with the city fee schedule.
   B.   The city administrator or the city administrator's designee shall
review applications for administrative permits and shall determine if an
application is in compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances and the
specific standards required for short term outdoor sales as provided in this
article.
   C.   The application shall also be reviewed by the police chief and/or other
appropriate review agencies.
   D.   A written permit shall be issued to the applicant. Specific conditions
to assure compliance with applicable codes, ordinances and the requirements of
this article shall be attached to the permit.
   E.   A failure of the city administrator to issue a permit within ten (10)
days of a completed application will be deemed a denial, subject to review by
the city council within fourteen (14) days following an appeal by the
applicant. An applicant must file an appeal within ten (10) days of a denial.
(Ord. 64, 4-28-2011)
4-5A-5: CONDITIONS FOR PERMIT APPROVAL:
The city administrator or city administrator's designee shall issue the permit
if the application complies with the following conditions:
   A.   Outdoor sales activities shall be limited to properties within the city
business districts.
   B.   The outdoor sales activities shall occur in association with a
community event sanctioned by the Elko New Market chamber of commerce or the
city.
   C.   Outdoor sales activities shall be limited to private property. In no
case shall sales activities occur in public rights of way unless specifically
approved by the city or the county (as may be applicable).
   D.   The outdoor sales event shall not exceed three (3) days.
   E.   No business shall participate in more than three (3) outdoor sales
events within a calendar year, and such events may not occur within twenty (20)
days of a prior event.
   F.   The outdoor sales shall be clearly accessory to the business located on
the property where the sales event is to occur.
   G.   Tents, stands, and other similar temporary structures and mobile
equipment may be utilized, provided they are clearly identified on the
submitted plan, and provided that it is determined by the city administrator
that they will not impair the parking capacity, emergency access, or the safe
and efficient movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on or off the site.
   H.   The submitted plan shall clearly demonstrate that adequate off street
parking for the proposed activity can and will be provided for the duration of
the activity.
   I.   Property owners and tenant signatures are required to conduct the
activity on the property.
   J.   Hours of operation shall be compatible with adjacent uses.
   K.   The approved permit shall be kept on the premises for the duration of
the event. (Ord. 64, 4-28-2011)
4-5A-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit: The city may, upon written notice,
suspend or revoke the short term outdoor sales event permit of any person or
business that violates any of the provisions of this article or any of the
conditions of the permit.
   B.   Denial Of Future Permits: Violation of an issued permit or the
provisions of this article may be grounds for denial of future permit
applications. (Ord. 64, 4-28-2011)
CHAPTER 6
SPEEDWAYS
(Rep. by Ord. 152, 3-23-2017)
CHAPTER 7
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 1
SECTION:
4-7-1: Purpose And Intent
4-7-2: Definitions
4-7-3: Classification Of Businesses
4-7-4: License Required; Applicability
4-7-5: Application For License
4-7-6: Issuance Or Denial Of License
4-7-7: Fees
4-7-8: License Information And Posting
4-7-9: Term Of License; Expiration And Renewals
4-7-10: No Transfer Of License Or Change Of Location
4-7-11: Inspections
4-7-12: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
4-7-13: Hearing And Appeal On Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of License
4-7-14: Additional Regulations
4-7-15: Restricted Conduct
4-7-16: Persons Under Eighteen
4-7-17: Exemptions
4-7-18: Misdemeanor Violation; Penalties
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  11-5-16 of this code.
4-7-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the
citizens of the city, to guard against infection and the transmission of
disease, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations. The provisions of
this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually
oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter
to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected
by the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. (Elko 2004 Code §
115.01)
   B.   The city council further finds that experience from other cities
demonstrates that sexually oriented businesses conducted in private by members
of the same or the opposite sex, and employing personnel with no specialized
training, are susceptible to operation in a manner contravening, subverting or
endangering the health, safety and welfare of members of the community by being
the sites of acts of prostitution, illicit sex, and occasions of violent
crimes, thus requiring close inspection, licensing, and regulation. (Elko 2004
Code § 115.02)
4-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ADULT ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin operated or slug operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image
producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons
per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT VIDEO STORE, OR ADULT STORE: A commercial establishment
which, as a principal business purpose, offers for sale or rental for any form
of consideration any one or more of the following:
   A.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, compact disks,
computer software, digital recordings, slides, or other visual representations
which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; or
   B.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
   A.   Persons who appear seminude or in a state of nudity; or
   B.   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
   C.   Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, compact disks, computer
software, digital recordings or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR: A conversation/rap parlor which excludes minors
by reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging in or listening to
conversation, talk, or discussion between an employee of the establishment and
a customer, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR: A massage parlor which excludes minors by reason of age,
or which provides, for any form of consideration, the rubbing, stroking,
kneading, tapping, or rolling of the body, if the service provided by the
massage parlor is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MOTEL: A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
   A.   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right of way
which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic
reproductions; or
   B.   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than
ten (10) hours or an hourly basis; or
   C.   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for
a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours or an hourly basis.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment where, for any form of
consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
ADULT SAUNA: A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides,
for any form of consideration, a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the
purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a
cleaning, relaxing, or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear seminude or in a
state of nudity, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure
of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
CITY CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Elko New Market.
DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON: The dominant or principal
theme of the object referenced. For instance, when the phrase refers to films
"which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the exhibition or
display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities".
EMPLOYEE, EMPLOY, AND EMPLOYMENT: Any person who performs any service on the
premises of a sexually oriented business on a full time, part time or contract
basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated as an employee,
independent contractor, agent, or by another status. "Employee" does not
include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
ESCORT: A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
ESCORT AGENCY: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
ESTABLISH OR ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes any of the following:
   A.   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new
business;
   B.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
   C.   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
   D.   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
LICENSEE: A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on
the application for a license.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO: Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or
displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched,
drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other
persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
NUDITY, NUDE OR A STATE OF NUDITY: A. The appearance of a human anus, male
genitals, female genitals, or female breast; or
   B.   A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human anus, male
genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast.
OPERATE OR CAUSE TO BE OPERATED: To cause to function or to put or keep in a
state of doing business.
OPERATOR: Any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who is
authorized to exercise operational control of the business, or who causes to
function, or who puts or keeps in operation the business. A person may be found
to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business
regardless of whether that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the
business.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association,
or other legal entity.
REGULARLY FEATURES OR REGULARLY SHOWN: A consistent or substantial course of
conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial
portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business
of the sexually oriented business.
SEMINUDE OR IN A SEMINUDE CONDITION: A state of dress in which clothing covers
no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as
well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER: A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of
its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
   A.   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
   B.   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater,
escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or
   B.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following:
   A.   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
   B.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
   C.   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
   D.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsections A, B and C of this definition.
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: The increase in floor
area occupied by the business by more than twenty five percent (25%), as the
floor area existed on the effective date hereof.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any of the
following:
   A.   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
   B.   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
   C.   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control. (Elko 2004 Code § 115.03; amd. 2011 Code)
4-7-3: CLASSIFICATION OF BUSINESSES:
The following are classified as sexually oriented businesses:
Adult arcades;
Adult bookstores, adult video stores, adult stores;
Adult cabarets;
Adult conversation/rap parlors;
Adult massage parlors;
Adult motels;
Adult motion picture theaters;
Adult saunas;
Adult theaters;
Escort agencies;
Nude model studios; and
Sexual encounter centers. (Elko 2004 Code § 115.04)
4-7-4: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICABILITY:
It is unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a
valid sexually oriented business license issued by the city for the particular
type of business. A person who possesses a valid business license is not exempt
from the requirement of obtaining any required sexually oriented business
license. A person who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses a
business license shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this
chapter, where applicable. (Elko 2004 Code § 115.05)
4-7-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Form: An application for a sexually oriented business license must be
made on a form provided by the city.
   B.   Required Information; Qualifications Of Applicant:
      1.   An application shall be considered complete if it includes the
information required in this section. The applicant shall be qualified
according to the provisions of this chapter. The application shall be notarized
and shall include the information set out in subsections B1a through B1f of
this section and, where applicable, subsection B1g of this section, as follows:
         a.   The full true name and any other names used in the preceding five
(5) years.
         b.   The current business address.
         c.   Either a set of fingerprints suitable for conducting necessary
background checks pursuant to this chapter, or the applicant's social security
number to be used for the same purpose.
         d.   The name, business location, legal description, business mailing
address and phone number of the proposed sexually oriented business.
         e.   Written proof of age, in the form of either: 1) a copy of a birth
certificate and current photo; 2) a current driver's license with picture; or
3) other picture identification document issued by a governmental agency.
         f.   The issuing jurisdiction and the effective dates of any license
or permit held by the applicant relating to a sexually oriented business, and
whether any such license or permit has been denied, revoked, or suspended, and
if so, the reason or reasons therefor.
         g.   The name and address of the statutory agent or other agent
authorized to receive service of process.
      2.   The information provided pursuant to subsection B1 of this section
shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the city clerk within ten (10) working days of a change of circumstances
which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete.
   C.   Diagram Of Premises: The application for a sexually oriented business
license must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of
the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the
business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be
drawn to a designated scale or drawn with market dimensions of the interior of
the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6"). Applicants who
must comply with subsection 4-7-14E of this chapter shall submit a diagram
meeting the requirements of that subsection.
   D.   Inspections: The applicant must be qualified according to the
provisions of this chapter, and the premises must be inspected and found to be
in compliance with the law by the fire department and building official.
   E.   Execution Of Application: If a person who wishes to operate a sexually
oriented business is an individual, the individual must sign the application
for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually
oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten
percent (10%) or greater interest in the business and each officer, director,
general partner, or other person who will participate directly in decisions
relating to management of the business must sign the application for a license
as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section
4-7-6 of this chapter, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a
license is granted. (Elko 2004 Code § 115.05)
4-7-6: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Within thirty (30) days after the receipt of a completed application,
the city shall either issue a license or issue a written notice of intent to
deny a license to the applicant. The city shall approve the issuance of a
license unless one or more of the following is found to be true:
      1.   An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   An applicant is delinquent in the payment to the city of taxes,
fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him or her or imposed upon him or
her in relation to a sexually oriented business.
      3.   An applicant has failed to provide information required under
section
4-7-5 of this chapter or which is necessary for issuance of the license or has
falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form.
      4.   An applicant has been convicted of a violation of a provision of
this chapter within two (2) years immediately preceding the application. The
fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect.
      5.   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business has not
been approved by the fire department and the building official as being in
compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
      6.   The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
      7.   An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with this chapter.
      8.   An applicant has been convicted of a crime:
         a.   Involving any of the following offenses:
            (1)   Prostitution as described in Minnesota statutes section
609.321, as it may be amended from time to time;
            (2)   Solicitation, inducement of promotion of prostitution as
described in Minnesota statutes section 609.322, as it may be amended from time
to time; (Elko 2004 Code § 115.05; amd. Elko Ord. 150, 4-26-2005)
            (3)   Receiving profit derived from prostitution as described in
Minnesota statutes section 609.322, as it may be amended from time to time;
(Elko 2004 Code § 115.05; amd. Elko Ord. 150, 4-26-2005; 2011 Code)
            (4)   Other prohibited acts relating to prostitution as described
in Minnesota statutes section 609.324, as it may be amended from time to time;
            (5)   Obscenity as described in Minnesota statutes section 617.241,
as it may be amended from time to time;
            (6)   Sale, dissemination, distribution, display or exhibition of
harmful materials to minors as described in Minnesota statutes sections 617.293
and 617.294, as they may be amended from time to time;
            (7)   Sexual performance by a child as described in Minnesota
statutes section 617.246, as it may be amended from time to time;
            (8)   Dissemination or possession of child pornography as described
in Minnesota statutes section 617.247, as it may be amended from time to time;
            (9)   Indecent exposure as described in Minnesota statutes section
617.23, as it may be amended from time to time;
            (10)   Criminal sexual conduct as described in Minnesota statutes
sections 609.342, 609.343, 609.344, and 609.345, as they may be amended from
time to time;
            (11)   Incest as described in Minnesota statutes section 609.365,
as it may be amended from time to time; or
            (12)   Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any
of the foregoing offenses.
         b.   For which:
            (1)   Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
            (2)   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
            (3)   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the
last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or
more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any twenty four (24) month period.
      9.   The proposed sexually oriented business would or does not comply
with the city zoning ordinance.
   B.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the disqualification of the applicant. For purposes of this section,
"conviction":
      1.   Means a conviction or a guilty plea; and
      2.   Includes a conviction of any business entity for which the applicant
had, at the time of the offense leading to the conviction for a crime
designated under this section, a management responsibility or a controlling
interest.
   C.   An applicant who has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection
A8a of this section may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only
when the time period required by subsection A8b of this section has elapsed.
(Elko 2004 Code § 115.05; amd. Elko Ord. 150, 4-26-2005)
4-7-7: FEES:
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license shall be set by
ordinance of the city council. The investigation fee for the purpose of issuing
a license shall be set by ordinance of the city council. In the event that the
license is denied upon application, the license fee shall be refunded; however,
no part of the license investigation fee shall be returned to the applicant. No
part of the annual license fee shall be refunded if the license is suspended or
revoked. (Elko 2004 Code § 115.05; amd. 2011 Code)
4-7-8: LICENSE INFORMATION AND POSTING:
The license, if granted, shall state the name of the person or persons to whom
it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the sexually oriented
business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any
time. (Elko 2004 Code § 115.05)
4-7-9: TERM OF LICENSE; EXPIRATION AND RENEWALS:
   A.   Each renewal license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year.
All licenses expire on December 31 of each year. Each license may be renewed
only by making application as provided in section
4-7-5 of this chapter. Application for renewal should be made at least ninety
(90) days before the expiration date. If the council determines good and
sufficient cause is shown by the applicant for failure to file a timely renewal
application, the council may, if there is compliance with other provisions of
this chapter, grant the application.
   B.   If the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be
issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to
denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has
been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least
ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the denial became final. (Elko
2004 Code § 115.07)
4-7-10: NO TRANSFER OF LICENSE OR CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another nor shall a
licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license
at any place other than the address designated in the application. (Elko 2004
Code § 115.10)
4-7-11: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Inspection Required: An applicant, operator, or licensee shall permit
law enforcement officers and any other federal, state, county or city agency in
the performance of any function connected with the enforcement of this chapter,
normally and arguably conducted by such agencies, to inspect the premises of a
sexually oriented business, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the
law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.
   B.   Refusal: A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his
agent or employee commits an offense if the person refuses to permit a lawful
inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department at any
time it is occupied or open for business.
   C.   Exception: The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an
adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a
permanent or temporary habitation. (Elko 2004 Code § 115.06)
4-7-12: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Suspension: The city may suspend a license for a period not to exceed
thirty (30) days following written notice and an opportunity to be heard if the
city determines that a licensee or an employee of a license has:
      1.   Violated or is not in compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter.
      3.   Knowingly permitted unlawful gambling by any person on the sexually
oriented business premises.
   B.   Revocation:
      1.   Intent To Revoke: The city shall issue a written statement of intent
to revoke a sexually oriented business license if a cause of suspension in
subsection A of this section occurs and the license has been suspended within
the preceding twelve (12) months.
      2.   Grounds For Revocation: The city shall issue a written statement of
intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if the city determines
that:
         a.   A licensee gave false or misleading information to the city
during the application process;
         b.   A licensee or operator has knowingly allowed possession, use, or
sale of controlled substances on the premises;
         c.   A licensee or operator has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises;
         d.   A licensee or operator knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
         e.   A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection
 4-7-6A8a of this chapter for which the time period required in subsection 4-7-
6A8b of this chapter has not elapsed;
         f.   On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a
person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises
of a crime listed in subsection
4-7-6A8a of this chapter, for which a conviction has been obtained, and the
person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time
the offenses were committed;
         g.   A licensee or operator has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur
in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the
meaning as is provided in Minnesota statutes section 609.341, subdivision 11
(b), as it may be amended from time to time. This subsection B2g shall not
apply to an adult motel unless the licensee knowingly allowed sexual activities
to occur either: 1) in exchange for money; or 2) in a public place or with
public view; or
         h.   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for ad valorem
taxes, local lodging tax, or other taxes or fees related to the sexually
oriented business.
      3.   Appeal Of Conviction: The fact that a conviction is being appealed
shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. (Elko 2004 Code §
115.08; amd. Elko Ord. 150, 4-26-2005; 2011 Code)
4-7-13: HEARING AND APPEAL ON DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Notice Requirements; Responses: If the city clerk determines that facts
exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license under this chapter,
the city clerk shall notify the applicant or licensee ("respondent") in writing
of the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, including the grounds
therefor, by personal delivery or by certified mail. The notification shall be
directed to the most current business address on file with the city. Within
five (5) working days of receipt of such notice, the respondent may provide to
the city clerk, in writing, a response that shall include a statement of
reasons why the license or permit should not be denied, suspended, or revoked.
Within three (3) days of the receipt of the respondent's written response, the
city clerk shall notify the respondent in writing of the hearing date on the
respondent's denial, suspension, or revocation proceeding.
   B.   Appeal And Hearing:
      1.   Within ten (10) working days of the receipt of the respondent's
written response, the city shall conduct a hearing on the respondent's appeal
of the city clerk's decision. The city council may appoint a committee of the
council or an independent hearing officer to hear the matter, report findings
of fact and a recommendation for disposition to the council. Hearings on the
appeal shall be open to the public, and the licensee or applicant shall have
the right to appear and be represented by legal counsel and to offer evidence
in his behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall make a
final decision. If a response is not received by the city in the time stated or
if, after the hearing, the city finds that grounds as specified in this chapter
exist for denial, suspension, or revocation, then such denial, suspension, or
revocation shall become final five (5) days after the city sends, by certified
mail, written notice that the license has been denied, suspended, or revoked.
Such notice shall include a statement advising the applicant or licensee of the
right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
      2.   If the city council finds that no grounds exist for denial,
suspension, or revocation of a license, then, within five (5) days after the
hearing, the city clerk shall withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke
the license, and shall so notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of
such action and shall contemporaneously issue the license.
   C.   Judicial Review: Any decision of the city council shall be a final
appealable order, and the applicant or licensee ("aggrieved party") may seek
prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent
jurisdiction. (Elko 2004 Code § 115.09)
   D.   Stay Of Decision: The filing of an appeal stays the action and decision
of the city council denying, suspending or revoking a license until sixty (60)
days after a final decision by the city council to provide the aggrieved party
sufficient time to appeal the city council's decision to a court of competent
jurisdiction. If the aggrieved party appeals the city council's decision within
the sixty (60) days provided, the stay shall be extended until a final judicial
decision is rendered in the matter.
   E.   Additional Requirements: The city council may condition denial,
suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal of a license upon appropriate terms and
conditions. (Elko 2004 Code § 115.09; amd. Elko Ord. 150, 4-26-2005)
4-7-14: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Escort Agencies:
      1.   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years.
      2.   A person commits an offense if he or she acts as an escort or agrees
to act as an escort for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
   B.   Nude Model Studios:
      1.   A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years.
      2.   A person commits an offense if he or she appears in a state of
nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of
a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right of way.
   C.   Adult Theaters And Adult Motion Picture Theaters: A person commits an
offense if he or she knowingly allows a person under the age of eighteen (18)
years to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater
or adult motion picture theater. It is a defense to prosecution under this
subsection if the person under eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not open
to public view or persons of the opposite sex.
   D.   Adult Motels:
      1.   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar
commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a
period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable
presumption that the establishment is an "adult motel" as that term is defined
in section
4-7-2 of this chapter.
      2.   A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a
sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does
not have a sexually oriented business license, he or she rents or subrents a
sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is
rented, he or she rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. For purposes
of this subsection D2, the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting
a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
   E.   Exhibition Of Sexually Explicit Films, Videos Or Live Entertainment In
Viewing Rooms:
      1.   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a
film, videocassette, live entertainment or other video reproduction which
depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply
with the following requirements:
         a.   Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not
exceed thirty two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also
designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if
granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or
architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be
oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be
drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the
various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6"). The city may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant submits a diagram that was
previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has
not been altered since it was prepared.
         b.   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
         c.   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station may be made without the prior approval of the city or its designee.
         d.   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to
ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each
manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
         e.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior
of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view
required in this subsection E1e must be by direct line of sight from the
manager's station.
         f.   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall
also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure
that the view area specified in subsection E1e of this section remains
unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials
at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no
patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application
filed pursuant to subsection E1a of this section.
         g.   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle as measured at the
floor level.
         h.   It shall be the duty of the licensee, owners and operator, and it
shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to
ensure that the illumination described in subsection A1g of this section is
maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
         i.   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any
time.
         j.   No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between
viewing rooms or booths.
         k.   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind
between viewing booths or rooms.
         l.   The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect
the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes
exist and shall cover or repair all openings or holes within twenty four (24)
hours.
         m.   The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to
be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
         n.   The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces
in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous,
easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board, or other porous
material shall be used within forty eight inches (48") of the floor.
      2.   A person having a duty under subsection E1 of this section commits a
misdemeanor if the person knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
   F.   Public Nudity: It shall be a misdemeanor for a person to knowingly and
intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity or
engage in specified sexual activities. (Elko 2004 Code § 115.11)
4-7-15: RESTRICTED CONDUCT:
   A.   Distance Requirement For Live Entertainment: All performers, dancers,
and persons appearing in a seminude condition or providing live entertainment
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing,
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas in the
licensed facility or in areas adjoining the licensed facility where such
entertainment can be seen by patrons of the licensed facility shall remain at
all times a minimum distance of six feet (6') from all patrons, customers, or
spectators and shall dance or provide such entertainment on a platform intended
for that purpose, which shall be raised at least two feet (2') from the level
of the floor on which patrons or spectators are located.
   B.   Interaction With Patrons: No dancer, performer, or person, while
seminude or providing live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas in the licensed facility or in areas
adjoining the licensed facility where the entertainment can be seen by patrons
of the licensed facility, shall knowingly or intentionally touch any spectator
or patron or the clothing of any spectator or patron.
   C.   Gratuity Prohibition: No customer, spectator, or patron of a licensed
facility shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or performer in
a seminude condition, and no dancer or performer in a seminude condition shall
solicit or receive any pay or gratuity directly from any patron or spectator.
   D.   Hours Of Operation: No sexually oriented business, except for an adult
motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M.
and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on weekdays and Saturdays, and one o'clock (1:00)
A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays. (Elko 2004 Code § 115.12)
4-7-16: PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN:
No licensee, operator or employee shall knowingly allow a person under the age
of eighteen (18) years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. (Elko
2004 Code § 115.13)
4-7-17: EXEMPTIONS:
It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that a person appearing in a
state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
   A.   By a proprietary school licensed by the state of Minnesota; a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
   B.   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
   C.   In a structure:
      1.   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
      2.   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at
least three (3) days in advance of the class; and
      3.   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time. (Elko 2004 Code § 115.14)
4-7-18: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
   A.   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business without a valid license or in violation of this chapter is subject to
a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any
person violating a provision of this chapter, upon conviction, is guilty of a
misdemeanor. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates is a separate
offense or violation.
   B.   See section
1-4-1 of this code for further penalty provisions. (Elko 2004 Code § 115.99)
CHAPTER 8
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM
SECTION:
4-8-1: Authority
4-8-2: Findings And Intent
4-8-3: Definitions And Interpretation
4-8-4: Franchise Territory
4-8-5: Federal, State And City Jurisdiction
4-8-6: Franchise Required
4-8-7: Term Of Franchise; Renewal
4-8-8: Transfer Of Franchise
4-8-9: City's Right To Purchase System
4-8-10: Nonexclusive Franchise
4-8-11: Initial Franchise Application
4-8-12: Franchise Fee
4-8-13: Indemnification And Insurance
4-8-14: Geographical Coverage Of System
4-8-15: Rate Regulation
4-8-16: Tree Trimming
4-8-17: System Design And Construction Requirements
4-8-18: Technical Standards
4-8-19: Programming Decisions
4-8-20: Consumer Protection And Service Standards
4-8-21: City Use Of System
4-8-22: Abandonment Or Removal Of Franchisee Property
4-8-23: Receivership And Foreclosure
4-8-24: Access To Records
4-8-25: Rights Reserved To Grantor
4-8-26: Protection Of Individual Rights
4-8-27: Liability For Damage To Facilities
4-8-28: Franchise Violation
4-8-29: Grantee's Inability To Perform
4-8-30: Severability
4-8-1: AUTHORITY:
The city of Elko New Market, pursuant to applicable laws, is authorized to
grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to construct, operate, maintain and
reconstruct cable television systems within the city limits. (Ord. 61, 2-10-
2011)
4-8-2: FINDINGS AND INTENT:
The city council finds that the development of cable television systems has the
potential of having great benefit and impact upon the residents of the city.
Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable
television, the city council further finds that the public convenience, safety
and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which
should be vested in the city or such persons as the city shall designate. It is
the intent of this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify
the means to attain the best possible cable television service to the public
and any franchises issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include
this finding as an integral part thereof. (Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
4-8-3: DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. Words used in the present
tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. All terms
in quotations used in the definition of any other term in this section shall
have their meanings as otherwise defined in this section. The words "shall" and
"will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given
their common and ordinary meanings.
APPLICABLE LAWS: Any law, statute, charter, ordinance, rule, regulation, code,
license, certificate, franchise, permit, writ, ruling, award, executive order,
directive, requirement, injunction (whether temporary, preliminary or
permanent), judgment, decree or other order issued, executed, entered or deemed
applicable by any "governmental authority".
BASIC CABLE SERVICE: Any service tier which includes the retransmission of
local television broadcast signals. Basic cable service as defined herein shall
not be inconsistent with 47 USC section 543(b)(7)(1993).
CABLE ACT: The cable communications policy act of 1984, Pub.L. 98-549, 98 Stat.
2779 (1984) (codified at 47 USC sections 521 through 611 [1982 and Supp. V
1987]) as amended by the cable television consumer protection and competition
act of 1992, Pub.L. 102-385 and the telecommunications act of 1996, Pub.L. 104-
458, as the same may, from time to time, be amended.
CABLE SERVICE: A. The one-way transmission to subscribers of: 1) video
programming; or 2) other programming service; and
   B.   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or
use of such video programming or other programming service.
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM, SYSTEM OR CABLE SYSTEM: A facility, consisting of a
set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception
and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes
video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a
community, but such term does not include:
   A.   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one
or more television broadcast stations;
   B.   A facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights of
way;
   C.   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part,
to the provisions of 47 USC sections 201 through 226; except, that such
facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of 47 USC
section 541) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video
programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to
provide interactive on demand services;
   D.   An open video system that complies with section 653 of the cable act;
or
   E.   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility system.
CHANNEL OR CABLE CHANNEL: A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum
which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television
channel as defined by the federal communications commission.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Elko New Market, Minnesota.
FRANCHISE: An initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city,
whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license,
resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the
construction or operation of a cable system.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A "franchise" granted pursuant to this chapter containing
the specific provisions of the "franchise" granted, including references,
specifications, requirements and other related matters.
FRANCHISE FEE: Any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the city or
any other governmental authority on a grantee or cable subscriber, or both,
solely because of their status as such. The term franchise fee does not
include:
   A.   Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such
tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their
services but not including a tax, fee, or assessment which is unduly
discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers);
   B.   Capital costs which are required by the franchise agreement to be
incurred by the grantee for PEG access facilities;
   C.   Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the
franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit,
insurance, indemnification, penalties or liquidated damages; or
   D.   Any fee imposed under title 17 of the United States Code.
GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITY: Any court or other federal, state, county, municipal or
other governmental department, commission, board, agency or instrumentality.
GRANTEE: Any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter and its
agents, employees, officers, designees, or any lawful successor, transferee or
assignee.
GRANTOR OR CITY: The city of Elko New Market, Minnesota, as represented by the
city council or any delegate acting within the scope of its jurisdiction. The
city clerk shall be responsible for the continuing administration of the
franchise.
GROSS REVENUES: All revenue received directly or indirectly by the grantee, its
affiliates, subsidiaries, parents, or any person in which the grantee has a
financial interest of five percent (5%) or more arising from or attributable to
the provision of cable service by the grantee within the city including, but
not limited to, monthly fees charged to subscribers for basic cable service;
monthly fees charged to subscribers for any optional service; monthly fees
charged to subscribers for any tier of service other than basic cable service;
installation, disconnection and reconnection fees; leased channel fees;
converter and remote revenues; advertising revenues; and revenues from home
shopping channels. Gross revenues shall be the basis for computing the
franchise fees imposed pursuant to section
4-8-12 of this chapter. The grantee shall not be required to pay a franchise
fee on gross revenues derived from any person receiving free cable service
pursuant to a franchise agreement. Gross revenues shall include franchise fees
collected by the grantee on behalf of the city. Gross revenues shall not
include revenues received from internet services for a period of two (2) years
from the date of introduction of high speed internet access. Thereafter, gross
revenues shall include revenues received from internet services to the extent
permitted by state or federal law.
INITIAL SERVICE AREA: The area of the city which will receive cable service
initially, as set forth in any franchise agreement.
INSTALLATION: The connection of the system to a subscriber and the provision of
cable service.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS: Those hours (8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M., Monday through
Friday) during which most similar businesses in the city are open to serve
customers. In all cases, normal business hours must include some evening hours
at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS: Those service conditions which are within the
control of the grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of
the grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil
disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual
weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of
the grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay per view
events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and
maintenance or upgrade of the system.
PERSON: Any individual or any association, firm, general partnership, limited
partnership, joint stock company, joint venture, trust, corporation, limited
liability company or other legally recognized entity, private or public,
whether for profit or not for profit.
PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENT ACCESS FACILITIES OR PEG ACCESS FACILITIES:
A. Channel capacity designated for public, educational or governmental use; and
   B.   Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.
SECTION: Any section, subsection or provision of this chapter.
SERVICE AREA OR FRANCHISE AREA: The entire geographic area within the city as
it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise
specified in the franchise agreement.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION: The loss of picture or sound on one or more cable
channels.
STATE: The state of Minnesota.
STREET OR PUBLICLY OWNED RIGHT OF WAY: Each of the following which has been
dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained
under public authority or by others and located within the city limits:
streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements,
rights of way and similar public property and areas that the grantor shall
permit to be included within this definition from time to time.
SUBSCRIBER: Any person who or which lawfully elects to subscribe to, for any
purpose, a service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with
the cable system whether or not a fee is paid for such service. (Ord. 61, 2-10-
2011; amd. 2011 Code)
4-8-4: FRANCHISE TERRITORY:
Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be valid within the
service area. (Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
4-8-5: FEDERAL, STATE AND CITY JURISDICTION:
   A.   This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with applicable
laws.
   B.   This chapter shall apply to all franchises granted or renewed after the
effective date hereof. This chapter shall further apply to the extent permitted
by applicable laws to all existing franchises granted prior to the effective
date hereof.
   C.   The rights of all grantees are subject to the policing powers of the
city to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and
welfare of the public. All grantees shall comply with all applicable laws
enacted by the city pursuant to that power.
   D.   No grantee shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter or any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter by reason of any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance.
   E.   This chapter and any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall
be construed and enforced in accordance with the substantive laws of the city,
state of Minnesota and applicable federal laws, including the cable act.
   F.   This chapter together with any franchise granted hereunder shall comply
with the Minnesota franchise standards contained in Minnesota statutes section
238.084.
   G.   The grantee and the city shall conform to state laws and rules
regarding cable communications not later than one year after they become
effective, unless otherwise stated, and shall conform to federal laws and
regulations regarding cable communications as they become effective. (Ord. 61,
2-10-2011)
4-8-6: FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the city, unless specifically
required by applicable laws, to construct, install or operate a cable
television system in the city in, on, over, under, upon, along or across any
street or publicly owned right of way without a franchise properly granted
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. A franchise granted by the city
under the provisions of this chapter shall encompass the following purposes:
   A.   To engage in the business of providing cable service, and such other
lawful services as may be permitted by applicable law, to subscribers within
the service area.
   B.   To erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace,
maintain and retain cables, lines, related electronic equipment, supporting
structures, appurtenances and other property in connection with the operation
of a cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets within
the service area.
   C.   To maintain and operate said franchise properties for the origination,
reception, transmission, amplification and distribution of television and radio
signals for the delivery of cable services.
   D.   To set forth the obligations of a grantee under the franchise
agreement. (Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
4-8-7: TERM OF FRANCHISE; RENEWAL:
   A.   Term: A franchise granted hereunder shall be for the term established
in the franchise agreement and shall not exceed fifteen (15) years.
   B.   Renewal: A franchise granted hereunder may be renewed upon application
by the grantee and shall be in accordance with applicable laws. The grantor and
grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time
during the term of the franchise. To the extent consistent with applicable
laws, a reasonable nonrefundable renewal application fee in an amount
established by the city may be required to accompany any renewal application.
Such application fee shall not be deemed to be "franchise fees" within the
meaning of section 622 of the cable act (47 USC section 542), and such payments
shall not be deemed to be: 1) "payments in-kind" or any involuntary payments
chargeable against the franchise fees to be paid to the city by the grantee
pursuant to section
4-8-12 of this chapter and applicable provisions of a franchise agreement; or
2) part of the franchise fees to be paid to the city by the grantee pursuant to
section
4-8-12 of this chapter and applicable provisions of a franchise agreement.
(Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
4-8-8: TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   The grantee shall not voluntarily or involuntarily, by operation of law
or otherwise, sell, assign, transfer, lease, sublet or otherwise dispose of, in
whole or in part, the franchise and/or cable system or any of the rights or
privileges granted by the franchise, without the prior written consent of the
city council and then only upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed
by the city council with regard to the proposed transferee's legal, technical
and financial qualifications, which consent shall not be unreasonably denied or
delayed. Any attempt to sell, assign, transfer, lease, sublet or otherwise
dispose of all or any part of the franchise and/or cable system or the
grantee's rights therein without the prior written consent of the city council
shall be null and void and shall be grounds for termination of the franchise
pursuant to section
4-8-28 of this chapter and the applicable provisions of any franchise
agreement.
   B.   Without limiting the nature of the events, requiring the city council's
approval under this section, the following events shall be deemed to be a sale,
assignment or other transfer of the franchise and/or cable system requiring
compliance with this section: 1) the sale, assignment or other transfer of all
or a majority of the grantee's assets or the assets comprising the cable system
to any person; 2) the merger of the grantee or any of its parents with or into
another person (including the merger of the grantee or any parent with or into
any parent or subsidiary corporation or other person); 3) the consolidation of
the grantee or any of its parents with any other person; 4) the transfer of the
franchise and/or cable system to a subsidiary corporation or other entity; 5)
the sale, assignment or other transfer of capital stock or partnership,
membership or other equity interests in the grantee or any of its parents by
one or more of its existing shareholders, partners, members or other equity
owners so as to create a new controlling interest (as defined by Minnesota
statutes section 238.084) in the grantee; 6) the issuance of additional capital
stock or partnership, membership or other equity interest by the grantee or any
of its parents so as to create a new controlling interest (as defined by
Minnesota statutes section 238.084) in the grantee; and 7) the entry by the
grantee into an agreement with respect to the management or operation of the
grantee, any of the grantee's parents and/or the system or the subsequent
amendment thereof, other than with an affiliate of the grantee. The term
"controlling interest" as used herein is not limited to majority ownership of
the grantee, but also includes actual working control over the grantee in
whatever manner exercised.
   C.   The grantee shall notify the grantor in writing of any foreclosure or
any other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the property and assets
comprising the cable system of the grantee or upon the termination of any lease
or interest covering all or a substantial part of said property and assets.
Such notification shall be considered by the grantor as notice that a change in
control or ownership of the franchise has taken place and the provisions under
this section governing the consent of the grantor to such change in control or
ownership shall apply.
   D.   For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change,
transfer or acquisition of control, the grantor may inquire into the
qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and the
grantee shall assist the grantor in any such inquiry. In seeking the grantor's
consent to any change of ownership or control, the grantee shall have the
responsibility of ensuring that the transferee completes an application in form
and substance reasonably satisfactory to the grantor, which application shall
include the information required under this chapter and applicable laws. The
transferee shall be required to establish to the satisfaction of the city that
it possesses the legal, technical and financial qualifications to operate and
maintain the system and comply with all franchise requirements for the
remainder of the term of the franchise. If, after considering the legal,
financial, character and technical qualities of the transferee and determining
that they are satisfactory, the grantor finds that such transfer is acceptable,
the grantor shall permit such transfer and assignment of the rights and
obligations of such franchise as may be in the public interest. The consent of
the grantor to such transfer shall not be unreasonably denied.
   E.   Any financial institution having a security interest in any and all of
the property and assets of the grantee as security for any loan made to the
grantee or any of its affiliates for the construction and/or operation of the
cable system must notify the grantor that it or its designee satisfactory to
the grantor shall take control of and operate the cable television system, in
the event of a default in the payment or performance of the debts, liabilities
or obligations of the grantee or its affiliates to such financial institution.
Further, said financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation
of the system within thirty (30) days of assuming such control that will ensure
continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the
term the financial institution or its designee exercises control over the
system. The financial institution or its designee shall not exercise control
over the system for a period exceeding one year unless extended by the grantor
in its discretion, and during said period of time, it shall have the right to
petition the grantor to transfer the franchise to another grantee.
   F.   In addition to the aforementioned requirements in this section, the
city and the grantee shall, at all times, comply with the requirements of
Minnesota statutes section 238.083 regarding the sale or transfer of a
franchise and with all other applicable laws. (Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
4-8-9: CITY'S RIGHT TO PURCHASE SYSTEM:
   A.   The city shall have a right of first refusal to purchase the cable
system in the event the grantee receives a bona fide offer to purchase the
cable system from any person. "Bona fide offer", as used in this subsection,
means a written offer which has been accepted by the grantee, subject to the
city's rights under this chapter and any franchise agreement. The price to be
paid by the city shall be the amount provided for in the bona fide offer,
including the same terms and conditions as the bona fide offer. The city shall
notify the grantee of its decision to purchase within sixty (60) days of the
city's receipt from the grantee of a copy of the written bona fide offer and
such other relevant and pertinent information as is necessary to understand the
transaction.
   B.   Consistent with section 627 of the cable act and all other applicable
laws, at the expiration, cancellation, revocation or termination of any
franchise agreement, the city shall have the option to purchase, condemn or
otherwise acquire and hold the cable system. (Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
4-8-10: NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE:
   A.   Franchise Not Exclusive: Any franchise granted under this chapter shall
be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any
time, such additional franchises for a cable television system as it deems
appropriate on terms and conditions no more favorable nor less burdensome than
those imposed in previously granted franchises, subject to applicable laws. The
grantor also specifically reserves the right to operate a municipal cable
television system pursuant to applicable laws.
   B.   Multiple Franchises:
      1.   The grantor may grant one or more franchises for a service area. The
grantor may, in its sole discretion, limit the number of franchises granted,
based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable laws
and specific local considerations; such as:
         a.   The capacity of the public rights of way to accommodate multiple
coaxial cables in addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of the utility
systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas and sewage.
         b.   The impact on the city of having multiple franchises.
         c.   The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition,
such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents' property, and the
disruption arising from numerous excavations of the rights of way.
         d.   The financial capabilities of the applicant and its guaranteed
commitment to make necessary investment to erect, maintain and operate the
proposed system for the duration of the franchise term.
      2.   Each grantee awarded a franchise to serve the entire city shall
offer service to all residences in the city, in accordance with construction
and service schedules mutually agreed upon between the grantor and the grantee,
and consistent with applicable laws.
      3.   The city may, in its sole discretion, require developers of new
residential housing with underground utilities to provide conduit to
accommodate cables for a minimum of two (2) cable systems in accordance with
the provisions of subsection
4-8-17C of this chapter.
      4.   The grantor may require that any new grantee be responsible for its
own underground trenching and the costs associated therewith, if, in the
grantor's opinion, the rights of way in any particular area cannot feasibly and
reasonably accommodate additional cables.
      5.   Any additional franchise granted by the city to provide cable
service in a part of the city in which a franchise has already been granted and
where an existing grantee is providing service shall require the new grantee to
provide service throughout its service area within a reasonable time and in a
sequence which does not discriminate against lower income residents. (Ord. 61,
2-10-2011)
4-8-11: INITIAL FRANCHISE APPLICATION:
   A.   Contents Of Application; Fee: Any person, other than the city unless
specifically required by applicable laws, desiring an initial franchise for a
cable television system shall file an application with the city. A reasonable
nonrefundable application fee in an amount established by the city shall
accompany the initial application. Such application fee shall not be deemed to
be "franchise fees" within the meaning of section 622 of the cable act (47 USC
section 542), and such payments shall not be deemed to be: 1) "payments in-
kind" or any involuntary payments chargeable against the franchise fees to be
paid to the city by the grantee pursuant to section
4-8-12 of this chapter and applicable provisions of a franchise agreement; or
2) part of the franchise fees to be paid to the city by the grantee pursuant to
section
4-8-12 of this chapter and applicable provisions of a franchise agreement. An
application for an initial franchise for a cable television system shall be in
a form reasonably acceptable to the grantor and shall contain, where
applicable:
      1.   A statement as to the proposed service area.
      2.   A resumé of prior history of applicant, including the legal,
technical and financial expertise of applicant in the cable television held.
      3.   A list of the general and limited partners of the applicant, if a
partnership, or the shareholders, if a corporation.
      4.   The percentage ownership of the applicant of each of its partners,
shareholders or other equity owners.
      5.   A list of officers, directors and managing employees of applicant or
its general partner, as applicable, together with a description of the
background of each such person.
      6.   The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of applicant or
any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in
part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by applicant.
      7.   A current financial statement of the applicant verified by an audit
or otherwise certified to be true, complete and correct to the reasonable
satisfaction of the city.
      8.   Proposed construction and service schedule.
      9.   Any additional information that the city deems applicable.
   B.   Recommendation; Grant Or Denial Of Franchise:
      1.   Upon receipt of any application for an initial franchise, the city
clerk shall prepare a report and make his or her recommendation with respect to
such application to the city council.
      2.   A public hearing shall be set prior to any initial franchise grant,
at a time and date approved by the city council. Within thirty (30) days after
the close of the hearing, the city council shall make a decision based upon the
evidence received at the hearing as to whether or not the franchise(s) should
be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The city council may
grant one or more initial franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise.
(Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
4-8-12: FRANCHISE FEE:
   A.   Following the issuance and acceptance of a franchise, the grantee shall
pay to the grantor a franchise fee in the amount set forth in the franchise
agreement.
   B.   The grantor, on an annual basis, shall be furnished a statement within
ninety (90) days of the close of the calendar year, certified by the company
controller or chief financial officer, reflecting the total amounts of gross
revenues, and all payments and computations of the franchise fee for the
previous calendar year. Upon ten (10) days' prior written notice, the grantor
shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of the grantee's records.
If such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of five percent (5%) or
more, the grantee shall assume all the city's reasonable out of pocket costs
associated with the conduct of such an audit and shall remit to the grantor all
applicable franchise fees due and payable together with interest thereon at the
lesser of the maximum rate permitted by applicable laws or eighteen percent
(18%) per annum.
   C.   Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by
the grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of
any claim the grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a
franchise fee under this chapter or any franchise agreement or for the
performance of any other obligation of the grantee.
   D.   In the event that any franchise fee payment or recomputed amount is not
made on or before the dates specified in the franchise agreement, the grantee
shall pay as additional compensation an interest charge, computed from such due
date, at an annual rate equal to the lesser of the maximum rate permitted by
applicable laws or eighteen percent (18%) per annum during the period for which
payment was due.
   E.   Franchise fee payments shall be made in accordance with the schedule
indicated in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
4-8-13: INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE:
   A.   Indemnification: The grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold the city,
its officers, council, commissions, agents and employees (collectively the
"indemnified parties") harmless from and against any and all lawsuits, claims,
causes of action, actions, liability, demands, damages, judgments, settlements,
losses, expenses (including reasonable attorney fees) and costs of any nature
that any of the indemnified parties may at any time, directly or indirectly,
suffer, sustain or incur arising out of, based upon or in any way connected
with the grant of a franchise to the grantee, the operation of the grantee's
system and/or the acts and/or omissions of the grantee or its agents or
employees, whether or not pursuant to the franchise. This indemnity shall
apply, without limitation, to any action or cause of action for invasion of
privacy, defamation, antitrust, errors and omissions, theft, fire, violation or
infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade names, service mark, patent, or
any other right of any person whether or not any act or omission complained of
is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or any franchise
agreement, but shall exclude any claim or action arising out of the acts or
omissions of the indemnified parties or related to any city programming or
other access programming for which the grantee is not legally responsible or
arising from the operation of access facilities and equipment.
   B.   Insurance:
      1.   Within sixty (60) days following the grant of a franchise, the
grantee shall obtain, pay all premiums for and make available to the city at
its request copies of the following insurance policies:
         a.   A general comprehensive liability insurance policy insuring,
indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the indemnified parties from any
and all claims by any person whatsoever on account of injury to or death of a
person or persons occasioned by the operations of the grantee under any
franchise granted hereunder, or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with
a minimum coverage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury
or death of one person, and three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for personal
injury or death of any two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence. The
policy limits provided for in this subsection B1a shall be reviewed and
adjusted by the city as necessary not more than once every three (3) years.
         b.   Property damage insurance for property damage occasioned by the
operation of the grantee under any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter,
or alleged to have been so caused or occurred, with minimum coverage of one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage to the property of any one
person and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for property damage to the
property of two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence. The policy limits
provided for in this subsection B1b shall be reviewed and adjusted by the city
as necessary not more than once every three (3) years.
         c.   Workers' compensation insurance as provided by applicable laws.
      2.   All insurance policies called for in this subsection shall be in a
form satisfactory to the city with a company licensed to do business in the
state of Minnesota with a rating by A.M. Best & Co. of not less than "A", and
shall require thirty (30) days' written notice of any cancellation to both the
city and the grantee. The grantee shall, in the event of any such cancellation
notice, obtain, pay all premiums for, and file with the city written evidence
of the issuance of replacement policies within thirty (30) days following
receipt by the city or the grantee of any notice of cancellation.
      3.   If the grantee sells or transfers the cable system, or in the event
of expiration, termination or revocation of a franchise, insurance tail
coverage shall be purchased and filed with the city for the then applicable
amounts, providing coverage for the time periods according to applicable
statutes of limitation, insurance for any issues attributable to the period the
grantee held its franchise.
      4.   It shall be the obligation of the grantee to promptly notify the
city of any pending or threatened litigation that would be likely to affect the
indemnified parties. (Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
4-8-14: GEOGRAPHICAL COVERAGE OF SYSTEM:
   A.   The grantee shall design, construct and maintain the cable television
system to have the capability to pass every dwelling unit in the service area,
subject to any service area line extension requirements of the franchise
agreement.
   B.   After service has been established by activating trunk and/or
distribution cables for any service area, the grantee shall provide cable
service to any requesting subscriber within that service area within thirty
(30) days from the date of request, provided that the grantee is able to secure
access to all rights of way necessary to extend service to such subscriber
within such thirty (30) day period on reasonable terms and conditions.
   C.   No subscriber shall be refused service arbitrarily. However, for
unusual circumstances such as the existence of more than one hundred fifty feet
(150') of distance from distribution cable to connection of service to
subscribers, or a density equivalent of less than forty (40) homes per mile,
service may be made available on the basis of a capital contribution in aid of
construction, including cost of material, labor and easements. For the purpose
of determining the amount of capital contribution in aid of construction to be
borne by the grantee and subscribers in the area in which service may be
expanded, the grantee will contribute an amount equal to the construction and
other costs per mile, multiplied by a fraction whose numerator equals the
actual number of residences per mile, and whose denominator equals forty (40)
residences. Subscribers who request service hereunder, will bear the remainder
of the construction and other costs on a pro rata basis. The grantee may
require that the payment of the capital contribution in aid of construction
borne by such potential subscribers be paid in advance.
   D.   The grantee shall immediately bury all drops to subscribers dwellings
when required by local construction standards. In the event the ground is
frozen or otherwise unsuitable to permit immediate burial, the grantee shall be
permitted to delay such burial until the ground becomes suitable for burial and
shall complete said burial no later than June 1 of each year. (Ord. 61, 2-10-
2011)
4-8-15: RATE REGULATION:
The city reserves the right to regulate rates for basic cable service and any
other services offered over the cable system to the extent not prohibited by
applicable laws. The grantee shall be subject to the rate regulation provisions
provided for herein, and those of the federal communications commission (FCC)
at 47 CFR part 76, subpart N, as the same may be amended from time to time. The
city shall follow the rules relating to cable rate regulation promulgated by
the FCC at 47 CFR part 76, subpart N, as the same may be amended from time to
time. (Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
4-8-16: TREE TRIMMING:
The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees, in accordance with all
applicable utility restrictions, ordinance and easement restrictions, upon and
hanging over streets and public places of the city so as to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the
grantee. City representatives shall have authority to supervise and approve all
trimming of trees conducted by the grantee. (Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
4-8-17: SYSTEM DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permits Required Generally: The grantee shall not construct any cable
system facilities until the grantee has secured the necessary permits from the
grantor, or other applicable governmental authorities.
   B.   Underground Or Aboveground Transmission:
      1.   In those areas of the city where transmission or distribution
facilities of all the public utilities providing telephone and electric power
service are underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and
maintain its transmission and distribution facilities therein underground.
      2.   In those areas of the city where the grantee's cables are located on
the aboveground transmission or distribution facilities of the public utility
providing telephone or electric power service, and in the event that the
facilities of both such public utilities subsequently are placed underground,
then the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its
transmission and distribution facilities underground, at the grantee's cost.
Certain of the grantee's equipment, such as pedestals, amplifiers and power,
supplies, which normally are placed aboveground, may continue to remain in
aboveground closures; however, the city specifically reserves all of its rights
to approve aboveground or underground locations for pedestals subject to
applicable laws.
   C.   Underground Easements: In new residential developments in which all the
electric power and telephone utilities are underground, the city may, in its
sole discretion, require that the following procedure apply with respect to
access to and utilization of underground easements:
      1.   The developer shall be responsible for contacting and surveying all
grantees to ascertain which grantees desire (or, pursuant to the terms and
provisions of this chapter and any franchise agreement, may be required) to
provide cable service to that development. The developer may establish a
reasonable deadline to receive responses from the grantees. The final
development map shall indicate the grantees that have agreed to serve the
development.
      2.   If one or more grantees wish to provide service within all or part
of the development, they shall be accommodated in the joint utilities trench on
a nondiscriminatory shared basis. If fewer than two (2) grantees indicate
interest, the developer shall provide conduit to accommodate a minimum of two
(2) sets of cable television cables and dedicate to the city any initially
unoccupied conduit.
      3.   The developer shall provide at least ten (10) business days' notice
of the date that utility trenches will be open to the grantees that have agreed
to serve the development. When the trenches are open, such grantees shall have
two (2) business days to begin the installation of their cables, and five (5)
business days after beginning installation to complete installation.
      4.   The final development map shall not be approved until the developer
submits evidence that:
         a.   It has notified each grantee that underground utility trenches
are to be open as of an estimated date, and that each grantee will be allowed
access to such trenches, including trenches from proposed streets to individual
homes or homesites, on specified nondiscriminatory terms and conditions; and
         b.   It has received a written notification from each grantee that the
grantee intends to install its facilities during the open trench period on the
specified terms and conditions, or such other terms and conditions as are
mutually agreeable to the developer and the grantee, or has received no reply
from a grantee within ten (10) days after its notification to such grantee, in
which case the grantee will be deemed to have waived its opportunity to install
its facilities during the open trench period.
      5.   Sharing the joint utilities trench shall be subject to compliance
with state regulatory agency and utility standards. If such compliance is not
possible, the developer shall provide a separate trench for the cable
television cables, with the entire cost shared among the participating grantee
(s). With the concurrence of the developer, the affected utilities and the
grantee(s), alternative installation procedures, such as the use of deeper
trenches, may be utilized, subject to the requirements of applicable laws.
      6.   Any grantee wishing to serve an area where the trenches have been
closed shall be responsible for its own trenching and associated costs and
shall repair all property to the condition which existed prior to such
trenching.
   D.   Construction Codes And Permits:
      1.   The grantee shall obtain all necessary permits from the city before
commencing any construction upgrade or extension of the system, including the
opening or disturbance of any street, or private or public property within the
city. The grantee shall strictly adhere to all state and local laws and
building and zoning codes currently or hereafter applicable to construction,
operation or maintenance of the system in the city and give due consideration
at all times to the aesthetics of the property.
      2.   The city shall have the right to inspect all construction or
installation work performed pursuant to the provisions of the franchise and to
make such tests at its own expense as it shall find necessary to ensure
compliance with the terms of the franchise and applicable provisions of local,
state and federal law.
   E.   Repair Of Streets And Property: Any and all streets or public property
or private property, which are disturbed or damaged during the construction,
repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance or reconsideration of
the system shall be promptly and fully restored by the grantee, at its expense,
to a condition as good as that prevailing prior to the grantee's work, as
approved by the city in the case of streets and other public property. If the
grantee shall fail to promptly perform the restoration required herein, the
city shall have the right to put the streets, public, or private property back
into good condition. The city reserves its right to pursue reimbursement for
such restoration from the grantee.
   F.   Conditions On Street Use:
      1.   Nothing in the franchise shall be construed to prevent the city from
constructing, maintaining, repairing or relocating sewers; grading, paving,
maintaining, repairing, relocating and/or altering any street; constructing,
laying down, repairing, maintaining or relocating any water mains; or
constructing, maintaining, relocating, or repairing any sidewalk or other
public work.
      2.   All system transmission and distribution structures, lines and
equipment erected by the grantee within the city shall be located so as not to
obstruct or interfere with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public
ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights of property
owners who abut any of the said streets, alleys and other public ways and
places, and not to interfere with existing public utility installations. The
grantee shall furnish to and file with the city clerk the maps, plats, and
permanent records of the location and character of all facilities constructed,
including underground facilities, and the grantee shall file with the city
updates of such maps, plats and permanent records annually if changes have been
made in the system.
      3.   If at any time during the period of this franchise the city shall
elect to alter or change the grade or location of any street, alley or other
public way, the grantee shall, at its own expense, upon reasonable notice by
the city, remove and relocate its poles, wires, cables, conduits, manholes and
other fixtures of the system, and in each instance comply with the reasonable
standards and specifications of the city. If the city reimburses other
occupants of the street, the grantee shall be likewise reimbursed.
      4.   The grantee shall not place poles, conduits, or other fixtures of
system aboveground or belowground where the same will interfere with any gas,
electric, telephone, water or other utility fixtures and all such poles,
conduits, or other fixtures placed in any street shall be so placed as to
comply with all requirements of the city.
      5.   The grantee shall, on request of any person holding a moving permit
issued by the city, temporarily move its wires or fixtures to permit the moving
of buildings with the expense of such temporary removal to be paid by the
person requesting the same, and the grantee shall be given not less than ten
(10) days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary changes. (Ord. 61, 2-
10-2011)
4-8-18: TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
   A.   The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system
in a manner consistent with all applicable laws and the federal communications
commission technical standards, and any standards set forth in its franchise
agreement. In addition, the grantee shall provide to the grantor, upon request,
a copy of the results of the grantee's periodic proof of performance tests
conducted pursuant to federal communications commission standards and
guidelines.
   B.   Failure to comply with the FCC's technical standards shall entitle the
city to utilize the procedures of section
4-8-28 of this chapter.
   C.   All construction practices shall be in accordance with all applicable
sections of the occupational safety and health act of 1970 1 , as amended, as
well as all other applicable laws.
   D.   All installation of electronic equipment at the time of installation
shall be of a permanent nature, durable and installed in accordance with the
provisions of the national electrical and safety code and the national
electrical code in effect at the time of installation.
   E.   Antennas and their supporting structures (towers) shall be painted,
lighted, erected and maintained in accordance with all applicable rules and
regulations of the federal aviation administration and all other applicable
laws.
   F.   All of the grantee's plant and equipment, including, but not limited
to, the antenna site, headend and distribution system, towers, house
connections, structures, poles, wire, coaxial cable, fixtures and appurtenances
shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced,
removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good engineering
practices, performed by experienced maintenance and construction personnel so
as not to endanger or interfere with improvements the city may deem appropriate
to make, or to interfere in any manner with the rights of any property owner,
or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   G.   The grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install
and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices preventing failures
and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injury or nuisance to the
public. (Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. MSA §§ 182.65, 182.661.
4-8-19: PROGRAMMING DECISIONS:
All programming decisions shall be at the sole discretion of the grantee;
provided, however, that any change in the mix, quality or level of service
pursuant to 47 USC section 545(a) shall require the prior approval of the city.
Such approval by the city shall not be unreasonably withheld. (Ord. 61, 2-10-
2011)
4-8-20: CONSUMER PROTECTION AND SERVICE STANDARDS:
The grantee shall maintain a convenient local customer service or bill payment
location for receiving subscriber payments. The grantee shall also maintain or
arrange for a location where equipment can be dropped off or exchanged as is
necessary or, in the alternative, establish a system for having subscriber
equipment picked up at the subscriber residence free of charge. The grantee
shall also provide the necessary facilities, equipment and personnel to comply
with the following consumer protection standards under normal operating
conditions:
   A.   Office Hours And Telephone Availability:
      1.   The grantee will maintain a local, toll free or collect call
telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers twenty four
(24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. Trained grantee representatives will
be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business
hours. After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a
service or an automated response system, including an answering machine.
Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a
trained grantee representative on the next business day.
      2.   Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a
customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30)
seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred,
transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds. These standards shell be
met no less than ninety percent (90%) of the time under normal operating
conditions, measured on a quarterly basis.
      3.   The grantee will not be required to acquire equipment or perform
surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards in
subsection A2 of this section, unless a historical record of complaints
indicates a clear failure to comply.
      4.   Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy
signal less than three percent (3%) of the time.
      5.   Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at
least during normal business hours.
   B.   Installations, Outages And Service Calls: Under normal operating
conditions, each of the following standards will be met no less than ninety
five percent (95%) of the time measured on a quarterly basis:
      1.   Standard installations will be performed within seven (7) business
days after an order has been placed. "Standard installations" are those that
are located up to one hundred twenty five feet (125') from the existing
distribution system. The grantee has agreed to one hundred fifty feet (150') at
subsection
4-8-14C of this chapter.
      2.   Excluding conditions beyond the control of the grantee, the grantee
will begin working on "service interruptions" promptly and in no event later
than twenty four (24) hours after the interruption becomes known. The grantee
must begin action to correct other service problems the next business day after
notification of the service problem.
      3.   The "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service
calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at
maximum, a four (4) hour time block during normal business hours. (The grantee
may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal
business hours for the express convenience of the customer.)
      4.   The grantee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the
close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment.
      5.   If the grantee's representative is running late for an appointment
with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the
customer will be contacted prior to the time of the scheduled appointment. The
appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient
for the customer.
   C.   Communications Between Grantee And Subscribers:
      1.   Notifications To Subscribers:
         a.   The grantee shall provide written information on each of the
following areas at the time of installation of service at least annually to all
subscribers, and at any time upon request:
            (1)   Products and services offered;
            (2)   Prices and options for programming services and conditions of
subscription to programming and other services;
            (3)   Installation and service maintenance policies;
            (4)   Instructions on how to use the cable service;
            (5)   Channel positions of the programming carried on the system;
and
            (6)   Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and
telephone number of the grantee's office within the service area.
         b.   Customers will be notified of any changes in rates, programming
services or channel positions as soon as possible in writing. Notice must be
given to subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes,
if the changes are within the control of the grantee. In addition, the grantee
shall notify subscribers thirty (30) days in advance of any significant changes
in the other information required by this subsection C1. The grantee shall not
be required to provide prior notice of any rate changes as a result of a
regulatory fee, franchise fee, or other fees, tax, assessment or charge of any
kind imposed by any federal agency, state or franchising authority on the
transaction between the operator and the subscriber.
      2.   Billing:
         a.   Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be
fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and
premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly
delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges,
rebates and credits.
         b.   In case of a billing dispute, the grantee must respond to a
written complaint from a subscriber within thirty (30) days.
      3.   Refunds: Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than
either:
         a.   The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the
request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier; or
         b.   The return of the equipment supplied by the grantee if service is
terminated.
      4.   Credits: Credits for service will be issued no later than the
customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is
warranted. (Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
4-8-21: CITY USE OF SYSTEM:
   A.   The city shall, at its own expense, have the right to install and
maintain upon the poles and within the underground pipes and conduits of the
grantee, any wires and fixtures desired by the city to the extent that such
installation and maintenance does not interfere with existing operations of the
grantee.
   B.   In the case of any emergency or disaster, the grantee shall, upon
request of the city or authorized emergency management personnel, make its
cable system and related facilities available to the city for emergency use.
(Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
4-8-22: ABANDONMENT OR REMOVAL OF FRANCHISEE PROPERTY:
   A.   In the event that the use of any property of the grantee within the
franchise area or a portion thereof is discontinued for a continuous period of
twelve (12) months, the grantee shall be deemed to have abandoned that
property.
   B.   The grantor, upon such terms as the grantor may impose, may give the
grantee permission to abandon, without removing, any system facility or
equipment laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained in, on, under or
over the franchise area. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, the grantee shall remove all abandoned facilities and
equipment upon receipt of written notice from the grantor and shall restore any
affected street to its former state at the time such facilities and equipment
were installed, so as not to impair its usefulness. In removing its plant,
structures and equipment, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any
excavation made by or on behalf of the grantee and shall leave all streets and
other public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to
such removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone
cable or other utility wires, poles or attachments. The grantor shall have the
right to inspect and approve the condition of the streets, public ways, public
places, cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The
liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter and any security
fund provided for in the franchise agreement shall continue in full force and
effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by the grantee
with the terms and conditions of this section.
   C.   Upon abandonment of any franchise property in place, the grantee, if
required by the grantor, shall submit to the grantor a bill of sale and/or
other instrument, satisfactory in form and content to the grantor, transferring
to the grantor the ownership of the franchise property abandoned.
   D.   At the expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted, or
upon its earlier revocation or termination, as provided for herein and/or in
the franchise agreement, in any such case without renewal, extension or
transfer, the grantor shall have the right to require the grantee to remove, at
its own expense, all aboveground portions of the cable television system from
all streets and public ways within the city within a reasonable period of time,
which shall not be less than one hundred eighty (180) days.
   E.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter, the
grantee may, with the consent of the grantor, abandon any underground franchise
property in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of
the street or public rights of way in which such property is located or with
the use thereof by any public utility or other cable grantee.
   F.   Upon termination or forfeiture of a franchise, the grantee shall remove
its cable, wires, and appliances from the streets, alleys, or other public
places within the service area if the city so requests. Failure by the grantee
to remove its cable, wires, and appliances as referenced herein shall be
subject to the requirements of this section. (Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
4-8-23: RECEIVERSHIP AND FORECLOSURE:
   A.   A franchise granted hereunder shall, at the option of the grantor,
cease and terminate one hundred twenty (120) days after appointment of a
receiver or receivers, or trustee or trustees, to take over and conduct the
business of the grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy
or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall
have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred twenty (120)
days, or unless: 1) such receivers or trustees shall have, within one hundred
twenty (120) days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all
the terms and provisions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant
hereto, and the receivers or trustees within said one hundred twenty (120) days
shall have remedied all the defaults and violations under the franchise and/or
this chapter, or provided a plan for the remedy of such defaults and violations
which is satisfactory to the grantor; and 2) such receivers or trustees shall,
within said one hundred twenty (120) days, execute an agreement duly approved
by the court having jurisdiction of the premises, whereby such receivers or
trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and
limitation of the franchise and this chapter.
   B.   In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the franchise
property, or any material part thereof, the grantor may give notice of
termination of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter upon the grantee
and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event, the franchise granted
and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder shall cease and
terminate thirty (30) days after such notice has been given, unless: 1) the
grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise in accordance with
the provisions of the franchise and this chapter; and 2) such successful bidder
shall have covenanted and agreed with the grantor to assume and be bound by all
terms and conditions of the franchise. (Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
4-8-24: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The city shall also have the right to inspect, upon twenty four (24) hours'
written notice, at any time during normal business hours at the grantee's
office, all books, records, maps, plans, financial statements, service
complaint logs, performance test results, records of request for service, and
other like materials of the grantee to the extent such examination will not
violate federal law or disclose proprietary information. (Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
4-8-25: RIGHTS RESERVED TO GRANTOR:
In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the grantor by this chapter,
the grantor reserves to itself every right and power which is required to be
reserved by a provision of any ordinance or under the franchise. (Ord. 61, 2-
10-2011)
4-8-26: PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS:
   A.   The grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise
discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the
basis of race, color, religion, disability, national origin, age, gender or
sexual preference. The grantee shall comply at all times with all other
applicable laws, relating to nondiscrimination.
   B.   The grantee shall adhere to the applicable equal employment opportunity
requirements of applicable laws, as now written or as amended from time to time
including 47 USC section 551, "protection of subscriber privacy".
   C.   Neither the grantee, nor any person, agency, or entity shall, without
the subscriber's consent, tap or arrange for the tapping, of any cable line,
signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose except
routine maintenance of the system, detection of unauthorized service, polling
with audience participating, or audience viewing surveys to support advertising
research regarding viewers where individual viewing behavior cannot be
identified.
   D.   In the conduct of providing its services or in pursuit of any
collateral commercial enterprise resulting therefrom, the grantee shall take
reasonable steps to prevent the invasion of a subscriber's or general citizen's
right of privacy or other personal rights through the use of the system as such
rights are delineated or defined by applicable laws. The grantee shall not,
without lawful court order or other applicable valid legal authority, utilize
the system's interactive two-way equipment or capability for unauthorized
personal surveillance of any subscriber or general citizen.
   E.   No cable line, wire, amplifier, converter, or other piece of equipment
owned by the grantee shall be installed by the grantee in the subscriber's
premises, other than in appropriate easements, without first securing any
required consent or as permitted by applicable law. If a subscriber requests
service, permission to install upon subscriber's property shall be presumed.
Where a property owner or his or her predecessor granted an easement including
a public utility easement or a servitude to another and the servitude by its
terms is a compatible use to the grantee's intended usage, the grantee shall
not be required to obtain the written permission of the owner for the
installation of equipment required to deliver cable service.
   F.   1. No signals of a class IV cable communications channel may be
transmitted from a subscriber terminal for purposes of monitoring individual
viewing patterns or practices without the express written permission of a
subscriber. The request for permission must be contained in a separate document
with a prominent statement that the subscriber is authorizing the permission in
full knowledge of its provisions. The written permission must be for a limited
period of time not to exceed one year which is renewable at the option of the
subscriber. No penalty may be invoked for a subscriber's failure to provide or
renew the authorization. The authorization is revocable at any time by the
subscriber without penalty of any kind. The permission must be required for
each type or classification or class IV cable communications activity planned.
      2.   No information or data obtained by monitoring transmission of a
signal from a subscriber terminal, including, but not limited to, the lists of
the names and addresses of the subscribers or lists that identify the viewing
habits of subscribers may be sold or otherwise made available to any person
other than to the grantee and its employees for internal business use, or to
the subscriber who is the subject of that information, unless the grantee has
received specific written authorization from the subscriber to make the data
available.
      3.   Written permission from the subscriber must not be required for the
systems conducting system wide or individually addressed electronic sweeps for
the purpose of verifying system integrity or monitoring for the purpose of
billing. Confidentiality of this information is subject to subsection F2 of
this section.
      4.   For purposes of this section, a "class IV cable communications
channel" means a signaling path provided by a system to transmit signals of any
type from a subscriber terminal to another point in the system. (Ord. 61, 2-10-
2011)
4-8-27: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE TO FACILITIES:
Nothing contained in this chapter relieves a person from liability arising out
of failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring the grantee's
facilities while performing work connected with grading, regrading or changing
the line of a street or public place or with the construction or reconstruction
of a sewer or water system. (Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
4-8-28: FRANCHISE VIOLATION:
In the event the grantor believes that the grantee has breached or violated any
material provision of this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder, the
grantor may act in accordance with the following procedures:
   A.   The grantor may notify the grantee of the alleged violation or breach,
stating with specificity the nature of the alleged violation or breach and
demand that the grantee cure the same within a reasonable time, which shall not
be less than ten (10) days in the case of an alleged failure of the grantee to
pay any sum or other amount due the grantor under this chapter or the grantee's
franchise, and thirty (30) days in all other cases. If the grantee fails either
to cure the alleged violation or breach within the time prescribed or to
commence correction of the violation or breach within the time prescribed and
thereafter diligently pursue correction of such alleged violation or breach,
the grantor shall then give written notice of not less than fourteen (14) days
of a public hearing to be held before the city council. Said notice shall
specify the violations or breaches alleged to have occurred. At the public
hearing, the city council shall hear and consider relevant evidence and
thereafter render findings and its decision. In the event the city council
finds that a material violation or breach exists and that the grantee has not
cured the same in a satisfactory manner or has not diligently commenced to cure
of such violation or breach after notice thereof from the grantor and is not
diligently proceeding to fully cure such violation or breach, the city council
may impose penalties from any security fund required in a franchise agreement
or may terminate the grantee's franchise and all rights and privileges of the
franchise.
   B.   If the city chooses to terminate the grantee's franchise, the following
additional procedure shall be followed:
      1.   After holding the public hearing, the city shall provide the grantee
with written notice of the city's intention to terminate the franchise and
specify in detail the reason or cause for the proposed termination. The city
shall allow the grantee a minimum of fifteen (15) days subsequent to receipt of
the notice in which to cure the default.
      2.   The grantee shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard at a
regular or special meeting of city prior to any final decision of city to
terminate the grantee's franchise.
      3.   In the event that the city determines to terminate the grantee's
franchise, the grantee shall have an opportunity to appeal said decision in
accordance with all applicable laws.
      4.   If a valid appeal is filed, the franchise shall remain in full force
and affect while said appeal is pending, unless the term of the franchise
sooner expires. (Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
4-8-29: GRANTEE'S INABILITY TO PERFORM:
In the event the grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions or
obligations required by this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder is
prevented by a cause or event not within the grantee's control, such inability
to perform shall be deemed excused for the period of such inability and no
penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof. For the purpose of
this section, causes or events not within the control of the grantee shall
include, without limitation, acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil
disturbances, restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court,
failure or loss of utilities, explosions, inability to obtain necessary permits
or approvals after having submitted timely applications, acts of public
enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides and
fires. (Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
4-8-30: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter is held by any governmental authority of
competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting with any applicable laws
now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such governmental authority to be
modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such
applicable laws, such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct, and
independent part of this chapter, and such holding shall not affect the
validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that
such applicable laws are subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise
changed, so that the provision hereof which had been held invalid or modified
is no longer in conflict with such laws, said provision shall thereupon return
to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding on the grantor and the
grantee, provided that the grantor shall give the grantee thirty (30) days'
written notice of such change before requiring compliance with said provision
or such longer period of time as may be reasonably required for the grantee to
comply with such provision. (Ord. 61, 2-10-2011)
CHAPTER 9
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
4-9-1: Definitions
4-9-2: Commercial Fireworks Permit Required
4-9-3: Consumer Fireworks Sales License Required
4-9-4: Consumer Fireworks Prohibited On Public Property
4-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COMMERCIAL FIREWORKS: Any substance or combination of substances or article
prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by
combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and includes blank
cartridges, toy cannons and toy canes in which explosives are used, any type of
balloon which requires fire underneath to propel it, firecrackers, torpedoes,
skyrockets, Roman candles, daygo bombs, or other fireworks of like
construction, and any fireworks containing any explosive or inflammable
compound, or any tablet or other device containing any explosive substance and
commonly used as fireworks. The term fireworks shall not include toy pistols,
toy guns, in which paper caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive
compound are used and toy pistol caps which contain less than 0.20 grains of
explosive mixture as well as those devices defined below as consumer fireworks.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS: Wire or wood sparklers of not more than one hundred grams
(100 g) of mixture per item, other sparkling items which are nonexplosive and
nonaerial and contain seventy five grams (75 g) or less of chemical mixture per
tube or a total of five hundred grams (500 g) or less for multiple tubes,
snakes and glowworms, smoke devices, and trick noisemakers which include paper
streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop pops, each
consisting of not more than twenty-five hundredths (25/100) grains of explosive
mixture. (Ord. 167, 4-12-2018)
4-9-2: COMMERCIAL FIREWORKS PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall use or display any commercial fireworks without an
administrative permit issued pursuant to this article. A commercial fireworks
permit is not transferable. The application for an administrative permit shall
be made as follows:
   A.   Application for an administrative permit shall be made in writing to
the City Clerk on forms to be provided by the City at least fifteen (15) days
in advance of the date of the display.
   B.   The application shall state the name and address of an operator who is
certified by the State Fire Marshal and will supervise the display, the
location of the display, and the date and time of the display.
   C.   The applicant for a commercial fireworks permit shall provide proof of
insurance policies or certificates of insurance acceptable to the City prior to
issuance of said license. The insurance policies shall be issued by insurance
companies authorized to do business in the State for coverage and limits as set
forth below:
      1.   General liability policy providing coverage for bodily injury or
property damage for claims arising out of the permittee's actions or inactions
in its use of explosives, fireworks or pyrotechnics for minimum combined single
liability limits as follows:
 
General aggregate $1,000,000.00
Each occurrence   1,000,000.00
 
The policy shall be on an annual basis or the full period of the permit, and
such policy shall include, but not be limited to, explosion, collapse, and
underground hazards, independent contractors, and contractual coverage, and
proof of insurance to the City shall state such coverage.
The City shall be named as an additional insured.
The permittee shall indemnify and hold the City, its officers, Commissioners,
and agents harmless from any damages or claims resulting from or relating to
its use of explosives, fireworks, or pyrotechnics in the City by the permittee.
Proof to the City will state the policy contractual coverage covers this
indemnification agreement.
      2.   Business auto policy covering owned (if any), nonowned, and hired
autos with minimum combined single bodily injury and property damage liability
limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each accident.
      3.   Workers' compensation and employers' liability as required by the
State.
Should any such policy be canceled or not renewed for any cause before the
expiration date thereof, the issuing company shall mail thirty (30) days'
written notice to the City Clerk, except such notice shall be ten (10) days for
nonpayment of premium.
If a policy is terminated for any reason, the permit shall be automatically
suspended upon the day the policy terminates, unless a new policy complying
with this section is obtained and filed with the City Clerk prior to the
termination of the policy in force.
The insurance policies shall be written with companies having a Best's Key
Rating Guide of A-VII, or as approved by the City's insurance agent.
   D.   The Fire Chief, or a designee, shall investigate each application. If
after the investigation the Fire Chief determines the operator of the display
is certified by the State Fire Marshal and competent and that the display is of
such character and is to be located, discharged, or fired that it will not be
hazardous to property or endanger any person and the display as planned will
conform to the safety guidelines of the State Fire Marshal, then the Clerk
shall issue a permit for display when the applicant pays a permit fee.
   E.   Every display shall be conducted so as not to endanger any person or
property. Every display shall be conducted in accordance with all applicable
provisions of this Code, State law, and regulations including regulations of
the State Fire Marshal.
   F.   The fee for a permit to display commercial fireworks shall be
established by ordinance. The fee shall be submitted with the permit
application. (Ord. 167, 4-12-2018)
4-9-3: CONSUMER FIREWORKS SALES LICENSE REQUIRED:
Except as herein provided, no person shall keep for retail sale or sell at
retail consumer fireworks unless licensed by the City. License applications
shall be submitted to the City Clerk together with the license fees as
determined from time to time by City Council resolution. A license shall be
issued for the specific premises identified in the application and shall not be
transferable. The application shall provide:
   A.   The net or gross quantity of explosive material to be kept on the
premises for retail sale or other disposition.
   B.   The interior floor plan of the building showing the place(s) of storage
and/or display.
   C.   The location, type and capacity of sprinkler(s) and fire extinguishers.
   D.   A license shall expire on December 31st of each year.
   E.   A license shall be issued subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   The license is non-transferable, either to a different person or
location.
      2.   The license must be publicly displayed on the licensed premises.
      3.   The licensee shall post in a conspicuous location in the licensed
premises a list of all legal fireworks displayed and stored on the property.
The list shall document the name, weight, and quantity of the fireworks and be
accompanied by the material safety data sheets.
      4.   The premises are subject to inspection by City employees, including
police officers and fire and building officials, during normal business hours.
      5.   The sale of legal fireworks must be allowed by the zoning ordinance
and must comply with all zoning ordinance requirements.
      6.   The licensee and permitted facility must be in compliance with all
provisions of National Fire Protection standard 1124.
      7.   The licensee shall comply with all applicable provisions of the
State of Minnesota Building and Fire Codes.
      8.   Photo identification must be checked with each sale. Purchasers must
be eighteen (18) years of age or older.
   F.   The fee for a permit to keep for retail sale or sell at retail consumer
fireworks shall be established by ordinance. The fee shall be submitted with
the permit application. (Ord. 167, 4-12-2018)
4-9-4: CONSUMER FIREWORKS PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
The use of consumer fireworks is not permitted on public property. (Ord. 167,
4-12-2018)
CHAPTER 10
MOBILE FOOD UNITS
SECTION:
4-10-1: Definitions
4-10-2: Exemptions
4-10-3: License Required
4-10-4: Ineligibility For License
4-10-5: Application For License
4-10-6: License Fee
4-10-7: Issuance Of License; Conditions
4-10-8: Performance Standards
4-10-9: Prohibited Activities
4-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ICE CREAM TRUCK: A motor vehicle utilized as the point of retail sales of pre-
wrapped or prepackaged ice cream, frozen yogurt, frozen custard, flavored
frozen water, or similar frozen dessert products.
MOBILE FOOD UNIT: A food and beverage service establishment that is: a) a
vehicle mounted unit, either motorized or trailered; b) readily movable without
disassembling for transport to another location; or c) a nonmotorized vehicle
self-propelled by the operator. (Ord. 190, 6-27-2019)
4-10-2: EXEMPTIONS:
Ice cream trucks are exempt from this chapter and shall be regulated as
peddlers pursuant to chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 190, 6-27-2019)
4-10-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, no entity shall conduct business
as a mobile food unit without first having obtained a license from the City as
required under this chapter. (Ord. 190, 6-27-2019)
4-10-4: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:
   A.   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having
obtained any required State license.
   B.   The revocation, within the past five (5) years, of any license issued
under this chapter. (Ord. 190, 6-27-2019)
4-10-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a City license to conduct business as a mobile food unit shall
be made at least two (2) regular business days before the applicant desires to
begin conducting business, unless otherwise approved by the City Clerk or their
designee. Application for a license shall be made on a form available from the
Office of the City Clerk. All applications shall be signed by the applicant,
who must be the owner of the mobile food unit. All applications shall include
the following information:
   A.   Applicant's full legal name, other names the applicant uses or is known
by, date of birth, driver's license number or other acceptable identification
of the person or entity applying for a license.
   B.   Applicant's permanent and any temporary home and business address,
phone number and email address of the applicant.
   C.   Any and all telephone numbers where the applicant can be reached while
conducting business within the City.
   D.   Name and contact information of primary mobile food unit operator, if
different from applicant.
   E.   Truck/trailer size to be used within the City, including: the license
plate number and registration information for any vehicle to be used in
conjunction with the licensed business and a description of the vehicle (make,
model and color).
   F.   Proof of any required State license for operation of a mobile food
unit.
   G.   All additional information deemed necessary by the City. (Ord. 190, 6-
27-2019)
4-10-6: LICENSE FEE:
All applications for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by the
fee set forth in the City fee schedule, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 190, 6-27-2019)
4-10-7: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; CONDITIONS:
   A.   Issuance: If the City determines that the applicant has satisfied all
of the requirements of this chapter, the City Clerk or the Clerk's designee
shall issue a license.
   B.   Mobile Food Unit Conditions: Mobile food units shall be subject to the
following conditions:
      1.   Locations: All mobile food units shall operate only in the following
locations:
         a.   Mobile food units may operate along public streets or public
rights-of-way.
         b.   Mobile food units may only operate on private property with the
written consent of the private property owner.
         c.   Mobile food units may only operate in a City park or on City
property with written consent by the City. (Ord. 190, 6-27-2019)
4-10-8: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All mobile food units are subject to the following performance standards:
   A.   Mobile food units shall comply with all applicable Federal, State and
local laws, ordinances, regulations, parking zones, and posted signs.
   B.   Proof of State and City licensing must be posted on the mobile food
unit.
   C.   Written permission from the property owner must be kept with the mobile
food unit and made immediately available upon request.
   D.   A mobile food unit may not operate on the same property more than seven
(7) consecutive days or twenty one (21) total days during any calendar year.
   E.   Mobile food units shall not operate between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. in Commercial or Industrial Districts and between
nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. in Residential Districts.
   F.   Mobile food units shall provide and maintain at least one clearly
designated waste container for customer use and locate it within five feet (5')
of the stand. All waste, garbage, litter and refuse shall be contained in leak
proof, nonabsorbent containers which shall be kept covered with tight-fitting
lids and properly disposed of. No waste, garbage, litter or refuse shall be
dumped or drained onto sidewalks, streets, gutters, storm drains, or public
trash receptacles. Licensee is responsible for daily removal of trash, litter,
recycling and refuse.
   G.   Mobile food units must dispose of its gray water. Gray water may not be
drained into City stormwater drains or disposed of in public trash cans.
   H.   Mobile food units must provide an independent power supply that is
screened from public view and that complies with City's noise regulations.
   I.   Mobile food units shall secure all propane tanks and provide adequate
ventilation.
   J.   A mobile food unit is not required to obtain a sign permit from the
City. However, no additional signage is permitted beyond that which is on the
mobile food unit unless it meets the following requirements:
      1.   One single sandwich board style sign is permitted per mobile food
unit;
      2.   The maximum sign size is eight (8) square feet;
      3.   The sign must be placed on the ground and within ten feet (10') of
the mobile food unit;
      4.   The sign must not be placed within the public right-of-way except
with the express written permission of the City; and
      5.   The sign cannot project from the mobile food unit or be mounted to
the roof of the mobile food unit.
   K.   A mobile food unit may have a maximum bumper to bumper length of no
more than thirty feet (30').
   L.   Mobile food units may not operate within the geographic area outlined
below during the Friday, Saturday, and Sunday of Fire Rescue Days unless
authorized by the event organizer to participate in the event.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c319d9474cf3d6d21aee248db1bb8796c21e98fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1755.jpg] 
(Ord. 190, 6-27-2019)
4-10-9: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
No mobile food unit shall conduct business in any of the following manners:
   A.   Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means
of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other
noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure.
   B.   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of- way.
   C.   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health,
safety and welfare of any individual or the general public.
   D.   Failing to provide proof of license and identification, when requested;
or using the license of another entity.
   E.   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service
being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No mobile food unit
shall claim to have the endorsement of the City solely based on the City having
issued a license to that entity.
   F.   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to
otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene,
threatening, intimidating or abusive. (Ord. 190, 6-27-2019)
CHAPTER 11
PAWNBROKERS AND PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS
SECTION:
4-11-1: Purpose
4-11-2: Definitions
4-11-3: License Required
4-11-4: Application Content
4-11-5: Application Execution
4-11-6: Application Verification
4-11-7: Application Consideration
4-11-8: Renewal Application
4-11-9: Fees
4-11-10: Bond Required
4-11-11: Persons And Locations Ineligible For A License
4-11-12: General License Restrictions
4-11-13: Restricted Transactions
4-11-14: Inspections
4-11-15: Restrictions Regarding License Transfer
4-11-16: Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of License
4-11-17: Penalty
4-11-1: PURPOSE:
The city council finds that the use of services provided by pawnbrokers and
precious metal dealers potentially provides an opportunity for the commission
of crimes and their concealment because such businesses have the ability to
receive and transfer stolen property easily and quickly. The city council also
finds that consumer protection regulation is warranted in transactions
involving pawnbrokers and precious metal dealers. The purpose of this chapter
is to prevent pawn and precious metal businesses from being used as facilities
for the commission of crimes and to assure that such businesses comply with
basic consumer protection standards, thereby protecting the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city.
To help the police department better regulate current and future pawn
businesses, decrease and stabilize costs associated with the regulation of the
pawn industry, and increase identification of criminal activities in the pawn
industry through the timely collection and sharing of pawn transaction
information, this chapter also implements and establishes the required use of
the automated pawn system (APS). (Ord. 236, 10-14-2021)
4-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms when used in this chapter shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
                Acceptable forms of identification are a current valid Minnesota driver's
ACCEPTABLE      license, a current valid Minnesota identification card, a current valid photo
IDENTIFICATION: driver's license, identification card issued by another state or province of
                Canada, or a current valid passport.
BILLABLE        Every reportable transaction conducted by a pawnbroker, except renewals,
TRANSACTIONS:   redemptions, or extensions of existing pawns on items previously reported and
                continuously in the licensee's possession is a billable transaction.
ISSUING         The city of Elko New Market.
AUTHORITY:
ITEM CONTAINING An item in whole or in part of metal and containing more than one percent (1%) by
PRECIOUS METAL: weight of silver, gold, or platinum.
                The person, corporation, partnership, or association to whom a license is issued
LICENSEE:       under this chapter, including any agents or employees of the person, corporation,
                partnership, or association.
MINOR:          Any natural person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
                Any person who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property or other
                valuable thing; who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other
                valuable thing on condition of selling that same back again at a stipulated
                price; or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage or on personal property,
PAWNBROKER:     taking possession of the property or any part thereof so mortgaged. To the extent
                that a pawnbroker business includes buying personal property previously used,
                rented, or leased, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable. Any bank,
                savings and loan association, credit union, consignment, used clothing, or
                bookshop shall not be deemed a pawnbroker for purposes of this chapter.
                Any one or more natural persons; a partnership, including a limited partnership;
PERSON:         a corporation, including a foreign, domestic, or nonprofit corporation; a trust;
                a political subdivision of the state; or any other business organization.
                Any person engaging in the business of buying secondhand items containing
                precious metal, including, but not limited to, jewelry, watches, eating utensils,
                candlesticks, and religious and decorative objects. Persons conducting the
                following transactions shall not be deemed to be precious metal dealers:
                A.   Transactions at occasional "garage" or "yard" sales, or estate sales or farm
                auctions held at the decedent's residence, except that precious metal dealers
                must comply with the requirements of Minnesota statutes, sections 325F.734 to
                325F.742, for these transactions;
                B.   Transactions regulated by Minnesota statutes, section 80A;
                C.   Transactions regulated by the federal commodity futures commission act;
                D.   Transactions involving the purchase of precious metal grindings, filings,
                slag, sweeps, scraps, or dust from an industrial manufacturer, dental lab,
                dentist, or agent thereof;
                E.   Transactions involving the purchase of photographic film, such as
                lithographic and x-ray film, or silver residue or flake recovered in lithographic
PRECIOUS METAL  and x-ray film processing;
DEALER:         F.   Transactions involving coins, bullion, or ingots;
                G.   Transactions in which the secondhand item containing precious metal is
                exchanged for a new item containing precious metal and the value of the new item
                exceeds the value of the secondhand item, except that a person who is a precious
                metal dealer by engaging in a transaction which is not exempted by this section
                must comply with the requirements of Minnesota statutes, sections 325F.734 to
                325F.742;
                H.   Transactions between precious metal dealers if both dealers are licensed
                under Minnesota statutes, section 325F.733, or if the seller's business is
                located outside of the state and the item is shipped from outside the state to a
                dealer licensed under Minnesota statutes, section 325F.733;
                I.   Transactions in which the buyer of the secondhand item containing precious
                metal is engaged primarily in the business of buying and selling antiques, and
                the items are resold in an unaltered condition except for repair, and the items
                are resold at retail, and the buyer paid less than two thousand five hundred
                dollars ($2,500.00) for secondhand items containing precious metals purchased
                within any period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
PRECIOUS        Silver, gold, or platinum.
METALS:
                Every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker in which merchandise is received
                through a pawn, purchase, consignment or trade, or in which a pawn is renewed,
                extended, or for which a unique transaction number or identifier is generated by
                their point-of-sale software, is reportable, except:
                A.   The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used merchandise from a merchant,
REPORTABLE      manufacturer, or wholesaler having an established permanent place of business,
TRANSACTION:    and the retail sale of said merchandise, provided the pawnbroker must maintain a
                record of such purchase or consignment which describes each item, and must mark
                each item in a manner which relates it to that transaction record.
                B.   Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally received by pawn or
                purchase, and for which all applicable hold and/or redemption periods have
                expired. (Ord. 236, 10-14-2021)
 
4-11-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall exercise, carry on, or be engaged in the trade or business of
pawnbroker or precious metal dealer within the city unless such person is
currently licensed under this chapter. (Ord. 236, 10-14-2021)
4-11-4: APPLICATION CONTENT:
   A.   Contents: In addition to any information that may be required by the
county pursuant to Minnesota statutes, section 471.924, every application for a
license under this chapter shall be made on a form supplied by the city and
shall contain the following information:
      1.   If the applicant is a natural person:
         a.   The name and date of birth, street residence address, and
telephone number of the applicant;
         b.   Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or a
resident alien;
         c.   Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name
other than the applicant's name, and if so, the name or names used and
information concerning dates and places where used;
         d.   The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a
designation, name, or style other than the name of the applicant and a
certified copy of the certificate as required by Minnesota statutes, section
333.01;
         e.   The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in
which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding five (5) years and
the name(s) and address(es) of the applicant's employer(s) and partner(s), if
any, for the preceding five (5) years;
         f.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, crime,
or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic or parking ordinance. If so,
the applicant must furnish information as to the time, place, and offense of
all such convictions;
         g.   The physical description of the applicant;
         h.   Minnesota Department of Revenue Tax Identification Form;
         i.   If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the
manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business and all information
concerning each of them required in subsections A1a through A1h of this
section.
      2.   If the applicant is a partnership:
         a.   The name(s) and address(es) of all general and limited partners
and all information concerning each general partner required in subsection A1
of this section;
         b.   The name(s) of managing partner(s) and the interest of each
partner in the pawnbroker or precious metal business;
         c.   A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with
the application. If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a
trade name pursuant to Minnesota statutes, section 333.01, a certified copy of
such certificate shall be attached to the application;
         d.   Minnesota Department of Revenue Tax Identification Form;
         e.   If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the
manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business and all information
concerning each of them required in subsections A1a through A1h of this
section.
      3.   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
         a.   The name of the corporation or business form, and if
incorporated, the state of incorporation;
         b.   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of
incorporation, or association agreement, and bylaws shall be attached to the
application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certificate of
authority as required by Minnesota statutes, section 303.06, shall be attached;
         c.   The name of the manager(s), proprietor(s), or other agent(s) in
charge of the business and all information concerning each manager, proprietor,
or agent required in subsections A1a through A1h of this section;
         d.   A list of all persons who control or own an interest in excess of
five percent (5%) in such organization or business form or who are officers of
the corporation or business form and all information concerning said persons
required in subsection A1 of this section.
      4.   For all applicants:
         a.   Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker, precious metal
dealer or secondhand goods dealer license from any other governmental unit;
         b.   Whether the applicant has previously been denied or had revoked
or suspended, a pawnbroker, precious metal dealer, or secondhand goods dealer
license from this or any other governmental unit;
         c.   The location of the business premises;
         d.   The legal description of the premises to be licensed;
         e.   The location at which the applicant's business records are
maintained;
         f.   If the applicant does not own the licensed premises, a true and
complete copy of the executed lease;
         g.   Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due
and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid,
the years and amounts that are unpaid;
         h.   Whenever the application is for premises either planned or under
construction or undergoing substantial alteration, the application shall be
accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the design of the proposed
premises to be licensed. If the plans or design are on file with the city
building/inspections department, no plans need be submitted to the issuing
authority;
         i.   Such other information as the city council or issuing authority
may require.
   B.   Manager/New Manager: When a licensee places a manager in charge of a
business, or if the named manager(s) in charge of a licensed business changes,
the dealer must complete and submit the appropriate application within fourteen
(14) days. The manager shall be subject to the investigation required by this
section, and to payment of the investigation fee required by this chapter,
which shall be paid in advance.
      1.   The designation of a new manager shall not cause the license to
become invalid before a decision is rendered, provided proper notice and
application are made by the applicant. A proposed new manager shall be referred
to as the interim manager. In the event an interim manager is rejected, the
licensee shall designate another interim manager and make the required
application within fifteen (15) days of the decision. If a proposed manager is
rejected, the decision may be appealed to the city council by filing a written
notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days after being notified
of the rejection. (Ord. 236, 10- 14-2021)
4-11-5: APPLICATION EXECUTION:
All applications for a license under this chapter shall be signed and sworn to
under oath or affirmation by applicant. If the application is that of a natural
person, it shall be signed and sworn to by such person; if that of a
corporation, by an officer thereof; if that of a partnership, by one of the
general partners; and if that of an unincorporated association, by the manager
or managing officer thereof. Any falsification on a license application shall
result in the denial of a license. (Ord. 236, 10-14-2021)
4-11-6: APPLICATION VERIFICATION:
All applications shall be referred to the police department for verification
and investigation of the facts set forth in the application. Within sixty (60)
days after receipt of a complete application, the police department shall make
a written report and recommendation to the city council as to issuance or
nonissuance of the license. The city council may order and conduct such
additional investigation as it deems necessary. If additional investigation is
necessary, the applicant shall pay the city the cost of the additional
investigation. The license shall not be issued until any additional
investigation costs are paid. (Ord. 236, 10-14-2021)
4-11-7: APPLICATION CONSIDERATION:
   A.   The city council shall, in its discretion, grant or deny the
application within thirty (30) days following receipt of the police
department's report and recommendation regarding the application.
   B.   If an application is granted for a location where a building is under
construction or not ready for occupancy, the license shall not be delivered to
the licensee until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the licensed
premises. (Ord. 236, 10-14-2021)
4-11-8: RENEWAL APPLICATION:
   A.   All licenses issued under this chapter shall be effective for one year
from the date of approval by the city council. An application for the renewal
of an existing license shall be made prior to the expiration date of the
license and shall be made in such form as the issuing authority requires. If,
in the judgment of the city council, good and sufficient cause is shown by the
applicant for the applicant's failure to submit a renewal application before
the expiration of the existing license, the city council may, if the other
provisions of this chapter are complied with, grant the renewal application.
   B.   A license under this chapter may not be renewed if the city council
determines that the licensee has failed to comply with the provisions of this
chapter in preceding license years. (Ord. 236, 10-14-2021)
4-11-9: FEES:
   A.   Investigation Fee: An applicant for any license under this chapter
shall pay the city in advance at the time an original application is submitted,
a nonrefundable investigation fee at a rate set by city council resolution to
cover the costs involved in verifying the license application and to cover the
expense of any investigation needed to assure compliance with this chapter.
   B.   License Fee:
      1.   The annual license fee shall be set by city council resolution. The
license fee shall be paid annually, to be determined from the date of issuance
of the license.
      2.   The annual license fee shall be paid in full before the license is
effective.
   C.   Billable Transaction Fees:
      1.   Licensees shall pay a monthly transaction fee on all billable
transactions. Such fee shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days.
Failure to timely pay the billable transaction fee shall constitute a violation
of this chapter.
      2.   The billable transaction fee shall reflect the cost of processing
transactions and other related regulatory expenses as determined and set by
city council resolution. Licensees shall be notified in writing thirty (30)
days before any adjustment is implemented. (Ord. 236, 10-14-2021)
4-11-10: BOND REQUIRED:
At the time of filing an application for a license, the applicant shall file a
bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with the city. The
bond, with a duly licensed surety company as surety thereon, must be approved
as to form by the city attorney. The bond must be conditioned on the licensee
observing all ordinances of the city and all laws relating to the business of
pawnbroker or precious metal dealer, and the licensee accounting for and
delivering to any person legally entitled thereto any articles which may have
come into the possession of the licensee as pawnbroker or precious metal
dealer, or in lieu thereof such licensee paying the person or persons the
reasonable value thereof. The bond shall contain a provision that it may not be
canceled without thirty (30) days' advance written notice to the licensing
authority. (Ord. 236, 10-14-2021)
4-11-11: PERSONS AND LOCATIONS INELIGIBLE FOR A LICENSE:
   A.   No license under this chapter shall be issued to an applicant who is a
natural person, a partnership if such applicant has any general partner or
managing partner, a corporation or other organization if such applicant has any
manager, proprietor or agent in charge of the business to be licensed, if the
applicant:
      1.   Is a minor at the time the application is filed;
      2.   Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation
licensed as prescribed by Minnesota statutes, section 364.03, subdivision 2,
and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present
fitness to perform the duties of a pawnbroker or precious metal dealer as
prescribed by Minnesota statutes, section 364.03, subdivision 3;
   B.   The following locations shall be ineligible for a license under this
chapter:
      1.   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any property
on which taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the state, county,
school district, or city are due, delinquent, or unpaid. In the event a suit
has been commenced under Minnesota statutes, sections 278.01 to 278.03,
questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the city council may on
application waive strict compliance with this provision; no waiver may be
granted, however, for taxes or any portion thereof which remain unpaid for a
period exceeding one year after becoming due.
      2.   No more than one (1) license shall be issued for each fifteen
thousand (15,000) population within the city as calculated by the most recent
decennial census or Metropolitan Council estimate of population in non-census
years.
      3.   No pawnbroker licensed under this chapter shall be located within
two (2) miles, as measured in a straight line from property line to property
line, of another licensed pawnbroker establishment. (Ord. 236, 10-14-2021)
4-11-12: GENERAL LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Records Required: At the time of any reportable transaction other than
renewals, extensions or redemptions, every licensee must immediately record in
English the following information by using ink or other indelible medium on
forms or in a computerized record approved by the police department:
      1.   Description Of Each Item: A complete and accurate description of
each item including, but not limited to, any trademark, identification number,
serial number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such an
item.
      2.   Purchase Price, Loan Or Pledge Amount: The purchase price, amount of
money loaned upon, or pledged therefor.
      3.   Transaction Information: The maturity date of the transaction and
the amount due, including monthly and annual interest rates and all pawn fees
and charges.
      4.   Transaction Identifiers: Date, time and place the item of property
was received by the licensee, and the unique alpha and/or numeric transaction
identifier that distinguishes it from all other transactions in the licensee's
records. Transaction identifiers must be consecutively numbered.
      5.   Personal Information: Full name, current residence address, current
residence telephone number, date of birth and accurate description of the
person from whom the item of the property was received, including: sex, height,
weight, race, color of eyes and color of hair.
      6.   Forms Of Identification: The identification number and state of
issue from an acceptable form of identification.
      7.   Signature: The signature of the person identified in the
transaction.
      8.   Color Photograph Or Color Video Recording: The licensee must also
take a color photograph or color video recording of:
         a.   Each customer involved in a billable transaction.
         b.   Every item pawned or sold that does not have a unique serial or
identification number permanently engraved or affixed.
         c.   If a photograph is taken, it must be at least two inches (2") in
length by two inches (2") in width and must be maintained in such a manner that
the photograph can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of
the transaction to which they relate. Such photographs must be available to the
chief of police, or the chief's designee, upon request. The major portion of
the photograph must include an identifiable front facial close-up of the person
who pawned or sold the item. Items photographed must be accurately depicted.
The licensee must inform the person that he or she is being photographed by
displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place in the premises. If
a video photograph is taken, the video camera must zoom in on the person
pawning or selling the item so as to include an identifiable close-up of that
person's face. Items photographed by video must be accurately depicted. Video
photographs must be electronically referenced by time and date so they can be
readily matched and correlated with all other records of the transaction to
which they relate. The licensee must inform the person that he or she is being
videotaped orally and by displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous
place on the premises. The licensee must keep the exposed videotape for three
(3) months, and furnish it to the police department upon request.
      9.   Digitized Photographs: Effective sixty (60) days from the date of
notification by the police department licensees must fulfill the color
photograph requirements in subsection A8 of this section by submitting them as
digital images, in a format specified by the issuing authority, electronically
cross referenced to the reportable transaction they are associated with.
Notwithstanding the digital images may be captured from required video
recordings, this provision does not alter or amend the requirements in
subsection A8 of this section.
      10.   Renewals, Extensions And Redemptions: For renewals, extensions, and
redemptions, the licensee shall provide the original transaction identifier,
the date of the current transaction, and the type of transaction.
   B.   Inspection Of Records: The pawnbroker or precious metal dealer shall
make available the information required in subsection A of this section at all
reasonable times for inspection by the Elko New Market police department or
issuing authority. Data entries shall be retained for at least three (3) years
from the date of transaction. Entries of required digital images shall be
retained a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) days.
   C.   Disposition Of Articles:
      1.   When an article of pawned or pledged property is redeemed from a
licensee, the records shall contain an account of such redemption with the
date, interest charges accrued, and the total amount for which the article was
redeemed.
      2.   When an article of purchased or forfeited property is sold or
disposed of by a licensee and the licensee receives one hundred dollars
($100.00) or more in the payment thereof, the records shall contain an account
of such sale with the date, the amount for which the article was sold, and the
full name, current address, and telephone number of the person to whom sold.
   D.   Daily Reports To Police:
         1.   Submit Reportable Transactions: Licensees must submit every
reportable transaction to the police department daily in the following manner:
            a.   Licensees must provide to the police department all
information required in subsections A1 through A6 of this section and other
required information, by transferring it from their computer to the automated
pawn system via modem. All required records must be transmitted completely and
accurately after the close of business each day in accordance with standards
and procedures established by the issuing authority using procedures that
address security concerns of the licensees and the issuing authority. The
licensee must display a sign of sufficient size, in a conspicuous place in the
premises, which informs all patrons that all transactions are reported to the
police department daily.
      2.   Billable Transaction Fees: Licensees will be charged for each
billable transaction reported to the police department:
         a.   If a licensee is unable to successfully transfer the required
reports by modem, the licensee must provide the police department printed
copies of all reportable transactions along with the videotape(s) for that
date, by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon the next business day;
         b.   If the problem is determined to be in the licensee's system and
is not corrected by the close of the first business day following the failure,
the licensee must provide the required reports as detailed in subsection D2a of
this section, and must be charged a fifty dollar ($50.00) reporting failure
penalty, daily, until the error is corrected; or
         c.   If the problem is determined to be outside the licensee's system,
the licensee must provide the required reports in subsection D2a of this
section, and resubmit all such transaction via modem when the error is
corrected;
         d.   If a licensee is unable to capture, digitize. or transmit the
photographs required in subsection A9 of this section, the licensee must
immediately take all required photographs with a still camera, cross reference
the photographs to the correct transaction, and make the pictures available to
the police department upon request;
         e.   Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical problems that
prevented the licensee from uploading their reportable transactions, upon
correction of the problem, the licensee shall upload every reportable
transaction from every business day the problem had existed;
         f.   Subsections D2a through D2c of this section notwithstanding, the
police department may, upon presentation of extenuating circumstances, delay
the implementation of the daily reporting penalty.
   E.   Receipt Required: Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party
identified in every reportable transaction and must maintain a duplicate of
that receipt for three (3) years. The receipt must include at least the
following information:
      1.   The name, address, and telephone number of the licensed business.
      2.   The date and time the item was received by the licensee.
      3.   Whether the item was pawned or sold, or the nature of the
transaction.
      4.   An accurate description of each item received including, but not
limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number,
brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item.
      5.   The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or employee that
conducted the transaction.
      6.   The amount advanced or paid.
      7.   The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees and
charges.
      8.   The last regular day of business by which the item must be redeemed
by the pledger without risk that the item will be sold, and the amount
necessary to redeem the pawned item on that date.
      9.   The full name, current residence address, current residence
telephone number, and date of birth of the pledger or seller.
      10.   The identification number and state of issue from an acceptable
form of identification.
      11.   Description of the pledger or seller including approximate sex,
height, weight, race, color of eyes, and color of hair.
      12.   The signature of the pledger or seller.
      13.   All printed statements as required by Minnesota statutes 325J.04,
subdivision 2 or any other applicable statutes.
   F.   Redemption Period: Any person pledging, pawning or depositing an item
for security must have a minimum of sixty (60) days from the date of that
transaction to redeem the item before it may be forfeited and sold. During the
sixty (60) day holding period, items may not be removed from the licensed
location except as provided in subsection
4-11-14A of this chapter. Licensees are prohibited from redeeming any item to
anyone other than the person to whom the receipt was issued or, to any person
identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem the property
identified in the receipt, or to a person identified in writing by the pledger
at the time of the initial transaction and signed by the pledger, or with
approval of the police license inspector. Written authorization for release of
property to persons other than original pledger must be maintained along with
original transaction record in accordance with subsection A10 of this section.
   G.   Holding Period: Any item purchased or accepted in trade by a licensee
must not be sold or otherwise transferred for thirty (30) days from the date of
the transaction. An individual may redeem an item seventy-two (72) hours after
the item was received on deposit, excluding Sundays and legal holidays.
   H.   Police Order To Hold Property:
      1.   Investigative Hold: Whenever a law enforcement official from any
agency notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or
removed from the premises. The investigative hold shall be confirmed in writing
by the originating agency within seventy-two (72) hours and will remain in
effect for fifteen (15) days from the date of initial notification, or until
the investigative order is canceled, or until an order to hold/confiscate is
issued, pursuant to subsection H2 of this section, whichever comes first.
      2.   Order To Hold: Whenever the chief of police, or the chief's
designee, notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or
removed from the licensed premises until authorized to be released by the chief
or the chief's designee. The order to hold shall expire ninety (90) days from
the date it is placed unless the chief of police or the chief's designee
determines the hold is still necessary and notifies the licensee in writing.
      3.   Order To Confiscate: If an item is identified as stolen or evidence
in a criminal case, the chief or chief's designee may:
         a.   Physically confiscate and remove it from the shop, pursuant to a
written order from the chief or the chief's designee, or
         b.   Place the item on hold or extend the hold as provided in
subsection H2 of this section, and leave it in the shop.
When an item is confiscated, the person doing so shall provide identification
upon request of the licensee, and shall provide the licensee the name and phone
number of the confiscating agency and investigator, and the case number related
to the confiscation.
When an order to hold/confiscate is no longer necessary, the chief of police,
or chief's designee shall so notify the licensee.
   I.   Label Required: Licensees must attach a label to every item at the time
it is pawned, purchased, or received in inventory from any reportable
transaction. Permanently recorded on this label must be the number or name that
identifies the transaction in the shop's records, the transaction date, the
name of the item and the description or the model and serial number of the item
as reported to the police department, whichever is applicable, and the date the
item is out of pawn or can be sold, if applicable. Labels shall not be reused.
   J.   License Display: A license issued under this chapter must be posted in
a conspicuous place in the premises for which it is used. The license issued is
only effective for the compact and contiguous space specified in the approved
license application.
   K.   Responsibility Of Licensee: A licensee under this chapter shall be
responsible for the conduct of the business being operated and shall maintain
conditions of order. The conduct of agents or employees of a licensee, engaged
in performance of duties for the licensee, shall be deemed the conduct of the
licensee.
   L.   Gambling: No licensee under this chapter may keep, possess, or operate,
or permit the keeping, possession, or operation on the licensed premises of
dice, slot machines, roulette wheels, punchboards, blackjack tables, or pinball
machines which return coins or slugs, chips, or tokens of any kind, which are
redeemable in merchandise or cash. No gambling equipment authorized under
Minnesota statutes, chapter 349, may be kept or operated and no raffles may be
conducted on the licensed premises and/or adjoining rooms. The purchase of
lottery tickets may take place on the licensed premises as authorized by the
director of the lottery pursuant to Minnesota statutes, chapter 349A.
   M.   Penalty For Property Owner: It is unlawful for any person who owns or
controls real property to knowingly permit it to be used for pawnbrokering or
dealing in precious metals without a license.
   N.   Premises: All property deposited, left, pledged, pawned, or held for
sale must be stored in an enclosed facility and may not be stored outside of
the premises. The city may, however, permit the licensee to designate one off
premises locked and secured facility in which the licensee may store only cars,
boats, and other motorized vehicles. The licensee shall permit immediate
inspection of the facility at any time during business hours by the city. All
provisions in this section regarding record keeping and reporting shall apply
to oversized items. All property shall be stored in compliance with zoning and/
or fire regulations and in an orderly manner. The premises shall also be
equipped with an operational security alarm.
   O.   Required Signage: All licensees shall by adequate signage and separate
written notice inform persons seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or deposit
articles of property with the licensee of the foregoing requirements.
      1.   For the purpose of this subsection, "adequate signage" shall be
deemed to mean at least one sign of not less than four (4) square feet in
surface area, comprised of lettering of not less than three-quarters (3/4) of
an inch in height, posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises and
stating substantially the following:
TO PAWN OR SELL PROPERTY:
YOU MUST BE AT LEAST 18 YEARS OF AGE.
YOU MUST BE THE TRUE OWNER OF THE PROPERTY.
THE PROPERTY MUST BE FREE OF ALL CLAIMS AND LIENS.
YOU MUST PRESENT VALID PHOTO IDENTIFICATION.
VIOLATION OF ANY OF THESE REQUIREMENTS IS A CRIME.
      2.   For the purpose of this subsection, "separate written notice" shall
be deemed to mean either the receipt, as required in subsection E of this
section, or a printed form, incorporating a statement to the effect that the
person pawning, pledging, selling, leaving, or depositing the article is at
least eighteen (18) years of age; is the true owner of the article; and that
the article is free of all claims and liens; which is acknowledged by way of
signature of the person pawning, pledging, selling, leaving, or depositing the
article. (Ord. 236, 10-14-2021)
4-11-13: RESTRICTED TRANSACTIONS:
   A.   Hours And Days Of Operation: No pawnbroker or precious metal dealer
shall keep the pawnbroker or precious metal dealer business open for the
transaction of business on any day of the week before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
or after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. No pawnbroker or precious metal dealer shall
be open for the transaction of business on Sundays.
   B.   Minors: No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may pawn or sell
or attempt to pawn or sell goods with any licensee, nor may any licensee
receive any goods from a person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
   C.   Incompetent Persons: A pawnbroker or precious metal dealer shall not
purchase or receive personal property on deposit or pledge from any incompetent
person or intoxicated person.
   D.   Prohibited Goods: No licensee under this chapter shall accept any item
of property which contains an altered or obliterated serial number or
"operation identification" number or any item of property whose serial number
has been removed.
   E.   Security Interest: No licensee nor any agent or employee of a licensee
shall purchase, accept, or receive any article of property knowing, or having
reason to know, that the article of property is encumbered by a security
interest. For the purpose of this section, "security interest" means an
interest in property which secures payment or other performance of an
obligation.
   F.   True Owner:
      1.   No licensee nor any agent or employee of a licensee shall purchase,
accept, or receive any article of property, from any person, knowing, or having
reason to know, that said person is not the true and correct owner of the
property.
      2.   No person may pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or deposit any article of
property not their own; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or
deposit the property of another, whether with permission or without; nor shall
any person pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or deposit any article of property in
which another has a security interest; with any licensee.
   G.   Proper Identification:
      1.   No licensee nor any agent or employee of a licensee shall purchase,
accept, or receive any article of property, from any person, unless the seller
presents an acceptable form of identification.
      2.   No person may pawn, pledge, sell, leave or deposit any article of
property with any licensee without first having presented an acceptable form of
identification.
   H.   Payment By Check: Payment of more than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) by a licensee for any article deposited, left, purchased, pledged or
pawned shall be made only by a check, draft, or other negotiable or
nonnegotiable instrument which is drawn against funds held by a financial
institution. This policy must be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises.
   I.   Restrictions On Sale: Pawnbrokers and precious metal dealers shall
suspend for one year, any business transaction with any person who has sold
and/or forfeited on six (6) previous occasions articles for which the person
received twenty five dollars ($25.00) or more per transaction within a single
six (6) month period.
   J.   False Identification: No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign,
leave, or deposit any article of property with any licensee shall give a false
or fictitious name; nor give a false date of birth; nor give a false or out of
date address of residence or telephone number; nor present a false or altered
identification, or the identification of another; to any licensee.
   K.   General Restrictions For Pawnbrokers: No pawnbroker licensed under this
chapter shall:
      1.   Lend money on a pledge at a rate of interest above that allowed by
law;
      2.   Knowingly possess stolen goods;
      3.   Sell pledged goods before the time to redeem has expired;
      4.   Refuse to disclose to the city, after having sold pledged goods, the
name of the purchaser or the price for which the item sold.
   L.   General Restrictions For Precious Metal Dealers: No precious metal
dealer licensed under this chapter shall knowingly possess stolen goods. (Ord.
236, 10- 14-2021)
4-11-14: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Premises: Any licensee shall, at all times during the term of the
license, allow the police department to enter the premises, where the licensee
is carrying on business, including all off site storage facilities as
authorized in subsection
4-11-12N of this chapter, during normal business hours, except in an emergency,
for the purpose of inspecting such premises and inspecting the articles and
records therein to locate goods suspected or alleged to have been stolen and to
verify compliance with this chapter or other applicable laws.
   B.   Inspection By Police Or Claimed Owner: All articles of property coming
into the possession of any licensee shall be open to inspection and right of
examination of any police officer or any person claiming to have been the owner
thereof or claiming to have had an interest therein when such person is
accompanied by a police officer. (Ord. 236, 10-14-2021)
4-11-15: RESTRICTIONS REGARDING LICENSE TRANSFER:
Each license under this chapter shall be issued to the applicant only and shall
not be transferable to any other person. No licensee shall loan, sell, give, or
assign a license to another person. (Ord. 236, 10-14-2021)
4-11-16: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   The city council may deny, suspend or revoke a license issued under
this chapter upon one or more of the following reasons:
      1.   The proposed use does not comply with the city's zoning ordinance;
      2.   The proposed use does not comply with any health, building, building
maintenance or other applicable provisions of the city code or state or federal
law;
      3.   The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with one or more
provisions of this chapter;
      4.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or bribery in securing or renewing a
license;
      5.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the application
and investigation for, or in the course of, the applicant's business;
      6.   The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or resident
alien, or upon whom it is impractical or impossible to conduct a background or
financial investigation due to the unavailability of information;
      7.   Violation of any law relating to theft, damage or trespass to
property, sale of a controlled substance, or operation of a business;
      8.   The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not
qualify for a license under the terms of this chapter.
   B.   A revocation or suspension by the city council shall be preceded by
written notice to the licensee and a public hearing. The written notice shall
give at least ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing and
shall state the nature of the charges against the pawnbroker. The notice may be
served upon the pawnbroker personally or by United States mail addressed to the
most recent address of the business in the license application. (Ord. 236, 10-
14-2021)
4-11-17: PENALTY:
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 236,
10-14-2021)
TITLE 5
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
Garbage And Refuse   1
Collectors Of Garbage And Refuse   1A
Open Burning   2
Weeds   3
Tree Diseases   4
Noise Control   5
Abandoned Property   6
Abandoned, Junk Vehicles   6A
CHAPTER 1
GARBAGE AND REFUSE 1
SECTION:
5-1-1: Definitions
5-1-2: Collection Of Garbage And Refuse Required
5-1-3: Recycling Opportunity
5-1-4: City Options For Service
5-1-5: Container Requirements
5-1-6: Multi-Family And Nonresidential Customers
5-1-7: Unauthorized Private Collections Prohibited
5-1-8: Removal Of Waste From Building Operations Or General Cleanup
5-1-9: Prohibited Acts
5-1-10: Collection Of Leaves, Trees And Limbs
5-1-11: Manner Of Collection And Transportation
5-1-12: Violation; Penalties
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  11-4-3 of this code.
5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases have the following
meanings:
ASSOCIATION: All cooperative organizations of residential dwelling owners
formed for the purpose of joint management of property or services.
COLLECTION: The aggregation of mixed municipal solid waste from the place at
which it is generated and includes all activities up to the time the waste is
delivered to a waste facility.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS: Waste building materials, packaging, and rubble resulting
from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition of buildings and roads.
GARBAGE: Animal, vegetable, or other putrescible wastes, but excluding human
excreta, sewage, or other forms of water carried wastes.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: The following waste from an industrial or manufacturing
business that is managed as a separate waste stream: ash, sand, wood waste,
contaminated soil, organic resin, and food waste from manufacturing; paper
waste from manufacturing; empty containers, printed circuit boards, ink and
sludge.
MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE: Garbage, refuse and other solid waste from
residential, commercial, industrial and community activities that the generator
of the waste aggregates for collection, but does not include auto hulks, street
sweeping, ash, construction debris, mining waste, sludges, tree and
agricultural wastes, tires, lead acid batteries, used oil, and other materials
collected, processed and disposed of as separate waste streams.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL: Material that can be readily separated from mixed
municipal solid waste for the purpose of recycling, including, but not limited
to, paper, glass, plastics, metals, automobile oil and batteries. Recyclable
materials that have been separated from the waste stream, processed, and sold
or given away for reuse are no longer considered waste.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL CONTAINER: A curbside recycling container owned by the city
or a licensed waste hauler and provided to the resident for the purpose of
collection and disposal of recyclable material.
REFUSE: Solid wastes such as nonrecyclable glass, crockery, cans, paper, boxes,
and rags, but excluding ashes, sand, earth, brick, stone, concrete, trees, tree
branches and wood.
RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY: Structures, machinery, or devices which, singly or
in combination, are designed, constructed, and operated so as to separate,
process, connect, treat, or prepare collected solid waste in such a manner that
component materials, substances, or recoverable resources may be used as a raw
material or for other productive purposes.
SPECIAL PICK UP: Any collection of materials other than mixed municipal solid
waste, recyclable material or yard waste including white goods, furniture,
oversized materials, construction debris, and other materials collected,
processed, and disposed of as separate waste streams.
TARGETED RECYCLABLE MATERIAL: Metal beverage containers, tin cans, glass,
newsprint, plastic containers with a neck, and corrugated cardboard, magazines,
or other materials that may be designated by resolution of the city council.
YARD WASTE: Organic materials consisting of grass clippings, leaves and other
forms of organic garden waste, prunings, tree waste, and fresh cut Christmas
trees and boughs, but excluding garden vegetables and materials that are not
readily compostible within a calendar year. (Ord. 12, 10-11-2007, eff. 1-1-
2008)
5-1-2: COLLECTION OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Collection Contract: Every household and commercial/industrial
establishment in the city must be under a contract for the collection of
garbage and refuse with a licensed garbage hauler by January 1, 2008. A
household in a multi-dwelling property is considered to be under a garbage
collection contract if the owner, association, or management entity has a
contract with a licensed garbage hauler.
   B.   Exemptions From Contract: A household or commercial/industrial
establishment may be exempt from the requirement to be under a garbage and
refuse contract if the household or commercial/industrial establishment hauls
garbage or refuse from its own residence or business property and complies with
the standards set forth in section
 5-1A-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 12, 10-11-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
5-1-3: RECYCLING OPPORTUNITY:
All residents of multiple dwelling properties shall have an opportunity to
recycle. Owners, associations, or other management entities of any multiple/
residential dwelling properties shall provide the opportunity to recycle on the
property to the residents by January 1, 2008. The recycling opportunity shall
include the collection of all targeted recyclables. (Ord. 12, 10-11-2007, eff.
1-1-2008)
5-1-4: CITY OPTIONS FOR SERVICE:
The city council may provide for sanitation collection services within the city
by use of city employees and vehicles, or it may grant licenses under the terms
and conditions of article A of this chapter, or it may contract with one or
more contractors for the provision of these services under the terms and
conditions negotiated with the contractors; except, that the provisions for
insurance under section
 5-1A-5 of this chapter shall always apply. (Elko 2004 Code § 50.07)
5-1-5: CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Container Required; Specifications: It shall be the duty of every
person whose garbage and refuse is collected by the sanitation collection
service to provide a container or containers for garbage and refuse, sufficient
in size and number to accommodate and securely keep all garbage and refuse that
may accumulate between collections. Garbage containers shall be watertight and
constructed of a solid and durable grade of metal, plastic, or paper material.
   B.   Placement For Collection: It shall be the duty of every person whose
garbage and refuse is collected by the sanitation collection service to place
his garbage containers directly behind the curb line of the street abutting his
property or, in the absence of a curb, directly behind the ditch line abutting
his property. In no event shall containers be placed in the street or on the
sidewalk or in any manner placed where the containers will interfere with
vehicular or pedestrian traffic. It shall be the responsibility of the
subscriber to place the containers no earlier than six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of
the afternoon preceding the collection day. (Elko 2004 Code § 50.03)
   C.   Sanitary And Secure Conditions: All containers shall be kept clean and
free from accumulation of any substance remaining attached to the inside of the
container which would attract or breed flies, mosquitoes, or other insects. The
area surrounding garbage containers shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition. The contents of all receptacles shall be protected so that the wind
cannot scatter the contents over the streets, alleys or other property within
the city. All containers shall be securely closed in a manner as to prevent the
scattering of the contents and to make them inaccessible to insects, rodents
and other animals. (Elko 2004 Code § 50.05)
   D.   Tampering With Containers Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to meddle
with garbage cans, trash or rubbish receptacles or in any way pilfer, search
through or scatter contents of garbage cans or rubbish receptacles in or upon
any street or alley within the city limits. This subsection shall not apply to
persons authorized by the city or persons authorized by state or federal law to
search through or otherwise meddle with trash receptacles. (Elko 2004 Code §
50.04)
5-1-6: MULTI-FAMILY AND NONRESIDENTIAL CUSTOMERS:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the owner or person otherwise in charge of
multi-family, commercial, institutional or industrial premises within the city
to cause all garbage and trash accumulated on the premises to be placed in
disposable containers or commercial type containers. Commercial type containers
may be used and may be placed at a location on the premises as arranged between
the customer and the collector but subject to review by the city at any time.
Disposable containers shall be placed at a location on the premises which is
readily accessible to the collector. (Elko 2004 Code § 50.11; amd. 2011 Code)
   B.   The amount and character of garbage shall be considered in establishing
the size of commercial containers and the frequency of pick up. The city shall
have final authority to establish the size and frequency based on the history
of amount and type of garbage generated by the customer. (Elko 2004 Code §
50.11)
   C.   The collection and removal of garbage and trash from premises used for
multi-family, commercial, institutional, or industrial purposes shall be made
as often as necessary in order to maintain the premises free of accumulations.
Garbage, except dry trash in contractor supplied containers, shall be collected
not less than one time each week, except for roll- off containers which shall
not be subject to this provision so long as they are used solely for brush and
dry trash. (Elko 2004 Code § 50.11; amd. 2011 Code)
5-1-7: UNAUTHORIZED PRIVATE COLLECTIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport garbage or refuse for hire
which has been collected from any premises within the city over any public
street within the city. This section shall not apply to any person who, at the
time of the activity, is operating under a valid contract or franchise granted
by the city which authorizes that person to use the public streets to conduct
that activity. (Elko 2004 Code § 50.06)
5-1-8: REMOVAL OF WASTE FROM BUILDING OPERATIONS OR GENERAL CLEANUP:
Waste from building operations, rock waste, building materials or other refuse
resulting from building or remodeling operations or resulting from a general
cleanup of vacant or improved property shall be removed by the building
contractor, owner or occupant of the building at his or her own expense. It
shall be unlawful for any person to place those materials in any dumpster or
other trash receptacle for disposal by the city or any agent or contractor of
the city. (Elko 2004 Code § 50.09)
5-1-9: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw or deposit any
garbage, trash, debris, stagnant water or dead animal into, upon or along any
public property or private property of another, except as may be specifically
provided by this chapter.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or otherwise in control of
any premises within the city to permit any of the conditions described in
subsection A of this section to exist upon property owned or controlled by him
or her after having actual or constructive notice thereof.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to place in any container any
material other than as specifically provided in this chapter.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or maintain garbage or
trash except as provided by this chapter.
   E.   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any burning match,
charcoal, ember, or other material in any container used for the disposal of
garbage. (Elko 2004 Code § 50.10)
   F.   It is unlawful for any person to remove any refuse from a receptacle
other than the refuse haulers or persons having the consent of the owner or
occupant of the property served or law enforcement agencies in pursuit of
evidence. (New Market 2004 Code § 4-1-9)
5-1-10: COLLECTION OF LEAVES, TREES AND LIMBS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the collection for hire
by other persons of leaves, trees or tree limbs. (Elko 2004 Code § 50.14)
5-1-11: MANNER OF COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION:
   A.   The collection, removal and disposal of all garbage, trash and brush
shall be carried on in a systematic, efficient manner to keep the city in a
clean and sanitary condition.
   B.   All vehicles used for the collection and transportation of garbage and
trash shall be equipped with suitable covers which shall be used to prevent
blowing or scattering of refuse while garbage and trash are being transported
for disposal. (Elko 2004 Code § 50.12)
5-1-12: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person convicted of violating this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment, or both, as
specified by state statute.
   B.   Any licensed collector that accumulates three (3) documented violations
of this chapter shall have its license revoked. A collector with a revoked
license may seek review and hearing by the city council by initiating such
proceedings with the city clerk 1 . (Ord. 12, 10-11-2007)
EL836   5-1A.txt
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  5-1A-11 of this chapter.
ARTICLE A. COLLECTORS OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
5-1A-1: License Required; Exemptions
5-1A-2: Application For License
5-1A-3: Investigation Of Applicant; Approval Of License
5-1A-4: License Fees; Issuance Or Denial Of License
5-1A-5: Insurance Requirements
5-1A-6: Term Of License
5-1A-7: Limitation On Number Of Licenses
5-1A-8: No Vested Rights In License
5-1A-9: Hauling And Disposal Conditions For Exempt Persons
5-1A-10: Collection Regulations
5-1A-11: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
5-1A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
No person or entity shall haul mixed municipal solid waste or recyclables in
the city without first securing a license from the city. A license under this
article is not required for the following:
   A.   Collecting industrial waste.
   B.   Collecting food waste to feed farm animals.
   C.   Nonprofit organizations collecting recyclable materials.
   D.   Collecting household appliances.
   E.   Collecting construction debris. (Ord. 12, 10-11-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
5-1A-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An applicant for a license shall make application to the city through forms and
procedures prescribed by the city. The application for a license shall contain
the following information: (Ord. 12, 10-11-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
   A.   Applicant's name, current business address, business phone, fax and e-
mail. (Ord. 115, 11-20-2014)
   B.   The type of license requested.
   C.   A list of the equipment which is proposed to be used in such
collection, including information about the number, type, license number, and
capacity of the collection vehicles and equipment to be used in the city.
   D.   The place or places to which the mixed municipal solid waste and/or
recyclable material is to be hauled.
   E.   A description of the services to be rendered, including a brief
description of how the applicant will comply with the provisions of section
5-1A-10 of this article.
   F.   Fees which are required for collections and conditions attached to such
collection.
   G.   List of recyclables to be collected at curbside and the method of
preparation which is preferred.
   H.   Certificate of insurance. (Ord. 12, 10-11-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
   I.   Recyclable material report from the previous year which must be
submitted prior to issuance of the mixed municipal solid waste and recyclable
collectors license. (Ord. 115, 11-20-2014)
5-1A-3: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; APPROVAL OF LICENSE:
The application shall be submitted to the city clerk for investigation and
report. If the city clerk finds that the applicant is responsible and has
proper equipment for such collection and that no nuisance is liable to be
created by the granting of the license, the city clerk shall endorse approval
upon the application. (Ord. 12, 10-11-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
5-1A-4: LICENSE FEES; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
Before any license may be issued, the applicant shall pay to the clerk a
license fee in an amount established by the city council, which fee shall
accompany the application. The city clerk shall issue licenses only after
receipt and review of all required forms, certificates and fees. Upon review of
the documents submitted, the city clerk shall issue a license if the documents
comply with the provisions of this article. An applicant denied a license by
the city clerk may have the decision reviewed by the city council. The
applicant shall request review by the city council in writing within ten (10)
days after denial of the license. (Ord. 12, 10-11-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
5-1A-5: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
An applicant must obtain all of the insurance required by this section. All
costs and expenses are the responsibility of the applicant. All insurance
coverage is subject to approval by the city and shall be maintained by the
licensee during the term of the license. No work under the license shall be
commenced until the requirements of this section have been satisfied.
   A.   The licensee shall obtain and maintain statutory workers' compensation
insurance and employer's liability insurance, as required under the laws of the
state of Minnesota. In the event the licensee is a sole proprietor and has not
elected to provide workers' compensation insurance, the licensee shall be
required to execute and submit an affidavit of sole proprietorship in a form
satisfactory to the city.
   B.   The licensee shall obtain and maintain the following minimum coverage
for comprehensive general liability (including premises-operations, independent
contractors' protective; products and completed operations; and broad form
property damage):
Bodily injury:
 
$1,000,000.00 per occurrence
1,000,000.00 product and completed operations
 
Property damage:
 
$1,000,000.00 per occurrence
 
   C.   The licensee shall obtain and maintain the following minimum insurance
coverage for personal injury liability (with employment related exclusion
deleted): One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence.
   D.   The licensee shall obtain and maintain the following minimum insurance
coverage for comprehensive automobile liability (owned, nonowned, hired):
Bodily injury:
 
$1,000,000.00 per person
1,000,000.00 per occurrence
 
Property damage:
 
$1,000,000.00 per occurrence
 
   E.   Insurance certificates evidencing that the insurance required by this
section is in force with companies acceptable and licensed in the state of
Minnesota, and in amounts required, shall be submitted for examination and
approval prior to the execution of the license. Thereafter, the certificates
shall be filed with the city. The insurance certificates shall specifically
provide that a certificate shall not be modified, canceled or nonrenewed except
upon thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the city. Neither the city's
failure to require or insist upon certificates or other evidence tending to
show a variance from the coverages specified in this section shall change a
licensee's responsibility to comply with these insurance requirements. (Ord.
115, 11-20-2014)
5-1A-6: TERM OF LICENSE:
The license shall be valid for one calendar year and shall expire on December
31 of each year unless revoked sooner. (Ord. 12, 10-11-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
5-1A-7: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF LICENSES:
A limitation on the number of mixed municipal solid waste or recyclable
material collectors in the city is necessary for the following reasons: proper
inspection and control is more difficult as the number of collectors increases;
more trucks use more fuel, create wear and tear on city streets, and create
more pollution and noise; more collectors create an increased risk to public
safety, decrease efficiency, and increase rates and energy costs. No more than
three (3) licenses may be in force at any time. (Ord. 84, 12-1-2011)
5-1A-8: NO VESTED RIGHTS IN LICENSE:
No hauler licensed pursuant to this article shall acquire a vested right in the
license. The city may, upon finding that public necessity so requires,
establish other means of refuse collection. (Ord. 12, 10-11-2007, eff. 1-1-
2008)
5-1A-9: HAULING AND DISPOSAL CONDITIONS FOR EXEMPT PERSONS:
The license requirements of this article shall not apply to persons who haul
recyclables, yard waste or mixed municipal solid waste from their own
residences or business properties; provided, that they are disposed of in an
environmentally sound manner by meeting the following conditions:
   A.   Garbage is hauled in a timely manner such that it does not accumulate
and become a nuisance as defined under this code.
   B.   Garbage is hauled in containers equipped with tightfitting covers and
which are also watertight on all sides and the bottom.
   C.   Refuse and recyclables are hauled in a manner that prevents leakage or
any possibility of a loss of cargo.
   D.   Garbage and refuse is only dumped or unloaded at a designated sanitary
landfill, municipal solid waste composting facility, resource recovery facility
or other facilities authorized by the county.
   E.   Recyclables are only dumped or unloaded at a recycling facility,
through an organized recycling drive, or through licensed collectors.
   F.   Yard waste is privately composted, or is only dumped or unloaded at a
composting facility authorized by the county, or through a licensed collector.
   G.   Items excluded in mixed municipal solid waste shall be collected,
processed, and disposed of according to state and county laws. (Ord. 12, 10-11-
2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
5-1A-10: COLLECTION REGULATIONS:
Licensed mixed municipal solid waste collectors shall comply with the following
collection regulations. Failure to observe these provisions may be a basis for
suspension or revocation of a license.
   A.   Duty To Collect; Number Of Collections: It shall be the duty of each
licensed mixed municipal solid waste collector to haul away once each week to
such places as designated in the license application all mixed municipal solid
waste from premises located within the area in which he is authorized to
collect mixed municipal solid waste.
   B.   Vehicle Requirements: Each licensed mixed municipal solid waste or
recyclable material collector shall use collection trucks that are properly
licensed and inspected by the state. The trucks shall be kept clean and as free
from offensive odors as possible, and shall not be allowed to stand in any
street, alley, or public place longer than is reasonably necessary to collect
mixed municipal solid waste and recyclable material. (Ord. 12, 10-11-2007, eff.
1-1-2008)
   C.   Days And Hours Of Collection 1 : No collections of mixed municipal
solid waste or recyclable material shall be made except between the hours of
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., Wednesday and Friday.
Operations during these hours may also be conducted on Thursday to accommodate
recognized national holidays or a "special pick up" as defined in section
5-1-1 of this chapter. Pick ups on Saturdays may occur only when a recognized
national holiday occurs on a Friday. Customers shall be reasonably notified of
the specific day and hours of the collection of their mixed municipal solid
waste and/or recyclables, and the licensee shall collect the materials within
those time periods. (Ord. 17, 1-24-2008)
   D.   Refusal To Collect: The collector may refuse to make collections from
any premises when the fees are not paid within one month from the date such
mixed municipal solid waste or recyclable material is collected. The collector
shall notify the city clerk of the discontinuance of service to any premises
within one week after service is discontinued. (Ord. 12, 10-11-2007, eff. 1-1-
2008)
   E.   Collecting Recyclable Materials Required: It shall be the duty of each
licensed mixed municipal solid waste collector to haul away bimonthly, on the
same day as mixed municipal solid waste service, to such places as designated
in their license application, the targeted recyclable materials from residences
with individual curbside mixed municipal solid waste containers within the area
in which they are authorized to collect mixed municipal solid waste and
recyclable material. Each licensed mixed municipal solid waste and recyclable
material collector shall do the same from residences of those who occupy
multiple-family (apartment) dwellings. The costs of collecting recyclable
material shall be included in the general pricing scheme for collection of
mixed municipal solid waste and recyclable material. (Ord. 84, 12-1-2011)
   F.   Recyclable Material Report: It shall be the duty of each licensed mixed
municipal solid waste and recyclable material collector and nonprofit
organization collecting recyclable material to provide the city with an annual
report from the previous year on quantity and type of all material recycled
within the city. The city reserves the right to request a copy of weight slips
obtained from each recyclable purchaser or other documentation satisfactory to
the city verifying that the collector is delivering recyclable materials to a
state approved recycling facility. Failure to provide the foregoing
documentation may be cause for revocation of the license. (Ord. 115, 11-20-
2014)
   G.   Necessary City Approval To Landfill Or Incinerate Recyclables: It shall
be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of collecting recyclable
material to landfill or incinerate collected recyclable material without
approval from the city.
   H.   Yard Waste:
      1.   Christmas Tree Collection: Each collector shall pick up Christmas
trees at no cost to the city or its residents in January and shall work with
the city to notify residents of the specific date(s) for collection. (Ord. 12,
10-11-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
      2.   Yard Waste Pick Up:
         a.   Regular: Each collector will collect leaves on two (2) dates (1
in the spring and 1 in the fall on dates agreed upon with city) at no cost to
the city or the collector's customers and will work with the city to notify
residents of the specific date(s) for collection. These dates shall coincide
with the city's annual recycling days. Yard waste must be placed in paper
compostable bags or bundled as brush and shall be limited to a combination of
six (6) bags or bundles. (Ord. 84, 12-1-2011)
         b.   Special: Each collector may provide additional yard waste pick
ups and will be responsible for billing residents directly and collecting all
service charges and fees for additional yard waste pick ups.
      3.   Manner Of Collection: Each collector shall segregate yard waste
materials from other solid waste materials. Collectors shall not mix other
types of waste or refuse or inorganic materials with the yard waste or take any
action so as to make the yard waste unacceptable at a compost facility
satisfactory to the city.
      4.   Disposal: Each collector shall weigh, transport, and dispose of each
load of material. Disposal of the material shall be to a licensed facility
approved by the city for composting.
   I.   Changes In License Information; Notice To City: The licensee shall
operate in a manner consistent with its application materials and shall provide
notice to the city within ten (10) days of any changes in information, forms or
certificates filed as a part of the license application process, except for the
thirty (30) day notice required by subsection
5-1A-5E of this article. (Ord. 12, 10-11-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
   J.   Minimum Service; Rate Structure: Residential mixed municipal solid
waste and recyclable material collector rates shall include a minimum of three
(3) levels of regular service, priced on the basis of volume, with a rate
structure designed to encourage reduction, reusage, and recycling. The rate
structure shall increase with the volume of the waste collected. Residential
mixed municipal solid waste and recyclable material collectors are prohibited
from imposing a greater charge on residents who recycle than on residents who
do not recycle. Upon request of the city, the licensee shall produce a copy of
the collection rate structure. (Ord. 115, 11-20-2014)
   K.   Deposit At A Resource Recovery Center: (Rep. by Ord. 84, 12-1-2011)
   L.   Compliance With Laws: The licensee shall comply with all state, county,
and local laws and regulations. (Ord. 12, 10-11-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  5-5-2B of this title.
5-1A-11: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE 1 :
The city council may suspend or revoke the license of any person whose conduct
is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article. Suspension or
revocation also may be based on other health, safety, and welfare concerns
arising out of the performance of the licensee, its employees, agents, and/or
vehicles and equipment. Revocation or suspension of a license by the city
council shall be preceded by a public hearing. The city council may appoint a
hearing examiner or may conduct the hearing itself. The hearing notice shall be
given at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, include notice of the time
and place of the hearing, and state the nature of the charges against the
licensee. (Ord. 12, 10-11-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
EL8386   5-2
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  5-1-12B of this chapter.
CHAPTER 2
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
5-2-1: Purpose
5-2-2: Definitions
5-2-3: Recreational Fires
5-2-4: Open Burning Prohibited; Exemptions
5-2-5: Burning Permit Requirements
5-2-6: Burning Ban Or Air Quality Alert
5-2-7: Misdemeanor Violation
5-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish permitted categories of open
burning events within the city and to provide for a permitting process for open
burning. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-1-2)
5-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CAMPFIRE: A fire set for cooking, warming, or ceremonial purposes, which is not
more than three feet (3') in diameter by three feet (3') high, and has had the
ground five feet (5') from the base of the fire cleared of all combustible
material.
COMMERCIAL FIRE PIT: A commercially manufactured appliance equipped with a lid
and a spark arresting screen.
OPEN FIRE OR OPEN BURNING: A fire burning in matter, whether concentrated or
dispersed, which is not contained within a fully enclosed firebox, structure or
vehicle, and from which the products of combustion are emitted directly to the
open atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct, or chimney.
RECREATIONAL FIRE: See definition of Campfire.
STARTER FUELS: Dry, untreated, unpainted wood or charcoal fire starter.
Paraffin candles and alcohols are permitted as "starter fuels" and as aids to
ignition only. Propane gas torches or other clean gas burning devices causing
minimal pollution must be used to start an open fire.
WOOD: Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, presto logs,
charcoal, cordwood or untreated dimensional lumber. "Wood" does not include
wood that is green, with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked, or treated
with paint, glue or preservatives. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-1-2; amd. New
Market Ord. 178, 7-13-2005)
5-2-3: RECREATIONAL FIRES:
   A.   Recreational Fire Sites: A "recreational fire site" is an area of no
more than a three foot (3') diameter circle (measured from the inside of the
fire ring or border) and completely surrounded by noncombustible and nonsmoke
or odor producing material, either of natural rock, cement, brick, tile or
block of ferrous metal only and which area is depressed belowground, on the
ground or on a raised bed. Included are permanent outdoor, wood burning
fireplaces. Recreational fire sites shall not be located closer than thirty
feet (30') to any structure. Burners or burn barrels are prohibited and are not
"recreational fire sites" as defined in this subsection.
   B.   Recreational Fire Burn: When a campfire or commercial fire pit is used
for recreation purposes, it must be ignited with an approved starter fluid
using dry, clean wood; producing little detectable smoke, odor or soot beyond
the property line; conducted with an adult tending the fire at all times;
extinguished completely before quitting the occasion; and respecting weather
conditions, neighbors, burning bans, and air quality so that nuisance, health,
or safety hazards will not be created. Mobile cooking devices such as
manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood smokers, and propane or natural
gas devices are not defined as "campfires" or "recreational fires".
   C.   Commercial Fire Pits: Commercial fire pits must be used in outdoor
locations and constructed of ferrous metal or approved, noncombustible
materials. Such commercial fire pits may be no more than thirty six inches
(36") in diameter and must be located at least ten feet (10') from all cars or
occupied structures and ten feet (10') from combustible walls, decks, roofs or
other combustible materials and structures. (New Market Ord. 178, 7-13-2005)
5-2-4: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   From and after the effective date hereof, except as herein otherwise
provided, open burning shall be prohibited within the city. Open burning of the
types and subject to the conditions as hereinafter stated shall be exempt from
the prohibition of this subsection: (New Market 2004 Code § 5-1-2)
      1.   Campfires and recreational fires, including commercial fire pits.
(New Market Ord. 178, 7-13-2005)
      2.   Fires under managed supervision for which a burning permit has been
obtained from the city and where required by state law from the department of
natural resources, but limited to the following:
         a.   Fires purposely set for the instruction and training of public
and industrial firefighting personnel.
         b.   Fires purposely set for forest and game management purposes.
   B.   Exemption to conduct fires under this section does not excuse a person
from the consequences, damages or injuries which may result from the fire nor
does it exempt any person from regulations promulgated by the Minnesota
pollution control agency or any other governmental unit exercising jurisdiction
in matters of pollution or fire hazard regulation.
   C.   Fire training permits can only be issued by the Minnesota department of
natural resources (DNR) forest officers.
   D.   No fire may be allowed to smolder with no flame present. (New Market
2004 Code § 5-1-2)
5-2-5: BURNING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall start or allow any open burning on any
property in the city without first having obtained an open burning permit. Open
burning permits for campfires, recreational fires and commercial fire pits may
be issued on an annual basis for a single property address. (New Market Ord.
178, 7-13-2005)
   B.   Application For Permit: Open burning permits shall be obtained by
making application on a form prescribed by the DNR and adopted by the city. The
permit application shall be presented to that city staff person designated by
the city administrator for reviewing and processing said applications.
   C.   Revocation Of Permit: The open burning permit is subject to revocation
at the discretion of a DNR forest/conservation officer, the city fire chief or
the city fire warden. Reasons for revocation include, but are not limited to: a
fire hazard existing or developing during the course of the burn, any of the
conditions of the permit being violated during the course of the burn,
pollution or nuisance conditions developing during the course of the burn, or a
fire smoldering with no flame present. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-1-2)
5-2-6: BURNING BAN OR AIR QUALITY ALERT:
No open burning will be permitted when the city or DNR has officially declared
a burning ban due to potentially hazardous fire conditions or when the
Minnesota pollution control agency (MPCA) has declared an air quality alert.
(New Market 2004 Code § 5-1-2)
5-2-7: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(New Market 2004 Code § 5-1-2)
CHAPTER 3
WEEDS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Weed Defined
5-3-2: Notice To Destroy
5-3-3: Action Upon Noncompliance
5-3-4: Charge A Lien
5-3-1: WEED DEFINED:
For the purpose of this chapter, the term "weeds" means noxious weeds as
defined by State law. All weeds or growing grasses upon any platted lot in the
City which are in excess of one foot (1'), or have gone or about to go to seed,
are hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the health, safety and
order of the City, with the following exceptions:
   A.   Slope Areas: Slopes that are steeper than three to one (3:1) may be
left in a natural state.
   B.   Ponds/Wetlands: Property adjacent to ponds may be left in a natural
state. Property owners will not be allowed to mow City property, including that
property surrounding ponds.
   C.   Natural/Wildlife Areas: Natural areas which include parks, wetlands/
ponds, unplatted land and other City designated areas may be left in a natural
state.
   D.   Natural Areas On Platted Lots: Natural areas will be allowed on platted
lots in backyards from the most rear corner of the home subject to a six foot
(6') setback from the property lines, except in the case where the natural area
is adjacent to another natural area or fence. A natural area contains "native
grasses" meaning those species of perennial grasses other than those designated
as noxious weeds by the Minnesota Department of Agriculture.
   E.   Undeveloped Platted Lots: Any platted lot within the City that is
undeveloped and does not share a common property line with any developed lot(s)
which contains a principal structure may be left in a natural state.
Noxious weeds must be removed regardless of where they exist. It shall be
unlawful for an owner, lessee or occupant of any land described above to allow,
permit or maintain a "nuisance" as defined herein on any such land or along the
sidewalk, street or alley adjacent thereto. (Ord. 158, 8-10-2017)
5-3-2: NOTICE TO DESTROY:
The City Administrator or his or her designee is hereby authorized and
empowered to notify, in writing, the owner of any lot, place or area within the
City, or the agent of the owner, to cut, destroy and/or remove any such weeds
or grass found growing, lying, or located on such owner's property or upon the
sidewalk or boulevard abutting same in violation of this chapter or State law.
The notice shall be sent by mail, addressed to said owner as shown on County
Property Tax records, at his/her last known address and posted on the property.
(Ord. 158, 8-10-2017)
5-3-3: ACTION UPON NONCOMPLIANCE:
Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent, so notified, to
cut, destroy and/or remove such weeds or grass within ten (10) days after
mailing or serving and posting the written notice provided for in section
5-3-2 of this chapter, the City Administrator or his or her designee is hereby
authorized and empowered to pay for the cutting, destroying and/or removal of
such weeds or grass or to order the removal by the City. (Ord. 158, 8-10-2017)
5-3-4: CHARGE A LIEN:
When the City has effected the removal of such obnoxious growth or has paid for
its removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest as provided by law,
and penalty as set forth from time to time by resolution of the City Council,
if not paid by such owner prior thereto, shall be charged to the owner of such
property on the next regular tax bill forwarded to such owner by the City, and
said charge shall be due and payable by said owner at the time of payment of
such tax bill, pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes Annotated
chapter 429. (Ord. 158, 8-10-2017)
CHAPTER 4
TREE DISEASES
SECTION:
5-4-1: Nuisances Declared
5-4-2: Abatement Procedure
5-4-3: Costs Of Abatement
5-4-4: Misdemeanor Violation; Penalty
5-4-1: NUISANCES DECLARED:
The following are public nuisances whenever they may be found within the city:
   A.   Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any degree
with the Dutch elm disease fungus Ceratocystis ulmi (Buisman) Moreau or which
harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus multistriatus (Eichh.) or
Hylungopinus rufipes (Marsh).
   B.   Any dead elm tree or part thereof including branches, stumps, firewood
or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed and burned or
sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle insecticide.
   C.   Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected to any degree
with the oak wilt fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum.
   D.   Any dead oak tree or part thereof which, in the opinion of the
designated officer, constitutes a hazard, including, but not limited to, logs,
branches, stumps, roots, firewood or other oak material which has not been
stripped of its bark and burned or sprayed with an effective fungicide.
   E.   Any other shade tree with an endemic disease. (Elko 2004 Code § 90.02)
5-4-2: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
It is unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance, as defined in
section
5-4-1 of this chapter, to remain on any premises the person owns or controls
within the city. The city council may by resolution order the nuisance abated.
Before action is taken on that resolution, the city council shall publish
notice of its intention to meet to consider taking action to abate the
nuisance. This notice shall be mailed to the affected property owner and
published once no less than one week prior to the meeting. The notice shall
state the time and place of the meeting, the street affected, action proposed,
the estimated cost of the abatement, and the proposed basis of assessment, if
any, of costs. At such hearing or adjournment thereof, the city council shall
hear any property owner with reference to the scope and desirability of the
proposed project. The city council shall thereafter adopt a resolution
confirming the original resolution with modifications as it considers desirable
and provide for the doing of the work by day labor or by contract. (Elko 2004
Code § 90.02)
5-4-3: COSTS OF ABATEMENT:
   A.   Record Of Costs: The city clerk shall keep a record of the costs of
abatement done under this chapter for all work done for which assessments are
to be made, stating and certifying the description of the land, lots, parcels
involved, and the amount chargeable to each.
   B.   Assessment Of Unpaid Charges: On or before September 1 of each year,
the city clerk shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against
each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this chapter.
The city council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof against the
property involved as a special assessment as authorized by Minnesota statutes
section 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and other pertinent
statutes for certification to the county auditor and collection the following
year along with the current taxes. (Elko 2004 Code § 90.02)
5-4-4: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violation of any provision of this chapter, including maintaining a nuisance
after being notified in writing by first class mail of a violation of any
provision of this chapter, shall be a misdemeanor and pushed as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Elko 2004 Code § 90.99)
CHAPTER 5
NOISE CONTROL 1
SECTION:
5-5-1: Prohibited Noises
5-5-2: Hours Restricted For Certain Operations
5-5-3: Enforcement
5-5-4: Violation; Penalties
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  11-4-8 of this code.
5-5-1: PROHIBITED NOISES:
   A.   General Prohibition: No person shall make or cause to be made any
distinctly and loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs,
injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or welfare of
any person or precludes his enjoyment of property or affects his property's
value. This general prohibition is not limited by the specific restrictions of
the following subsections.
   B.   Horns And Audible Signaling Devices: No person shall sound any audible
signaling device on any vehicle except as a warning of danger, as required by
Minnesota statutes section 169.68.
   C.   Exhaust: No person shall discharge the exhaust or permit the discharge
of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine,
motor boat, motor vehicle, or snowmobile except through a muffler or other
device that effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom and
complies with all applicable state laws and regulations.
   D.   Defective Vehicles Or Loads: No person shall use any vehicle so out of
repair or so loaded as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding,
rattling, or other noise.
   E.   Loading, Unloading And Unpacking: No person shall create loud or
excessive noise in loading, unloading, or unpacking any vehicle.
   F.   Radios, Phonographs And Paging Systems: No person shall use or operate
or permit the use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, paging system, machine, or other device for the production or
reproduction of sound in a distinct and loudly audible manner as to
unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of any person nearby.
Operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine, or other device
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. in
such a manner as to be plainly audible at the property line of the structure or
building in which it is located, in the hallway or apartment adjacent, or at a
distance of fifty feet (50') if the source is located outside a structure or
building shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection.
   G.   Noisy Parties Or Gatherings: No person shall participate in any party
or other gathering of people giving rise to noise or unreasonably disturbing
the peace, quiet, or repose of another person. When a police officer determines
that a gathering is creating such a noise disturbance, the officer may order
all persons present, other than the owner or tenant of the premises where the
disturbance is occurring, to disperse immediately. No person shall refuse to
leave after being ordered by a police officer to do so. Every owner or tenant
of such premises who has knowledge of the disturbance shall make every
reasonable effort to see that the disturbance is stopped.
   H.   Loudspeakers And Amplifiers: No person shall operate or permit the use
or operation of any loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other device for the
production or reproduction of sound on a street or other public place for the
purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to
any commercial establishment or vehicle, except as otherwise provided in the
zoning ordinance.
   I.   Animals: No person shall keep any animal that unreasonably disturbs the
comfort or repose of persons in the vicinity by its frequent or continued
noise. For purposes of this subsection, "disturbs the comfort or repose of
persons in the vicinity by its frequent or continued noise" means any one of
the following:
      1.   The animal noise occurs at a time between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and can be heard from a location outside the
building and premises where the animal is being kept, and the animal has made
such noises intermittently for more than three (3) minutes with one minute or
less lapse of time between each animal noise during the three (3) minute
period; or
      2.   The animal noise can be heard from a distance located three hundred
fifty feet (350') from the location of the building and premises where the
animal is being kept, and the animal has made such noises intermittently for
more than three (3) minutes with one minute or less lapse of time between each
animal noise during the three (3) minute period; or
      3.   The animal noise can be heard from a location outside the building
and premises where the animal is being kept, and the animal has made such
noises intermittently for a period of at least five (5) minutes with one minute
or less lapse of time between each animal noise during the five (5) minute
period.
   J.   Near Schools, Churches And Hospitals: No person shall create any
excessive noise on a street, alley, or public grounds adjacent to any school,
institution of learning, church, or hospital when the noise unreasonably
interferes with the working of the institution or disturbs or unduly annoys its
occupants or residents and when conspicuous signs indicate the presence of such
institution. (2011 Code)
5-5-2: HOURS RESTRICTED FOR CERTAIN OPERATIONS 1 :
   A.   Domestic Power Equipment: Except as otherwise provided herein, no
person shall operate a power lawn mower, power hedge clipper, chain saw,
mulcher, garden tiller, edger, drill, or other similar domestic power
maintenance equipment except between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on any weekday or between the hours of nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on any weekend or holiday. Snow
removal equipment is exempt from this provision. Mowing of golf courses may
occur between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
on any weekday or between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and nine o'clock
(9:00) P.M. on any weekend or holiday.
   B.   Refuse Hauling 2 : Except as otherwise limited for licensed hauling
under chapter 1, article A of this title, no person shall collect or remove
garbage or refuse in any residential district except between the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on any weekday or between the
hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on any weekend
or holiday.
   C.   Construction Activities: No person shall engage in or permit
construction activities involving the use of any kind of electric, diesel, or
gas powered machine or other power equipment except between the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on any weekday or between the
hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on any weekend
or holiday.
   D.   Exemptions: The following activities are specifically exempted from the
prohibitions under this section: Public works construction by Federal, State,
County, or City authorities or their contractors and subcontractors as approved
by the city engineer; equipment used for snow removal; emergency public works
repair/construction. (2011 Code; amd. Ord. 147, 1-12-2017; Ord. 212, 5-14-2020)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  11-11-8D of this code.
2 2. See also subsection
  5-1A-10C of this title.
5-5-3: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Police Department Duties: The police department shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter. The police department may inspect private premises
other than private residences and shall make all reasonable efforts to prevent
violations of this chapter.
   B.   Civil Remedies: This chapter may be enforced by injunction, action for
abatement, or other appropriate civil remedy.
   C.   Noise Impact Statements: The council may require any person applying
for a change in zoning classification or a permit or license for any structure,
operation, process, installation or alteration, or project that may be
considered a potential noise source to submit a noise impact statement on a
form prescribed by the council. The council shall evaluate each such statement
and take its evaluation into account in approving or disapproving the license
or permit applied for or the zoning change requested. (2011 Code)
5-5-4: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter involving the operation of a motor vehicle is a
petty misdemeanor. In all cases, the city shall be entitled to collect the
costs of prosecution to the extent outlined by law, rules of criminal
procedure, and the rules of court. Each act of violation and each day a
violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense. (2011 Code)
CHAPTER 6
ABANDONED PROPERTY
SECTION:
5-6-1: Disposition Of Abandoned Property
5-6-1: DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED PROPERTY:
   A.   Procedure: Except for abandoned and junked vehicles, all property
lawfully coming into possession of the city shall be disposed of as provided in
this section which is adopted pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 471.195,
as it may be amended from time to time. Abandoned and junked vehicles shall be
disposed of according to the procedures of article A of this chapter.
   B.   Storage: The department of the city acquiring possession of the
property shall arrange for its storage. If city facilities are unavailable or
inadequate, the department may arrange for storage at a privately owned
facility.
   C.   Claim By Owner: The owner may claim the property by exhibiting
satisfactory proof of ownership and paying the city any storage or maintenance
costs incurred thereby. A receipt for the property shall be obtained upon
release to the owner.
   D.   Sale: If the property remains unclaimed in the possession of the city
for sixty (60) days, the property shall be sold to the highest bidder at a
public auction conducted by the city clerk or his or her designee after two (2)
weeks' published notice setting forth the time and place of the sale and the
property to be sold.
   E.   Disposition Of Proceeds: The proceeds of the sale shall be placed in
the general fund of the city. If the former owner makes application and
furnishes satisfactory proof of ownership within six (6) months of the sale,
the former owner shall be paid the proceeds of the sale of the property less
the costs of storage and the proportionate part of the cost of published notice
and other costs of the sale. (Elko 2004 Code § 92.01)
ARTICLE A. ABANDONED, JUNK VEHICLES 1
SECTION:
5-6A-1: State Regulations Adopted
5-6A-2: Definitions
5-6A-3: Abandonment Prohibited
5-6A-4: Authority To Impound Vehicles
5-6A-5: Sale Of Vehicles
5-6A-6: Notice Of Taking And Sale
5-6A-7: Right To Reclaim
5-6A-8: Operator's Deficiency Claim
5-6A-9: Disposition By Impound Lot
5-6A-10: Disposal Authority
5-6A-11: Contracts; Reimbursement By MPCA
 
Notes
  1. See also subsection
1  6-5B-5B4 and section
  6-5B-6 of this code.
5-6A-1: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
Minnesota statutes chapter 168B and Minnesota rules chapter 7035, as they may
be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference. This article is
adopted under the authority of Minnesota statutes section 168B.09, subdivision
2, as it may be amended from time to time. If any provisions of this article
are less stringent than the provisions of Minnesota statutes chapter 168B or
Minnesota rules chapter 7035, as they may be amended from time to time, the
statute or rule shall take precedence. (Elko 2004 Code § 92.15)
5-6A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: A. A "motor vehicle", as defined in Minnesota statutes
section 169.011, as it may be amended from time to time, that:
      1.   Has remained illegally:
         a.   For a period of more than forty eight (48) hours on any property
owned or controlled by a unit of government, or more than four (4) hours on
that property when it is properly posted; or
         b.   On private property for a period of time, as determined under
subsection
5-6A-4B of this article, without the consent of the person in control of the
property; and
      2.   Lacks vital component parts or is in such an inoperable condition
that it has no substantial potential for further use consistent with its usual
functions, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building.
   B.   A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in Minnesota statutes section
168.10, as it may be amended from time to time, is not considered an abandoned
vehicle.
   C.   Vehicles on the premises of junkyards and automobile graveyards that
are defined, maintained, and licensed in accordance with Minnesota statutes
section 161.242, as it may be amended from time to time, or that are licensed
and maintained in accordance with local laws and zoning regulations, are not
considered abandoned vehicles.
   D.   A vehicle being held for storage by agreement or being held under
police authority or pursuant to a writ or court order is not considered
abandoned. It may not be processed as abandoned while the police hold, writ or
court order is in effect.
DEPARTMENT: The Minnesota department of public safety.
IMPOUND: To take and hold a vehicle in legal custody. There are two (2) types
of impounds: public and nonpublic.
IMPOUND LOT OPERATOR OR OPERATOR: A person who engages in impounding or
storing, usually temporarily, unauthorized or abandoned vehicles. "Operator"
includes an operator of a public or nonpublic impound lot, regardless of
whether tow truck service is provided.
JUNK VEHICLE: A vehicle that:
   A.   Is three (3) years old or older;
   B.   Is extensively damaged, with the damage including such things as broken
or missing wheels, motor, drive train or transmission;
   C.   Is apparently inoperable;
   D.   Does not have a valid, current registration plate; or
   E.   Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate
value of the scrap in it.
MPCA OR AGENCY: The Minnesota pollution control agency.
MOTOR VEHICLE OR VEHICLE: Has the meaning given "motor vehicle" in Minnesota
statutes section 169.011, as it may be amended from time to time.
MOTOR VEHICLE WASTE: Solid waste and liquid wastes derived in the operation of
or in the recycling of a motor vehicle, including such things as tires and used
motor oil, but excluding scrap metal.
NONPUBLIC IMPOUND LOT: An impound lot that is not a public impound lot.
PUBLIC IMPOUND LOT: An impound lot owned by or contracting with a unit of
government under section
5-6A-10 of this article.
UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE: A vehicle that is subject to removal and impoundment
pursuant to subsection
5-6A-4B of this article or Minnesota statutes section 169.041, as it may be
amended from time to time, but is not a junk vehicle or an abandoned vehicle.
VITAL COMPONENT PARTS: Those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to the
mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including such things as the motor,
drive train and wheels. (Elko 2004 Code § 92.16; amd. 2011 Code)
5-6A-3: ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED:
Any person who abandons a motor vehicle on any public or private property,
without the consent of the person in control of the property, is guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Elko 2004 Code § 92.17)
5-6A-4: AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES:
   A.   Abandoned Or Junk Vehicles: The city clerk, or his or her designee, or
any peace officer employed or whose services are contracted for by the city may
take into custody and impound any abandoned or junk vehicle if the vehicle is
on public property. If the abandoned or junk vehicle is located on private
property, the vehicle shall not be removed or impounded until there is
compliance with the provisions of subsection C of this section.
   B.   Unauthorized Vehicles: The city clerk, or his or her designee, or any
peace officer employed or whose services are contracted for by the city may
take into custody and impound any unauthorized vehicle under Minnesota statutes
section 169.041, as it may be amended from time to time. A vehicle may also be
impounded after it has been left unattended in one of the following public or
private locations for the indicated period of time: (Elko 2004 Code § 92.18)
      1.   In a public location not governed by Minnesota statutes section
169.041, as it may be amended from time to time:
         a.   On a highway and properly tagged by a peace officer, four (4)
hours;
         b.   Located so as to constitute an accident or traffic hazard to the
traveling public, as determined by a peace officer, immediately; or
         c.   That is a parking facility or other public property owned or
controlled by a unit of government, properly posted, four (4) hours; or
         d.   Located so as to constitute an accident or traffic hazard to the
traveling public within the department of transportation's eight (8) county
metropolitan district, as determined by an authorized employee of the
department's freeway service patrol, immediately.
      2.   a. On private property, only with the express permission of the
owner of the property, a resident or other person in control of the premises:
            (1)   That is single-family or duplex residential property,
immediately;
            (2)   That is private, nonresidential property, properly posted,
immediately;
            (3)   That is private, nonresidential property, not posted, twenty
four (24) hours;
            (4)   That is any residential property, properly posted,
immediately; or
            (5)   That is private, nonresidential property of an operator of an
establishment for the servicing, repair, or maintenance of motor vehicles, five
(5) business days after notifying the vehicle owner by certified mail, return
receipt requested, of the property owner's intention to have the vehicle
removed from the property.
         b.   An owner or agent of an owner of private, nonresidential property
described in subsection B2a(5) of this section is authorized to remove or cause
the removal of an unauthorized vehicle from that property after providing five
(5) days' notice to the vehicle owner by certified mail, return receipt
requested, that the vehicle will be removed from the property. Notification
must include identification of the registration plate number, the vehicle
identification number, and the make, model, and color of the vehicle. The owner
or agent of an owner of property upon which a motor vehicle is unauthorized may
cause the vehicle to be removed by a towing service under this subsection B2b
without incurring any civil liability to the owner of the unauthorized vehicle.
Vehicles removed pursuant to a complaint of the owner or agent of the owner of
private property must be disposed of as provided in this article. (Elko 2004
Code § 92.18; amd. 2011 Code)
         c.   If, under this subsection B2, permission is not granted, then the
city shall not remove and impound any vehicle until the procedure established
in this subsection B2 has been followed.
   C.   Private Property: If the vehicle is on private property, the city
clerk, or his or her designee, or any peace officer employed or whose services
are contracted for by the city may take into custody and impound any abandoned
or junk vehicle on private property only with the permission of the owner of
the property, a resident, or other person in control of the premises. If
permission is denied, the city may declare the existence of the abandoned or
junk vehicle to be a nuisance and proceed to abate the nuisance as provided in
this article. Once the abatement procedure has been completed, the city may
apply for an order from a court of competent jurisdiction authorizing the
removal and impoundment of the vehicle, and after the order has been granted,
the city may then remove and impound the vehicle. (Elko 2004 Code § 92.18)
5-6A-5: SALE OF VEHICLES:
   A.   An impounded vehicle is eligible for disposal or sale under section
5-6A-9 of this article fifteen (15) days after notice to the owner, if the
vehicle is determined to be:
      1.   A junk vehicle; except, that it may have a valid, current
registration plate and still be eligible for disposal or sale under this
subsection; or (Elko 2004 Code § 92.19)
      2.   An abandoned vehicle.
   B.   1. If an unauthorized vehicle is impounded, the impounded vehicle is
eligible for disposal or sale under section
5-6A-9 of this article the earlier of:
         a.   Forty five (45) days after notice to the owner; or
         b.   The date of a voluntary written title transfer by the registered
owner to the impound lot operator.
      2.   A voluntary written title transfer constitutes a waiver by the
registered user of any right, title and interest in the vehicle. (Elko 2004
Code § 92.19; amd. 2011 Code)
5-6A-6: NOTICE OF TAKING AND SALE:
   A.   When an impounded vehicle is taken into custody, the city or impound
lot operator taking it into custody shall give written notice of the taking
within five (5) days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, to the
registered vehicle owner and any lienholders. The notice must:
      1.   Set forth the date and place of the taking;
      2.   Provide the year, make, model, and serial number of the impounded
motor vehicle, if such information can be reasonably obtained, and the place
where the vehicle is being held;
      3.   Inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the
vehicle under section
5-6A-7 of this article;
      4.   State that failure of the owner or lienholders to:
         a.   Exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle within the
appropriate time allowed under subsection
5-6A-5A or B of this article, and under the conditions set forth in subsection
5-6A-8A of this article, constitutes a waiver by them of all right, title, and
interest in the vehicle and a consent to the transfer of title to and disposal
or sale of the vehicle pursuant to section
 5-6A-9 of this article; or
         b.   Exercise their right to reclaim the contents of the vehicle
within the appropriate time allowed and under the conditions set forth in
subsection
5-6A-7C of this article, constitutes a waiver by them of all right, title, and
interest in the contents and consent to sell or dispose of the contents under
section
5-6A-9 of this article; and
      5.   State that a vehicle owner who provides to the impound lot operator
documentation from a government or nonprofit agency or legal aid office that
the owner is homeless, receives relief based on need, or is eligible for legal
aid services has the unencumbered right to retrieve any and all contents
without charge.
   B.   The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if any, of an
impounded vehicle and to all readily identifiable lienholders of record. The
department shall make this information available to impound lot operators for
notification purposes. If it is impossible to determine with reasonable
certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all lienholders,
the notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
area where the motor vehicle was towed from or abandoned. Published notices may
be grouped together for convenience and economy.
   C.   If an unauthorized vehicle remains unclaimed after thirty (30) days
from the date the notice was sent under subsection B of this section, a second
notice must be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
registered owner, if any, of the unauthorized vehicle and to all readily
identifiable lienholders of record. (Elko 2004 Code § 92.20; amd. 2011 Code)
5-6A-7: RIGHT TO RECLAIM:
   A.   Payment Of Charges: The owner or any lienholder of an impounded vehicle
shall have a right to reclaim the vehicle from the city or impound lot operator
taking it into custody upon payment of all towing and storage charges resulting
from taking the vehicle into custody within fifteen (15) or forty five (45)
days, as applicable under subsection
 5-6A-5A or B of this article, after the date of the notice required by section
5-6A-6 of this article.
   B.   Lienholder: Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair any
lien of a garage keeper under the laws of this state, or the right of a
lienholder to foreclose. For the purposes of this subsection, "garage keeper"
is an operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a motor
vehicle storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for the servicing,
repair or maintenance of motor vehicles. (Elko 2004 Code § 92.21)
   C.   Retrieval Of Contents:
      1.   For purposes of this subsection, the following words and terms have
the following meanings:
   CONTENTS: Does not include any permanently affixed mechanical or
nonmechanical automobile parts; automobile body parts; or automobile
accessories, including audio or video players.
   RELIEF BASED ON NEED: Includes, but is not limited to, receipt of MFIP and
diversionary work program, medical assistance, general assistance, general
assistance medical care, emergency general assistance, Minnesota supplemental
aid, MSA-emergency assistance, Minnesota care, supplemental security income,
energy assistance, emergency assistance, food stamps, earned income tax credit,
or Minnesota working family tax credit.
      2.   The city or impound lot operator shall establish reasonable
procedures for retrieval of vehicle contents, and may establish reasonable
procedures to protect the safety and security of the impound lot and its
personnel.
      3.   At any time before the expiration of the waiting periods provided in
section
5-6A-5 of this article, a registered owner who provides documentation from a
government or nonprofit agency or legal aid office that the registered owner is
homeless, receives relief based on need, or is eligible for legal aid services
has the unencumbered right to retrieve any and all contents without charge and
regardless of whether the registered owner pays incurred charges or fees,
transfers title, or reclaims the vehicle.
   D.   Waiver Of Rights: The failure of the registered owner or lienholders to
exercise the right to reclaim the vehicle before the expiration of the waiting
periods provided under section
 5-6A-5 of this article constitutes a waiver of all right, title, and interest
in the vehicle and a consent to the transfer of title to, and disposal or sale
of, the vehicle under section
5-6A-9 of this article. The failure of the registered owner to exercise the
right provided under subsection C of this section constitutes a waiver of all
right, title, and interest in the contents and a consent to the transfer of
title to, and disposal or sale of, the contents under section
5-6A-9 of this article. (2011 Code)
5-6A-8: OPERATOR'S DEFICIENCY CLAIM:
The nonpublic impound lot operator has a deficiency claim against the
registered owner of the vehicle for the reasonable costs of services provided
in the towing, storage and inspection of the vehicle minus the proceeds of the
sale or auction. The claim for storage costs may not exceed the costs of:
   A.   Twenty five (25) days' storage for a vehicle described in subsection
5-6A-5A of this article; and
   B.   Fifty five (55) days' storage for a vehicle described in subsection
5-6A-5B of this article. (Elko 2004 Code § 92.22; amd. 2011 Code)
5-6A-9: DISPOSITION BY IMPOUND LOT:
   A.   Auction Or Sale:
      1.   If an abandoned or unauthorized vehicle and contents taken into
custody by the city or any impound lot is not reclaimed under section
5-6A-7 of this article, it may be disposed of or sold at auction or sale when
eligible pursuant to sections
5-6A-5 and
5-6A-6 of this article. If the contents of an abandoned or unauthorized vehicle
taken into custody by the city or any impound lot are not reclaimed under
section
5-6A-7 of this article, they may be disposed of or sold at auction or sale when
eligible pursuant to sections
5-6A-5 and
5-6A-6 of this article. (Elko 2004 Code § 92.23; amd. 2011 Code)
      2.   The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the
registrar of motor vehicles which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the
vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle
and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of
ownership. Before a vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must
receive a motor vehicle safety check.
   B.   Unsold Vehicles: Abandoned or junk vehicles not sold by the city or
public impound lots pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be disposed
of in accordance with section
 5-6A-10 of this article.
   C.   Sale Proceeds:
      1.   Public Entities: From the proceeds of a sale under this section by
the city or public impound lot of an abandoned or unauthorized motor vehicle,
the city shall reimburse itself for the costs of towing, preserving and storing
the vehicle, and all administrative, notice and publication costs incurred in
handling the vehicle pursuant to this article. Any remainder from the proceeds
of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for
ninety (90) days and then shall be deposited in the treasury of the city.
      2.   Nonpublic Impound Lots: The operator of a nonpublic impound lot may
retain any proceeds derived from a sale conducted under the authority of
subsection A of this section. The operator may retain all proceeds from the
sale of any personal belongings and contents in the vehicle that were not
claimed by the owner or the owner's agent before the sale; except, that any
suspected contraband or other items that likely would be subject to forfeiture
in a criminal trial must be turned over to the appropriate law enforcement
agency. (Elko 2004 Code § 92.23)
5-6A-10: DISPOSAL AUTHORITY:
The city may contract with others or may utilize its own equipment and
personnel for the inventory of impounded motor vehicles and abandoned scrap
metal and may utilize its own equipment and personnel for the collection,
storage and transportation of these vehicles and abandoned scrap metal. The
city may utilize its own equipment and personnel only for the collection and
storage of not more than five (5) abandoned or unauthorized vehicles without
advertising for or receiving bids in any one hundred twenty (120) day period.
(Elko 2004 Code § 92.24)
5-6A-11: CONTRACTS; REIMBURSEMENT BY MPCA:
   A.   If the city proposes to enter into a contract with a person licensed by
the MPCA pursuant to this section or a contract pursuant to section
5-6A-10 of this article, the MPCA may review the proposed contract before it is
entered into by the city to determine whether it conforms to the MPCA's plan
for solid waste management and is in compliance with MPCA rules. A contract
that does so conform may be approved by the MPCA and entered into by the city.
Where a contract has been approved, the MPCA may reimburse the city for the
costs incurred under the contract that have not been reimbursed under section
5-6A-9 of this article. Except as otherwise provided in section
5-6A-10 of this article, the MPCA shall not approve any contract that has been
entered into without prior notice to and request for bids from all persons duly
licensed by the MPCA to be a party to a disposal contract pursuant to Minnesota
statutes section 116.07, as it may be amended from time to time; does not
provide for a full performance bond; or does not provide for total collection
and transportation of abandoned motor vehicles; except, that the MPCA may
approve a contract covering solely collection or transportation of abandoned
motor vehicles where the MPCA determines total collection and transportation to
be impracticable and where all other requirements herein have been met, and the
unit of government, after proper notice and request for bids, has not received
any bid for total collection and transportation of abandoned motor vehicles.
   B.   If the city utilizes its own equipment and personnel pursuant to its
authority under section
5-6A-10 of this article, and the use of the equipment and personnel conforms to
the MPCA's plan for solid waste management and is in compliance with MPCA
rules, the city may be reimbursed by the MPCA for reasonable costs incurred
which are not reimbursed under section 5-6A-9 of this article.
   C.   The MPCA may demand that the city contract for the disposal of
abandoned motor vehicles and other scrap metal pursuant to the MPCA's plan for
solid waste disposal. If the city fails to contract within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the demand, the MPCA, through the department of administration
and on behalf of the city, may contract with any person duly licensed by the
MPCA for the disposal. (Elko 2004 Code § 92.25)
TITLE 6
POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
Police Department   1
Fire Department   2
Emergency Management   3
Animal Control   4
Potentially Dangerous Dogs And
Dangerous Dogs   4A
Animal Shelters   4B
Commercial Animal Kennels   4C
Misdemeanor Offenses; Nuisances   5
Misdemeanor Offenses   5A
Public Nuisances   5B
Juveniles   6
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-1-1: Created; Purpose
6-1-2: Supervision
6-1-3: Composition; Appointment; Obedience To Superiors
6-1-4: Duties Of Chief
6-1-1: CREATED; PURPOSE:
There is hereby created a city police department for the city. The department
shall be responsible for the preservation of public peace and order, the
prevention and detection of crime, the apprehension of offenders, the
protection of persons and property, the enforcement of state laws and city
ordinances, and the rendering of emergency services. (Elko 2004 Code §§ 32.01,
32.02)
6-1-2: SUPERVISION:
The police department shall be under the direct supervision of the police chief
who shall be responsible to and under the direct supervision of the city
administrator. (Elko 2004 Code § 32.03; amd. 2011 Code)
6-1-3: COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT; OBEDIENCE TO SUPERIORS:
The police department consists of a police chief and such other members as may
be determined from time to time. The police chief and other personnel of the
police department are appointed by the city council for an indefinite period.
All members of the police department subordinate to the police chief shall obey
the instructions of the police chief and any superior officer. (Elko 2004 Code
§ 32.04)
6-1-4: DUTIES OF CHIEF:
The police chief shall be responsible to the city administrator for all aspects
of public safety relating to the fair and just enforcement of all laws,
statutes, and ordinances and the preservation of justice, law and order in the
city; for developing and implementing procedures and policies pertaining to all
police activities; and for developing and implementing selection procedures for
personnel of the department. (Elko 2004 Code § 32.05; amd. 2011 Code)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-2-1: Organization And Purpose
6-2-2: Composition; Appointments And Removals
6-2-3: Fire Marshal
6-2-4: Restrictions On And Requirements Of The Public
6-2-5: Authority Of Department
6-2-6: Fees
6-2-1: ORGANIZATION AND PURPOSE:
   A.   The volunteer fire department of the city is hereby continued and shall
operate pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, this code, city policies
and procedures and department standard operating guidelines approved by the
city council.
   B.   The department shall be responsible for fire prevention, suppression of
fires, the protection of life and property against fire, enforcement of the
building code and fire code, the rendering of emergency services, and such
other duties as are prescribed by the city council.
   C.   The members of the fire department may organize themselves into a
firefighters' relief association in accordance with state law. (2011 Code)
6-2-2: COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENTS AND REMOVALS:
   A.   The department shall consist of a fire chief appointed by city council
and such other officers appointed and members as determined by the city council
from time to time. The department shall be under the direction of the fire
chief who shall report to the city administrator.
   B.   All department officers and members will be selected, appointed, and
removed by the city council in accordance with the city policies. (2011 Code)
6-2-3: FIRE MARSHAL:
A fire marshal may be appointed by the city council upon the recommendation of
the fire chief and the city administrator. The fire marshal shall be supervised
by the fire chief and shall carry out duties and responsibilities as provided
by the city council. The fire chief shall perform the duties of fire marshal if
a fire marshal is not appointed or in the fire marshal's absence. (2011 Code)
6-2-4: RESTRICTIONS ON AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE PUBLIC:
   A.   Interference With Fire Department Duties: No unauthorized person shall
ride upon, race with, trail or follow within three hundred feet (300') of any
apparatus belonging to the fire department when such apparatus is actively
responding to an emergency call.
   B.   Driving Over Fire Hose: No person shall drive any vehicle over a fire
hose except upon specific orders from a member of the police or fire department
of the city and then only with due caution.
   C.   Parking Near Or Obstructing Station, Hydrants And Fires: No person
shall park any vehicle or place any material or other obstruction within twenty
feet (20') of the entrance to a fire station or within fifteen feet (15') of
any fire hydrant, nor shall any person park any vehicle within three hundred
feet (300') of a place where a fire requiring firefighting by the fire
department is in progress.
   D.   Use Of Fire Equipment: No person shall use any fire apparatus or
equipment for any reason except in accordance with city policies regarding use
of fire equipment and as authorized by the fire chief and city administrator.
(2011 Code)
6-2-5: AUTHORITY OF DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Request Assistance: It shall be lawful for any officer of the fire
department or the chief of police to request the assistance of any person at
any place in time of fire.
   B.   Order Destruction: It shall be lawful for the fire chief to order the
destruction or removal of any building or obstruction for the purpose of
completing fire extinguishment. (2011 Code)
6-2-6: FEES:
All fees shall be in the amount set by the council from time to time by
ordinance. (2011 Code)
CHAPTER 3
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
6-3-1: Policy And Purpose
6-3-2: Definitions
6-3-3: Office Of Emergency Management Created
6-3-4: Powers And Duties Of Director
6-3-5: Oath Of Office
6-3-6: Volunteer Members
6-3-7: Application Of City Personnel Procedures
6-3-8: Emergency Regulations
6-3-9: Emergency Management A Government Function
6-3-10: Participation In Labor Disputes Or Politics Prohibited
6-3-11: Fiscal Matters
6-3-12: Cooperation With Other Agencies
6-3-13: Misdemeanor Violation
6-3-1: POLICY AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Because of the existing and increasing possibility of the occurrence of
natural and other disasters of major size and destructiveness, and in order to
ensure that preparations of the city will be adequate to deal with disasters,
generally protect the public peace, health, and safety, and preserve the lives
and property of the people of the city, the legislature finds and declares it
necessary: (New Market 2004 Code § 5-2-1; amd. 2011 Code)
      1.   To establish a city emergency management organization.
      2.   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during major
emergencies or at the time of a natural disaster.
      3.   To provide for the formulation of necessary plans and training to
meet the requirements of the city's missions.
      4.   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between the city and
other political subdivisions of the state and of other states with respect to
the carrying out of emergency management functions.
   B.   It is further declared to be the purpose of this chapter and the policy
of the city that all emergency management functions of the city be coordinated
to the maximum extent practicable with the comparable functions of the federal
government, of the state, and other municipalities of the county, and of
private agencies of every type, to the end that the most effective preparations
and use may be made of the city's labor supply, resources, and facilities for
dealing with any disaster that may occur. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-2-1)
6-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT: The preparation for and the carrying out of emergency
functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from
disasters, from acute shortages of energy, or from incidents occurring at
nuclear power plants that pose radiological or other health hazards. These
functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services;
medical and health services; rescue, engineering, warning services;
communications; radiological, chemical and other special weapons defense;
evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency human services; emergency
transportation; existing or properly assigned functions of plant protection;
temporary restoration of public utility services; implementation of energy
supply emergency conservation and allocation measures; and other functions
related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or
incidental to preparing for and carrying out these functions.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES: Any personnel employed by the city and any other
volunteer or paid member of the city emergency management organization engaged
in carrying on population protection functions in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter or any rule or order hereunder.
MAJOR EMERGENCY: An emergency declared by the governor under the provisions of
Minnesota statutes section 12.31, as amended, or an emergency declared by the
city council under section
6-3-8 of this chapter. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-2-2)
6-3-3: OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created within the city government an office of emergency
management which shall be under the direction and control of a director of
emergency management, hereinafter called the director. The chief of police
shall serve as director and may be compensated at a rate to be determined by
the city council. The director shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration and operation of the emergency management
organization subject to the direction and control of the city council. The
office of emergency management shall be organized into such divisions,
consistent with federal, state, and local emergency management plans, as the
director deems necessary to provide for the efficient performance of emergency
management functions during a major emergency. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-2-3;
amd. 2011 Code)
6-3-4: POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR:
   A.   Develop Mutual Aid Agreements: The director, with the consent of the
city council, shall represent the city on any regional or state conference for
emergency management. The director shall develop proposed mutual aid agreements
with other political subdivisions of the state for reciprocal aid and
assistance in a major emergency too great to be dealt with unassisted, and he
shall present such agreements to the city council or clerk for action. Such
arrangements shall be consistent with the state emergency plan, and during a
major emergency, it shall be the duty of the emergency management organization
to render assistance in accordance with the provisions of such mutual aid
arrangements.
   B.   Availability Of Resources: The director shall make such studies and
surveys of the labor supply, industries, resources, and facilities of the city
as the director deems necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency
management and to plan for their most efficient use in time of a major
emergency. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-2-4)
   C.   Preparation Of Plan: The director shall prepare a comprehensive
emergency operations plan for the emergency management office of the city,
including the unincorporated areas, and shall present such plan to the council
for its approval. When the council has approved the plan by ordinance, it shall
be the duty of all city agencies and all emergency management forces of the
city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The
plan may be modified in like manner from time to time. The director shall
coordinate the emergency management activities of the city to the end that they
shall be consistent and fully integrated with the plans of the federal
government and the state and correlated with the emergency management plans of
other political subdivisions within the state. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-2-4;
amd. 2011 Code)
   D.   Training And Information Programs: In accordance with the state and
county emergency management plan, the director shall institute such training
programs and public information programs and shall take all other preparatory
steps, including the partial or full mobilization of emergency management
forces in advance of actual disaster, as may be necessary to the prompt and
effective operation of the city emergency management plan in time of an
impending major emergency. The director may, from time to time, conduct such
practice air warning alerts or other emergency management exercises in
accordance with the state warning plan.
   E.   Utilize City Personnel And Equipment: The director shall utilize the
personnel, services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments
and agencies of the city to the maximum extent practicable. The officers and
personnel of all such departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent
practicable, cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the city
emergency management agency and to the governor upon request. The head of each
department and agency, in cooperation with and under the direction of the
director, shall be responsible for the planning and programming of such
emergency management activities as will involve the utilization of the
facilities of the department head's department or agency.
   F.   Training: The director shall, in cooperation with existing city
departments and agencies affected, organize, recruit, and train auxiliary
firefighters, emergency medical personnel, and any other personnel that may be
required on a volunteer basis to the extent that such emergency personnel are
recruited to augment a regular city department or agency for major emergencies.
They shall be assigned to such departments or agencies and shall be under the
administration and control of said department or agency. The director may
dismiss any emergency management volunteer at any time and require the
emergency management volunteer to surrender any equipment and identification
furnished by the city.
   G.   Assure Capabilities: Consistent with state statute, the director shall
coordinate the activity of the municipal emergency management organization and
assist in establishing and conducting training programs as required to assure
emergency operational capability in the several services 1 .
   H.   Compliance With State Regulations: The director shall carry out all
orders, rules and regulations issued by the governor with reference to major
emergencies.
   I.   Major Emergencies: The director shall direct and coordinate the general
operations of all city emergency management forces during a major emergency in
conformity with regulations and instructions of this chapter and other
authorities.
   J.   Impending Disasters: Upon instructions from the city council, the
director may be ordered to direct and coordinate the general operations of all
city emergency management forces during the time of an impending disaster as
well as during the time that disaster relief operations are necessary. The
director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations issued by the city
clerk and/or the city council to alleviate the disaster situation.
   K.   Emergency Operating Center: Consistent with the city emergency plan,
the director shall provide and equip, at some suitable place in the city, an
emergency operating center to be used during a major emergency as headquarters
for direction at the control center by city departments and agencies, public
utilities and other agencies authorized by federal or state authority to carry
on emergency management activities during a major emergency. The director shall
arrange for the installation at the control center of necessary facilities for
communication with and between heads of emergency management services and
operating units of city services and other communities and control centers
within the surrounding area and with the federal and state agencies concerned.
(New Market 2004 Code § 5-2-4)
   L.   Demand Assistance And Use Of Property: During the first thirty (30)
days of a major emergency, if the legislature is in session or the governor has
coupled a declaration of the emergency with a call for a special session of the
legislature, the director may, when necessary to save life or property, require
any person, except members of the federal or state military forces and officers
of the state or any other political subdivision, to perform services for
emergency management purposes as the director directs, and the director may
commandeer, for the time being, any motor vehicle, tools, appliances or any
other property to be used for the duration of the emergency or until such time
the director deems necessary, subject to the owner's right to just compensation
as provided by law. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-2-4; amd. 2011 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 12.25, as amended.
6-3-5: OATH OF OFFICE:
No person may be employed or associated in any capacity in the office of
emergency management who advocates or has advocated a change by force or
violence in the constitutional form of government of the United States or in
the state or the overthrow of any government in the United States by force or
violence, or who has been convicted of or is under indictment for information
charging any subversive act against the United States. Each person who is
appointed to serve in the emergency management agency shall, before entering
upon his duties, take an oath in writing as prescribed by Minnesota statutes
section 12.43. It must read substantially as follows:
I,                      , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and
defend the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State
of Minnesota against all enemies, foreign or domestic; that I will bear true
faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, without
any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and
faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do
further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the Government
of the United States or of this state by force or violence; and that during
such time as I am a member of the Elko New Market Emergency Management
Organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States, or of this state, by force or violence.
(New Market 2004 Code § 5-2-5; amd. 2011 Code)
6-3-6: VOLUNTEER MEMBERS:
   A.   Call To Service: Emergency management volunteers shall be called into
service only in case of a major emergency or a natural disaster for which the
regular county services are inadequate or for necessary training and
preparations for such emergencies. All volunteers shall serve without
compensation, except as provided in Minnesota statutes chapter 12, as amended.
   B.   Identification: Each emergency management volunteer shall be provided
with such suitable insignia or other identification as may be required by the
director. No volunteer shall exercise any authority over the persons or
property of others without the volunteer's identification as a volunteer. (New
Market 2004 Code § 5-2-6)
   C.   Firearms Prohibited: No emergency management volunteer shall carry any
firearm while on duty except on written order of the chief of police. (New
Market 2004 Code § 5-2-6; amd. 2011 Code)
6-3-7: APPLICATION OF CITY PERSONNEL PROCEDURES:
Personnel procedures of the city applicable to regular employees shall apply to
volunteer emergency management. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-2-7)
6-3-8: EMERGENCY REGULATIONS:
   A.   Definition: When used in this section, the term "major emergency"
includes, in addition to the meaning given in section
6-3-2 of this chapter, disasters caused by fire, flood, windstorm or other
natural or manmade causes. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-2-8)
   B.   Council Authority: Whenever necessary to meet a major emergency or to
prepare for such an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been
adopted by the governor or the city council, the council may, by ordinance,
promulgate regulations, consistent with applicable federal or state law or
regulation, respecting: protection against air raids; the sounding of air raid
alarms; the conduct of persons and the use of essential public services;
emergency health, fire, and safety regulations; trial drills or practice
periods required for preliminary training; and all other matters which are
required to protect public safety, health and welfare during major emergencies.
No regulation governing observation of enemy aircraft, air attack, alarms, or
illumination during air attacks shall be adopted or take effect unless approved
by the state director of emergency management. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-2-8;
amd. 2011 Code)
   C.   Ordinance Of Emergency Regulations: Every ordinance of emergency
regulations shall be in writing and signed by the mayor, shall be dated, shall
refer to the particular major emergency or disaster situation to which it
pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the city clerk,
where a copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during
business hours. Notice of the existence of such regulation and its availability
for inspection at the city clerk's office shall be conspicuously posted at the
front of the city hall or other headquarters of the city and at such other
places in the affected area as the council shall designate in the ordinance.
Thereupon, the regulation shall take effect immediately or at such later time
as may be specified in the ordinance. By like ordinance, the council may modify
or rescind any such regulation.
   D.   Time Limitation: An emergency may not be continued for a period in
excess of three (3) days, except by or with the consent of the city council.
Any ordinance, rule or regulation inconsistent with any emergency regulation
promulgated by the council shall be suspended during the period of time and to
the extent that such conflict exists. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-2-8)
6-3-9: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION:
All functions hereunder and all other activities relating to population
protection are hereby declared to be governmental functions. The provisions of
this section shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to
which the person would otherwise be entitled under this chapter or under the
workers' compensation law 1  or any pension law, nor the right of any such
person to receive any benefits or compensation under any act of congress. (New
Market 2004 Code § 5-2-9)
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 176.001 et seq.
6-3-10: PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS PROHIBITED:
The office of emergency management shall not participate in any form of
political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute. (New Market
2004 Code § 5-2-10)
6-3-11: FISCAL MATTERS:
There is hereby established an account in the general fund to be known as the
emergency management account. Into this account shall be placed the proceeds of
taxes levied for emergency management, monies transferred from other funds,
gifts and other revenues of the emergency management agency. From it shall be
made expenditures for the operation and maintenance of the office of emergency
management and other expenditures for emergency services. Regular accounting
procedures of the city shall apply to the emergency management fund insofar as
practicable, but budgeting requirements and other financial procedures shall
not apply to expenditures from the fund in any case when their application will
prevent compliance with terms and conditions of a federal or state grant of
money or property for emergency management purposes. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-
2-11)
6-3-12: COOPERATION WITH OTHER AGENCIES:
Every officer and agency of the city shall cooperate with federal and state
authorities and with authorized agencies engaged in emergency service measures
to the fullest possible extent consistent with the performance of their other
duties. The provisions of this chapter and of all regulations made hereunder
shall be subject to all applicable and controlling provisions of federal and
state laws and of regulations and orders issued thereunder and shall be deemed
to be suspended and inoperative so far as there is any conflict therewith. (New
Market 2004 Code § 5-2-12)
6-3-13: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or of any regulation
adopted hereunder relating to acts, omissions, or conduct, other than official
acts of city officials or employees, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (New Market
2004 Code § 5-2-13)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
6-4-1: Purpose
6-4-2: Definitions
6-4-3: Dogs And Cats
6-4-3-1: Running At Large Prohibited
6-4-3-2: Maximum Number Permitted
6-4-3-3: Licensing Regulations
6-4-3-4: Vaccinations Required
6-4-4: Nondomestic Animals
6-4-5: Farm Animals
6-4-5-1: Keeping Of Backyard Chickens
6-4-6: Impoundment And Redemption Provisions
6-4-7: Duty Of Animal Owners
6-4-8: Nuisance Conditions
6-4-9: Dangerous Animals
6-4-10: Diseased Animals
6-4-11: Treatment Of Animals
6-4-12: Seizure Of Animals
6-4-13: Breeding Control
6-4-14: Stopping An Attack
6-4-15: Enforcing Officers
6-4-16: Violations; Penalties
6-4-1: PURPOSE:
The city hereby establishes this chapter to protect the public health and
safety of its citizens and to promote the general welfare of the citizens and
animals residing within the city. Animal ownership is encouraged and welcomed
within the city; however, strong emphasis is placed on responsible ownership of
animals. Animal owners are encouraged to respect the rights of their fellow
citizens and also the health and safety of their animals. Primary
responsibility is placed upon animal owners to properly train and/or secure
their animals so as to prevent them from causing injuries and/or creating
nuisances. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
words shall be defined to mean:
ANIMAL: Any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including all fowl and
poultry) or other member commonly accepted as a part of the animal kingdom.
"Animals" shall be classified as follows:
Domestic Animal: Those animals commonly accepted as domesticated household
pets. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall include dogs, cats, caged
birds, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, domesticated rabbits, fish,
nonpoisonous, nonvenomous and nonconstricting reptiles or amphibians, and other
similar animals.
Farm Animals: Those animals commonly associated with a farm or performing work
in an agricultural setting. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall
include members of the equestrian family (horses, mules), bovine family (cows,
bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens, turkeys), fowl (ducks, geese), swine
(including Vietnamese potbellied pigs), goats, bees, and other animals
associated with a farm, ranch, or stable.
Nondomestic Animal: Those animals commonly considered to be naturally wild and
not naturally trained or domesticated, or which are commonly considered to be
inherently dangerous to the health, safety, and welfare of people. Unless
otherwise defined, such animals shall include:
   A.   Any member of the large cat family (family Felidae) including lions,
tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards and jaguars, but excluding commonly accepted
domesticated house cats.
   B.   Any naturally wild member of the canine family (family Canidae)
including wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes, and jackals, but excluding commonly
accepted domesticated dogs.
   C.   Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog, unless
the crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated house pet.
   D.   Any member or relative of the rodent family including any skunk
(whether or not descented), raccoon, or squirrel, but excluding those members
otherwise defined or commonly accepted as domesticated pets.
   E.   Any poisonous, venomous, constricting, or inherently dangerous member
of the reptile or amphibian families including rattlesnakes, boa constrictors,
pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators.
   F.   Any other animal which is not explicitly listed above but which can be
reasonably defined by the terms of this section, including, but not limited to,
bears, deer, monkeys and game fish (except game fish purchased through a
licensed dealer).
   G.   Ferrets.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY: The city of Elko New Market.
ANIMAL SHELTER: Any place that shelters lost or abandoned animals for the
purpose of reclaiming by the owner, adoption, placement with another agency, or
humane euthanization; may include limited veterinary services such as routine
vaccinations, spaying and neutering.
AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner and not under the custody and control
of the owner or other person, either by leash, cord, chain, or otherwise
restrained or confined.
BACKYARD CHICKEN: A female chicken or hen which serves as a source of eggs.
CAT: Both the male and female of the feline family commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets.
COOP: A structure used for housing of backyard chickens as permitted by this
chapter.
DANGEROUS DOG: Has the meaning given it under Minnesota statutes section
347.50, subdivision 2.
DOG: Both the male and female of the canine family, commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets, and other domesticated animals of a dog kind.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL ANIMAL: Any place that keeps four (4) or more of any one
type of domestic animal or more than six (6) or more of a combination of
domestic animals that are more than six (6) months of age for the purposes of
selling, boarding, breeding, training, treating or grooming.
OWNER: Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation, or department
possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in, or having care, custody,
or control of an animal.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG: Has the meaning given it under Minnesota statutes
section 347.50, subdivision 3.
PROPER ENCLOSURE: Securely confined indoors or in a securely locked pen or
structure suitable to prevent the animal from escaping and to provide
protection for the animal from the elements. A "proper enclosure" does not
include a porch, patio, or any part of a house, garage, or other structure that
would allow the animal to exit of its own volition, or any house or structure
in which windows are open or in which door or window screens are the only
barriers which prevent the animal from exiting. The enclosure shall not allow
the egress of the animal in any manner without human assistance. A pen or
kennel shall meet the following minimum specifications:
   A.   Have a minimum overall floor size of thirty two (32) square feet.
   B.   Sidewalls shall have a minimum height of five feet (5') and be
constructed of 11-gauge or heavier wire. Openings in the wire shall not exceed
two inches (2"), and support posts shall be one and one-fourth inch (11/4") or
larger steel pipe buried in the ground eighteen inches (18") or more. When a
concrete floor is not provided, the sidewalls shall be buried a minimum of
eighteen inches (18") in the ground.
   C.   A cover over the entire pen or kennel shall be provided. The cover
shall be constructed of the same gauge wire, or heavier, as the sidewalls and
shall also have no openings in the wire greater than two inches (2").
   D.   An entrance/exit gate shall be provided and be constructed of the same
material as the sidewalls and shall also have no openings in the wire greater
than two inches (2"). The gate shall be equipped with a device capable of being
locked and shall be locked at all times when the animal is in the pen or
kennel.
PROVOCATION: Has the meaning given it under Minnesota statutes section 347.50,
subdivision 8.
RELEASE PERMIT: A permit issued by the police department for the release of any
animal that has been taken to the pound. A release permit may be obtained upon
proof of rabies vaccination within the last two (2) years and payment of all of
the following fees: a) a fee in accordance with the regular license requirement
(if the animal is unlicensed); b) a release fee; and c) any maintenance costs
incurred in capturing and impounding the animal. The release fee shall be as
established from time to time by the city council under its fee schedule. For
the purpose of a release permit, any change in the registered ownership of an
animal subsequent to its impoundment and release shall reset that animal's
impoundment count to the beginning of the fee scale.
ROOSTER: A male chicken.
RUN: An enclosed outdoor area, as permitted by this chapter, within which
backyard chickens may roam.
TRAP, NEUTER AND RETURN PROGRAM: A city approved program in which stray and
feral cats already living outdoors are humanely trapped, then evaluated,
vaccinated, and sterilized. Kittens and tame (stray) cats may be adopted into
good homes. Healthy adult cats too wild (feral) to be adopted are returned to
their familiar habitat.
UNPROVOKED: The condition in which the animal is not purposely excited,
stimulated, agitated or disturbed. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008; amd. 2011 Code; Ord.
130, 4-28-2016, eff. 6-1-2016)
6-4-3: DOGS AND CATS:
6-4-3-1: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for the dog or cat of any person who owns, harbors, or
keeps a dog or cat, or the parents or the guardians of any such person under
eighteen (18) years of age, to run at large. Dogs or cats on a leash and
accompanied by a responsible person or accompanied by and under the control and
direction of a responsible person so as to be effectively restrained by command
as by leash shall be permitted in streets or on public land unless the city has
posted an area with signs reading "Dogs Or Cats Prohibited". (Ord. 24, 6-26-
2008)
6-4-3-2: MAXIMUM NUMBER PERMITTED:
It is unlawful for any person to keep more than three (3) of any one type of
domestic animal or more than five (5) of any combination of domestic animals,
that are more than six (6) months of age on any premises in the city, except
for commercial animal kennels permitted as provided in article C of this
chapter. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
6-4-3-3: LICENSING REGULATIONS:
   A.   License And Registration Required: All dogs over the age of six (6)
months kept, harbored, or maintained by their owners in the city shall be
licensed and registered with the city.
   B.   Application For License: Dog licenses shall be issued by the city clerk
upon payment of the license fee. The owner shall state, at the time application
is made for the license and upon forms provided for such purpose, his or her
name and address and the name, breed, color, and sex of each dog owned or kept
by him or her. No license shall be granted for a dog that does not have proper
certification of valid and current vaccination against distemper and rabies, as
provided in this section
 6-4-3. Any veterinarian who vaccinates a dog to be licensed in the city shall
complete a certificate of vaccination. One copy shall be issued to the dog
owner for affixing to the license application.
   C.   License Fee: It shall be the duty of each owner of a dog subject to
this section to pay to the city clerk the license fee as imposed by the city
council under the city fee schedule.
   D.   Tags:
      1.   Upon payment of the license fee, the city clerk shall issue to the
owner a license certificate and metallic tag for each dog licensed. The tag
shall have stamped on it the year for which it is issued and the number
corresponding with the number on the certificate.
      2.   Every owner shall be required to provide each dog with a collar to
which the license tag must be affixed and shall see that the collar and tag are
constantly worn.
      3.   If a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate shall be issued by
the city clerk upon payment of the duplicate tag fee.
      4.   Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another, and no
refunds shall be made on any dog license fee or tag because of the death of a
dog or the owner leaving the city before the expiration of the license period.
   E.   Exemptions: The licensing provisions of this section shall not apply
to:
      1.   Dogs whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the city;
      2.   Dogs brought into the city for the purpose of participating in any
dog show;
      3.   "Seeing eye" dogs properly trained to assist blind persons for the
purpose of aiding them in going from place to place when the dog is actually
being used for that purpose;
      4.   Dogs properly trained to assist hearing impaired persons for the
purpose of aiding them, when the dog is actually being used for that purpose;
and
      5.   Any dog used in law enforcement or that is under the ownership and
control of law enforcement. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
      6.   Dogs properly trained to assist persons with special needs, e.g.,
dogs trained to sense a person about to experience a seizure. (2011 Code)
   F.   Use Of Funds: The funds received by the city clerk from all dog
licenses and metallic tags fees shall first be used to defray any costs
incidental to the enforcement of this section; including, but not restricted
to, the costs of licenses, metallic tags, and impounding and maintenance of the
dogs.
   G.   Application To Cats: Except as part of a council approved trap, neuter
and return program, cats shall be included as controlled by this section
insofar as running at large, pick up, impounding, boarding, licensing and proof
of antirabies vaccine are concerned. All other provisions of this section shall
also apply to cats unless otherwise provided. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4-3-4: VACCINATIONS REQUIRED:
   A.   Required Vaccinations: All dogs and cats kept, harbored, maintained, or
transported within the city shall have a current valid vaccination for rabies
and distemper.
   B.   Certificate Of Vaccination: A certificate of vaccination must state the
date of vaccination, owner's name and address, the animal's name (if
applicable), sex, description and weight, the type of vaccine, and the
veterinarian's signature. Upon demand made by the city clerk or a police
officer, the owner shall present for examination the required certificate(s) of
vaccination for the animal(s). In cases where certificates are not presented,
the owner or keeper of the animal(s) shall have seven (7) days in which to
present the certificate(s) to the city clerk or police officer. Failure to do
so shall be deemed a violation of this section. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4-4: NONDOMESTIC ANIMALS:
It shall be illegal for any person to own, possess, harbor, or offer for sale
any nondomestic animal within the city limits. Any owner of such an animal at
the effective date hereof shall have thirty (30) days in which to remove the
animal from the city, after which time the city may impound the animal as
provided in this chapter. Exceptions to this prohibition are as follows:
   A.   The keeping of backyard chickens as regulated by section
 6-4-5-1 of this chapter.
   B.   Animals specifically trained for and actually providing assistance to
the handicapped or disabled, and for those animals brought into the city as
part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic or licensed show or exhibition.
(Ord. 130, 4-28-2016, eff. 6-1-2016)
6-4-5: FARM ANIMALS:
Farm animals shall be kept only in areas approved under the city zoning
ordinance. An exception shall be made to this section for those animals brought
into the city as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, or licensed
show or exhibition. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4-5-1: KEEPING OF BACKYARD CHICKENS:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose and intent of this section to permit, but
strictly limit, the keeping of backyard chickens as an egg source in a clean
and sanitary manner which is not a nuisance to or detrimental to the public
health, safety, and welfare of the city of Elko New Market.
   B.   Keeping Of Backyard Chickens Allowed: A person may keep up to four (4)
backyard chickens on property zoned R-1 suburban single-family residential as
provided for in section
11-25A-3 of this code and R-2 urban (small lot) single-family residential as
provided for in section
11-25B-3 of this code provided that:
      1.   The owner of the backyard chickens resides in a detached dwelling
located upon the parcel at which the backyard chickens are kept.
      2.   The owner of the subject parcel obtains a backyard chicken permit
from the city, issued in compliance with this section.
   C.   Permit Required: A permit is required for the keeping of backyard
chickens.
      1.   Those desiring to keep backyard chickens shall file a written
application with the city clerk on a form provided by the city and pay an
application fee.
      2.   Application materials provided to first time applicants (by the
city) shall include an educational pamphlet concerning the raising of backyard
chickens in residential areas of the city. Such educational pamphlet shall be
in a form approved by the city. Prior to permit issuance, applicants shall
acknowledge, in writing, that they have read such pamphlet.
      3.   The application shall include the following:
         a.   The breed and number of chickens to be maintained on the
premises.
         b.   A written statement that the applicant shall, at all times, keep
the backyard chickens in accordance with all of the conditions prescribed by
the city and that failure to obey such conditions shall constitute a violation
of the provisions of this chapter and will be grounds for cancellation of the
permit.
         c.   A legal description of the real property upon which it is desired
to keep the chickens and evidence of title to the property.
         d.   Consent of the property owner for the keeping of chickens.
         e.   A site plan of the property showing the location and size of the
proposed chicken coop and run, setbacks from the chicken coop to property lines
and surrounding buildings (including houses and buildings on adjacent lots),
and the location, style, and height of fencing proposed to contain the chickens
in a run or exercise area. Portable coops and cages are allowed, but portable
locations shall be illustrated with the site plan.
         f.   The required permit fee in accordance with the city's adopted fee
schedule.
         g.   Other information as may be required by the city clerk necessary
to process the permit.
         h.   The city clerk and/or designee shall process the application.
      4.   All initial permits shall expire on December 31 of the following
year after their issuance unless sooner revoked. Renewal permits shall expire
on December 31 of the second year following their issuance unless sooner
revoked.
      5.   The city, upon written notice, may revoke a permit for failure to
comply with provisions of this section or any of the permit's conditions.
      6.   The city may inspect the premises for which a permit has been
granted in order to ensure compliance with this section. If the city is not
able to obtain the occupant's consent to enter the property, it may seek an
administrative search warrant or revoke the permit.
      7.   The city may revoke any permit issued under this section if the
permit holder fails or refuses to comply with the requirements of this section
or any state or local law governing the cruelty to animals or the keeping of
animals. Any person whose permit is revoked shall have the right to appeal the
revocation according to the process provided under section
4-1-11 of this code.
      8.   Any person whose permit for the keeping of backyard chickens is
revoked or who fails to renew a permit shall, within ten (10) days thereafter,
humanely dispose of all chickens owned, kept or harbored by such person on the
subject property.
   D.   General Standards For The Keeping Of Backyard Chickens:
      1.   The keeping of roosters is prohibited under this section.
      2.   Backyard chickens shall not be raised or kept for the purpose of
fighting.
      3.   Backyard chickens shall not be kept in a dwelling, garage or
accessory structure other than those meeting the requirements of an enclosed
coop.
      4.   All backyard chickens shall have access to an enclosed coop meeting
the following minimum standards:
         a.   The enclosed coop may not occupy a front or side yard.
         b.   A maximum of one coop per lot shall be permitted.
         c.   The enclosed coop shall have a minimum size of four (4) square
feet per chicken and shall not exceed a maximum of forty (40) square feet in
total area.
         d.   The enclosed coop shall be set back a minimum of twenty five feet
(25') from the principal structure, at least ten feet (10') from all property
lines and shall not encroach upon utility easements.
         e.   The enclosed coop shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height.
         f.   The enclosed coop shall be the same or similar in color to the
principal structure on the lot.
         g.   Enclosed coops shall be compatible with the principal building on
the lot. Under no circumstances shall sheet metal, corrugated metal, asbestos,
iron, plain concrete block (whether painted or color integrated or not) be
deemed acceptable as major exterior wall materials. "Compatible" means that the
exterior appearance of the coop (accessory building) is not at variance with
the principal building from an aesthetic and architectural standpoint as to
cause:
            (1)   A difference to a degree to cause incongruity.
            (2)   A depreciation of neighborhood values or adjacent property
values.
            (3)   A nuisance which may have characteristics related to noise,
dust, odors, glare, and unsightly building exterior.
         h.   The enclosed coop shall be built to protect the backyard chickens
from extreme heat or cold.
         i.   The enclosed coop shall be at all times maintained in a good
condition.
         j.   The enclosed coop shall comply with all applicable building code
requirements.
      5.   All backyard chickens shall have access to a run meeting the
following minimum standards:
         a.   The run shall be attached to and provided access to the coop.
         b.   The run shall be set back a minimum of twenty five feet (25')
from the principal structure, at least ten feet (10') from all property lines
and shall not encroach upon utility easements.
         c.   A maximum of one run per lot shall be permitted.
         d.   The run shall have a maximum size of twenty (20) square feet per
chicken.
         e.   The run shall be fully enclosed and covered with durable
materials. Structural components of the run shall be consistent with coop
materials.
         f.   Fencing materials used as run components shall be consistent with
fence requirements imposed in residential zoning districts as provided in this
code.
         g.   The run shall be maintained in a good condition at all times.
      6.   The following minimum sanitation standards shall be observed at all
times:
         a.   The slaughtering of backyard chickens on the property is
prohibited.
         b.   No chicken or chicken byproducts shall be sold upon the subject
property.
         c.   All premises on which backyard chickens are kept or maintained
shall be kept clean from filth, garbage, and any substances which attract
rodents. The coop and its surrounding area shall be cleaned frequently to
control odor. Manure shall not be allowed to accumulate in a way that causes an
unsanitary condition or causes odors to be detectible from another property.
Failure to comply with these conditions may result in the removal of backyard
chickens from the premises and/or revocation of the backyard chicken permit.
         d.   All grain and food stored for backyard chickens shall be kept
indoors in a rodentproof container.
         e.   Backyard chickens shall be kept in such a manner which does not
constitute a nuisance as provided for in chapter 5, article B of this title.
         f.   Persons no longer intending to keep backyard chickens on the
subject property shall notify the city in writing and remove the enclosed coop
and run.
         g.   The enclosed coop and run shall be removed from the property upon
permit expiration and/or permit revocation at the property owner's expense.
(Ord. 130, 4-28-2016, eff. 6-1-2016)
6-4-6: IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION PROVISIONS:
   A.   Official Pound: Every year the council shall designate an official
pound to which animals found in violation of this chapter shall be taken for
safe treatment and, if necessary, for destruction.
   B.   Impoundment Of Animals:
      1.   Running At Large: Any animal running at large is hereby declared a
public nuisance. Except as otherwise provided under a city approved trap,
neuter and release program, any police officer may impound any dog or other
animal found unlicensed or any animal found running at large and shall give
notice of the impounding to the owner of such dog or other animal, if known. In
case the owner is unknown, the officer shall post notice at the city office
that if the dog or other animal is not claimed within the time specified in
subsection C of this section, it will be sold or otherwise disposed of. Except
as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful to kill, destroy,
or otherwise cause injury to any animal, including dogs and cats running at
large. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
      2.   Animals That Bite: Any animal that does not have a current and valid
rabies vaccination and which has bitten any person, wherein the skin has been
punctured or the services of a doctor are required, shall be confined in the
city pound for a period of not less than ten (10) days, at the expense of the
owner. The animal may be released at the end of such time if healthy and free
from symptoms of rabies and by the payment of all costs by the owner. However,
if the owner of the animal shall elect immediately upon receipt of notice of
need for such confinement by the officer to voluntarily and immediately confine
the animal for the required period of time in a veterinary hospital of the
owner's choosing, not outside of the county, and provide immediate proof of
such confinement in such manner as may be required, the owner may do so. If,
however, the animal has been properly vaccinated for rabies and the owner has
proof of the vaccination by a certificate from a licensed veterinarian, the
owner may confine the dog or other animal to the owner's property. (Ord. 24, 6-
26-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
      3.   Animal That Has Been Bitten Or Exposed: Any animal known to have
been bitten or exposed to rabies shall be impounded and destroyed; provided,
however, that such animal may be immediately destroyed if, with reasonable
effort, it cannot first be taken up and impounded. If such an animal is
impounded, it shall not be destroyed if the owner makes provision for suitable
quarantine for a period of not less than six (6) months or proof of
immunization is furnished and booster injections are given by a licensed
veterinarian at the expense of the owner. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
   C.   Conditions Of Impoundment; Reclamation Of Animal: All animals conveyed
to the pound shall be kept, with humane treatment and sufficient food and water
for their comfort, at least five (5) regular business days, unless the animal
is a dangerous animal as defined in section
6-4-9 of this chapter, in which case, it shall be kept for seven (7) regular
business days, and if the animal is a cruelly treated animal, it shall be kept
for ten (10) regular business days, unless sooner reclaimed by its owners or
keepers as provided by this section. In case the owner or keeper shall desire
to reclaim the animal from the pound, the following shall be required, unless
otherwise provided in this code or established from time to time by ordinance
of the city council: (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
      1.   Payment of a release fee and receipt of a release permit from the
police. This release fee is in addition to the release permit fee;
      2.   Payment of maintenance costs, as provided by the pound, per day or
any part of day while the animal is in the pound; and
      3.   If a dog is unlicensed, payment of a regular license fee and valid
certificate of vaccination for rabies and distemper shots.
   D.   Unclaimed Animals: At the expiration of the times established in
subsection C of this section, if the animal has not been reclaimed in
accordance with the provisions of this section, the officer appointed to
enforce this section may let any person claim the animal by complying with all
provisions in this section, or released for adoption, or cause the animal to be
destroyed in a proper and humane manner and shall properly dispose of the
remains thereof. Any money collected under this subsection shall be payable to
the city clerk. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4-7: DUTY OF ANIMAL OWNERS:
It shall be the duty of every owner of an animal, or anyone having any animal
in his or her possession or custody, to exercise reasonable care and to take
all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property, and
animals from injuries or damage that might result from his or her animal's
behavior, regardless of whether such behavior is motivated by mischievousness,
playfulness, or ferocity. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4-8: NUISANCE CONDITIONS:
   A.   Barking: Barking dogs shall be subject to the provisions of subsection
5-5-1I of this code. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
   B.   Damage To Property: It shall be unlawful for any owner's dog or other
animal to damage any lawn, garden, or other property, whether or not the owner
has knowledge of the damage. Any animal covered by this subsection may be
impounded as provided in this chapter or a complaint may be issued by anyone
aggrieved by an animal under this subsection against the owner of the animal
for prosecution under this subsection.
   C.   Feces Removal: The owner of any animal or person having the custody or
control of any animal shall be responsible for cleaning up any feces of the
animal and disposing of such feces in a sanitary manner whether on his own
property, on the property of others or on public property.
   D.   Violations: Any animals kept contrary to this section are subject to
impoundment as provided in section
6-4-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4-9: DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
If, in the reasonable belief of any person or police officer, an animal
presents an immediate danger to the health and safety of any person, or the
animal is threatening imminent harm to any person, or the animal is in the
process of attacking any person, the officer may destroy the animal in a proper
and humane manner. Otherwise, the person or officer may apprehend the animal
and deliver it to the pound for confinement under section
 6-4-6 of this chapter. If the animal is destroyed, the costs to dispose of the
animal are payable by the owner of the animal to the city. If the animal is
found not to be a danger to the health and safety of the city, it may be
released to the owner or keeper in accordance with section
6-4-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4-10: DISEASED ANIMALS:
   A.   Prohibited: No person shall keep or allow to be kept on his or her
premises, or on premises occupied by him or her, nor permit to run at large in
the city any animal that is diseased so as to be a danger to the health and
safety of the city, even though the animal is properly licensed under this
chapter.
   B.   Confinement: Any animal reasonably suspected of being diseased and
presenting a threat to the health and safety of the public may be apprehended
and confined in the pound by any person or police officer. The police officer
shall have a qualified veterinarian examine the animal. If the animal is found
to be diseased in such a manner so as to be a danger to the health and safety
of the city, the officer shall cause such animal to be painlessly destroyed and
shall properly dispose of the remains. The owner or keeper of the animal
destroyed under this subsection shall be liable for the actual costs to cover
the cost of maintaining and disposing of the animal, plus the costs of any
veterinarian examinations.
   C.   Release: If the animal, upon examination, is not found to be diseased
within the meaning of this section, the animal shall be released to the owner
or keeper free of charge. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4-11: TREATMENT OF ANIMALS:
   A.   Outdoor Dogs: An owner of a dog that is kept outdoors or in an unheated
enclosure shall provide the dog with shelter and bedding as prescribed in this
subsection as a minimum.
      1.   Building Specifications: The shelter shall include a moistureproof
and windproof structure of suitable size to accommodate the dog and allow
retention of body heat. It shall be made of durable materials with a solid
floor raised at least two inches (2") from the ground and with the entrance
covered by a flexible windproof material or a self-closing swinging door. The
structure shall be provided with a sufficient quantity of suitable bedding
materials consisting of hay, straw, cedar shavings, blankets or the equivalent,
to provide insulation and protection against cold and dampness and promote
retention of body heat.
      2.   Shade: Shade from the direct rays of the sun during the months of
June to September shall be provided.
      3.   Farm Dogs: In lieu of the requirements of subsections A1 and A2 of
this section, a dog kept on a farm may be provided with access to a barn with a
sufficient quantity of loose hay or bedding to protect against cold and
dampness.
   B.   Inhumane Treatment:
      1.   Torture: No person shall overdrive, overload, torture, cruelly beat,
neglect or unjustifiably injure, maim, mutilate, or kill any animal, or cruelly
work any animal, whether it belongs to himself or another person.
      2.   Nourishment; Shelter: No person shall deprive any animal over which
he has charge or control of necessary food, water or shelter.
      3.   Cruelty: No person shall wilfully instigate or in any way further
any act of cruelty to any animal or animals, or any act tending to produce
cruelty to animals.
   C.   Abandonment: It is unlawful for any person to abandon any animal within
the city. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4-12: SEIZURE OF ANIMALS:
Any police officer or animal control officer may enter upon private property
and seize any animal; provided, that following exist:
   A.   There is an identified complainant other than the police officer or
animal control officer making a contemporaneous complaint about the animal;
   B.   The officer reasonably believes that the animal meets either the
barking dog criteria set out in subsection
6-4-8A of this chapter, the criteria for cruelty set out in subsection
6-4-11B of this chapter, or the criteria for an at large animal set out in
section
6-4-3-1 of this chapter;
   C.   The officer can demonstrate that there has been at least one previous
complaint of a barking dog, inhumane treatment of the animal, or that the
animal was at large at this address on a prior date;
   D.   The officer has made a reasonable attempt to contact the owner of the
property, and those attempts have either failed or have been ignored;
   E.   The seizure will not involve the forced entry into a private residence.
Use of a pass key obtained from a property manager, landlord, innkeeper, or
other authorized person to have such key shall not be considered unauthorized
entry; and (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
   F.   Written notice of the seizure is left in a conspicuous place if
personal contact with the owner of the animal is not possible. (Ord. 24, 6-26-
2008; amd. 2011 Code)
6-4-13: BREEDING CONTROL:
Every female dog or female cat in heat shall be confined in a building or other
enclosure in such manner that it cannot come in contact with another dog or cat
except for planned breeding. Upon capture and failure to reclaim the animal,
every dog or cat shall be neutered or spayed prior to being transferred to a
new owner. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4-14: STOPPING AN ATTACK:
If any police officer or animal control officer is witness to an attack by an
animal upon a person or another animal, the officer may take whatever means the
officer deems appropriate to bring the attack to an end and prevent further
injury to the victim. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4-15: ENFORCING OFFICERS:
   A.   Appointment: The council is hereby authorized to appoint an animal
control officer(s) to enforce the provisions of this chapter. In the officer's
duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, he or she may from time to
time, with the consent of the council, designate assistants.
   B.   Interference Prohibited: No person shall in any manner molest, hinder,
or interfere with any person authorized by the council to capture dogs, cats or
other animals and convey them to the pound while engaged in such operation; nor
shall any unauthorized person break open the pound, or attempt to do so, or
take or attempt to take from any agent any animal taken up by him or her in
compliance with this chapter, or in any other manner to interfere with or
hinder such officer in the discharge of his or her duties under this chapter.
(Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4-16: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Separate Offenses: Each day a violation of this chapter is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such under this section.
   B.   Misdemeanor: Unless otherwise provided, violation of this chapter shall
constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
   C.   Exception: Penalties greater than those set forth in this section are
imposed by Minnesota state statute for various sections of this chapter. In
such cases the more severe penalties shall apply. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008; amd.
2011 Code)
ARTICLE A. POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS AND DANGEROUS DOGS
SECTION:
6-4A-1: Potentially Dangerous Dogs
6-4A-2: Dangerous Dogs
6-4A-2-1: Declaration Of Dangerous Dog
6-4A-2-2: Exemptions
6-4A-2-3: Notice Requirements
6-4A-2-4: Hearing
6-4A-2-5: Registration Of Dangerous Dog
6-4A-2-6: Owner Requirements
6-4A-2-7: Seizure
6-4A-2-8: Reclamation Of Dog
6-4A-2-9: Subsequent Offenses
6-4A-2-10: Destruction Of Dog
6-4A-2-11: Ownership Restrictions
6-4A-1: POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS:
   A.   Designation: The animal control authority shall have the authority to
designate any dog as a potentially dangerous dog if the authority believes that
the dog: (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
      1.   When unprovoked, inflicted bites on a human or domestic animal on
public or private property; or
      2.   When unprovoked, chased or approached a person, including a person
on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private property,
other than the dog owner's property, in an apparent attitude of attack; or
      3.   Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack
unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or
domestic animals.
   B.   Notice: Upon a determination by the animal control authority that a dog
is potentially dangerous, the authority shall provide a notice to the owner
that states: a description of the dog declared potentially dangerous; the
authority for and purpose of the potentially dangerous declaration; the time,
place, and circumstances under which the dog is declared potentially dangerous;
and the requirements of subsection C of this section.
   C.   Microchip Required: The owner of a potentially dangerous dog must have
a microchip implanted in the dog for identification pursuant to Minnesota
statutes section 347.515.
   D.   Hearing: The owner of a dog declared potentially dangerous has the
right to a hearing by an impartial hearing officer. Any hearing must be held
within fourteen (14) days of the owner's request to determine the validity of
the potentially dangerous dog declaration. The hearing officer must be an
impartial employee of the city or an impartial person retained by the city to
conduct the hearing. In the event that the potentially dangerous dog
declaration is upheld by the hearing officer, actual expenses of the hearing,
up to a maximum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), will be the responsibility
of the dog's owner. The hearing officer shall issue a decision on the matter
within ten (10) days after the hearing. The decision must be delivered to the
dog's owner by hand delivery or registered mail as soon as practical, and a
copy must be provided to the animal control authority. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4A-2: DANGEROUS DOGS:
6-4A-2-1:   DECLARATION OF DANGEROUS DOG:
The animal control authority shall determine that a dog is dangerous if the
authority believes that a dog has:
   A.   Without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a human being
on public or private property;
   B.   Killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's
property; or
   C.   Been found to be potentially dangerous, and after the owner has notice
that the dog is potentially dangerous, the dog aggressively bites, attacks, or
endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4A-2-2:   EXEMPTIONS:
Dogs may not be declared dangerous if the threat, injury, or damage was
sustained by a person:
   A.   Who was committing, at the time, a wilful trespass or other tort upon
the premises occupied by the owner of the dog;
   B.   Who was provoking, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or who
can be shown to have repeatedly, in the past, provoked, tormented, abused, or
assaulted the dog; or
   C.   Who was committing or attempting to commit a crime. (Ord. 24, 6-26-
2008)
6-4A-2-3:   NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
The animal control authority shall give notice that a dog is a dangerous dog by
delivering it or mailing it to the owner of the dog, or posting a copy of it at
the place where the dog is kept, or by delivering it to a person residing on
the property, and telephoning, if possible. The notice must include:
   A.   A description of the dog; the authority for and purpose of the
dangerous dog declaration and seizure, if applicable; the time, place, and
circumstances under which the dog was declared dangerous; and if the dog is
seized, the telephone number and contact person where the dog is kept;
   B.   A statement as to whether the animal control authority is seeking
destruction of the dog; (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
   C.   A statement that the dog owner must comply with the requirements in
this section
6-4A-2; (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
   D.   A statement that the owner of the dog may request a hearing concerning
the dangerous dog declaration and, if applicable, prior potentially dangerous
dog declarations for the dog, and that failure to do so within fourteen (14)
days of the date of the notice will terminate the owner's right to a hearing
under this section 6-4A-2;
   E.   A statement that if an appeal request is made within fourteen (14) days
of the notice, the owner must immediately comply with the requirements of
Minnesota statutes section 347.52, paragraphs (a) and (c), and until such time
as the hearing officer issues an opinion;
   F.   A statement that if the hearing officer affirms the dangerous dog
declaration, the owner will have fourteen (14) days from receipt of that
decision to comply with all other requirements of Minnesota statutes sections
347.51, 347.515, and 347.52;
   G.   A form to request a hearing under this section
 6-4A-2; and
   H.   A statement that all actual costs of the care, keeping, and disposition
of the dog are the responsibility of the person claiming an interest in the
dog, except to the extent that a court or hearing officer finds that the
seizure or impoundment was not substantially justified by law. (Ord. 24, 6-26-
2008)
6-4A-2-4:   HEARING:
The owner of a dog declared dangerous has the right to a hearing by an
impartial hearing officer. Any hearing must be held within fourteen (14) days
of the owner's request to determine the validity of the dangerous dog
declaration. The hearing officer must be an impartial employee of the city or
an impartial person retained by the city to conduct the hearing. In the event
that the dangerous dog declaration is upheld by the hearing officer, actual
expenses of the hearing, up to a maximum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00),
will be the responsibility of the dog owner. The hearing officer shall issue a
decision on the matter within ten (10) days after the hearing. The decision
must be delivered to the dog owner by hand delivery or registered mail as soon
as practical, and a copy must be provided to the animal control authority.
(Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4A-2-5:   REGISTRATION OF DANGEROUS DOG:
The animal control authority shall issue a certificate of registration to the
owner of a dangerous dog if the owner presents sufficient evidence that:
   A.   A proper enclosure exists for the dangerous dog and a posting on the
premises with a clearly visible warning sign that there is a dangerous dog on
the property, including a warning symbol to inform children;
   B.   A surety bond issued by a surety company authorized to conduct business
in this state in a form acceptable to the animal control authority in the sum
of at least three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00), payable to any person
injured by the dangerous dog, or a policy of liability insurance issued by an
insurance company authorized to conduct business in this state in the amount of
at least three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00), insuring the owner for
any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog; (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
   C.   The owner has paid the fee established by city council ordinance; (Ord.
24, 6-26-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
   D.   The owner has had microchip identification implanted in the dangerous
dog as required under Minnesota statutes section 347.515; and
   E.   The owner has a standardized, easily identifiable tag identifying the
dog as dangerous and containing the uniform dangerous dog symbol affixed to the
dog's collar at all times. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4A-2-6:   OWNER REQUIREMENTS:
The owner of a dangerous dog shall comply with the following:
   A.   An owner of a dangerous dog shall keep the dog, while on the owner's
property, in a proper enclosure. If the dog is outside the proper enclosure,
the dog must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and
under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle must be made
in a manner that will prevent the dog from biting any person or animal but that
will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration.
(Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
   B.   An owner of a dangerous dog must renew the registration of the dog
annually until the dog is deceased. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
   C.   An owner of a dangerous dog must notify the animal control authority in
writing of the death of the dog or its transfer to a new owner within thirty
(30) days of the death or transfer, and must, if requested by the animal
control authority, execute an affidavit under oath setting forth either the
circumstances of the dog's death and disposition or the complete name, address,
and telephone number of the person to whom the dog has been transferred and
location where the dog will reside or the address where the dog has been
relocated.
   D.   An animal control authority shall require a dangerous dog to be
sterilized at the owner's expense. If the owner does not have the animal
sterilized within thirty (30) days, the animal control authority shall seize
the dog and have it sterilized at the owner's expense.
   E.   A person who owns a dangerous dog and who rents property from another
where the dog will reside must disclose to the property owner prior to entering
the lease agreement and at the time of any lease renewal that the person owns a
dangerous dog that will reside at the property.
   F.   A person who transfers ownership of a dangerous dog must notify the new
owner that the animal control authority has identified the dog as dangerous.
The current owner must also notify the animal control authority in writing of
the transfer of ownership and provide the animal control authority with the new
owner's name, address, and telephone number. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4A-2-7:   SEIZURE:
   A.   The animal control authority shall immediately seize any dangerous dog
if:
      1.   After fourteen (14) days after the owner has notice that the dog is
dangerous, is not validly registered under Minnesota statutes section 347.51;
      2.   After fourteen (14) days after the owner has notice that the dog is
dangerous, the owner does not secure proper liability insurance under Minnesota
statutes section 347.51, subdivision 2;
      3.   The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure;
      4.   The dog is outside the proper enclosure but not under physical
restraint of a responsible person under Minnesota statutes section 347.52; or
      5.   The dog is not sterilized within thirty (30) days pursuant to
Minnesota statutes section 347.52, paragraph (d).
   B.   If an owner of a dog is convicted of a crime for which the dog was
originally seized, the court may order that the dog be confiscated and
destroyed in a proper and humane manner, and that the owner pay the costs
incurred in confiscating, confining, and destroying the dog. (Ord. 24, 6-26-
2008)
6-4A-2-8:   RECLAMATION OF DOG:
A dangerous dog seized under section 6-4A-2-7 of this article may be reclaimed
by the owner upon payment of impounding and boarding fees, and presenting proof
to the animal control authority that each of the requirements of this article
are met. Any dog not reclaimed under this section within seven (7) days may be
disposed of as provided under Minnesota statutes section 35.71, subdivision 3,
and the owner is liable to the animal control authority for costs incurred in
confining the animal. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4A-2-9:   SUBSEQUENT OFFENSES:
If a person has been convicted of violating Minnesota statutes sections 347.51,
347.515, and 347.52 with the same dog, the dog must be seized by the animal
control authority. If the owner is convicted of the crime for which the dog was
seized, the animal control authority shall order the dog destroyed in a proper
and humane manner, and the owner shall pay the costs of confining the dog. If
the owner is not convicted and the dog is not reclaimed by the owner within
seven (7) days after the date the owner is notified that the dog may be
reclaimed, the dog may be disposed of as provided under Minnesota statutes
section 35.71, subdivision 3. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4A-2-10:   DESTRUCTION OF DOG:
   A.   A dog may be destroyed in a proper and humane manner by the animal
control authority if the dog:
      1.   Inflicted substantial or great bodily harm on a human on public or
private property without provocation;
      2.   Inflicted multiple bites on a human on public or private property
without provocation;
      3.   Bit multiple human victims on public or private property in the same
attack without provocation; or
      4.   Bit a human on public or private property without provocation in an
attack where more than one dog participated in the attack.
   B.   The animal control authority may not destroy a dog until the dog owner
has had the opportunity for a hearing pursuant to section 6-4A-2-4 of this
article. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4A-2-11:   OWNERSHIP RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection C of this section, no person may own a
dog if the person has:
      1.   Been convicted of a third or subsequent violation of Minnesota
statutes section 347.51, 347.515, or 347.52;
      2.   Been convicted of a violation under Minnesota statutes section
609.205, clause (4);
      3.   Been convicted of a gross misdemeanor under Minnesota statutes
section 609.226, subdivision 1;
      4.   Been convicted of a violation under Minnesota statutes section
609.226, subdivision 2; or
      5.   Had a dog ordered destroyed under Minnesota statutes section 347.56
and been convicted of one or more violations of Minnesota statutes section
347.51, 346.515, 347.52, or 609.226, subdivision 2.
   B.   If any member of a household is prohibited from owning a dog in
subsection A of this section, unless specifically approved with or without
restrictions by an animal control authority, no person in the household is
permitted to own a dog. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
   C.   Beginning three (3) years after a conviction under subsection A of this
section that prohibits a person from owning a dog, and annually thereafter, the
person may request that the animal control authority review the prohibition.
The animal control authority may consider such facts as the seriousness of the
violation or violations that led to the prohibition, any criminal convictions,
or other facts that the animal control authority deems appropriate. The animal
control authority may rescind the prohibition entirely or rescind it with
limitations. The animal control authority also may establish conditions a
person must meet before the prohibition is rescinded, including, but not
limited to, successfully completing dog training or dog handling courses. If
the animal control authority rescinds a person's prohibition and the person
subsequently fails to comply with any limitations imposed by the animal control
authority or the person is convicted of any animal violation involving
unprovoked bites or dog attacks, the animal control authority may permanently
prohibit the person from owning a dog in the city. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008; amd.
2011 Code)
ARTICLE B. ANIMAL SHELTERS
SECTION:
6-4B-1: License Required
6-4B-2: Ineligibility For License
6-4B-3: Application For License
6-4B-4: Fees
6-4B-5: Review Of Application; Grant Or Denial Of License
6-4B-6: Expiration And Renewal Of License
6-4B-7: Display Of License
6-4B-8: Compliance With Regulations
6-4B-9: Rules And Regulations
6-4B-10: Denial, Revocation, Suspension Or Nonrenewal Of License
6-4B-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No animal shelter may be operated without first being issued an animal shelter
license. A separate license shall be obtained for each place of business. (Ord.
24, 6-26-2008)
6-4B-2: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
   A.   No license shall be issued if the applicants have been convicted of any
offense involving cruelty to animals, the operation of animal shelters, or
animal related nuisances. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
   B.   No licenses shall be issued to applicants who have, within one year
prior to the date of application, been denied licensure or who have, within
such period, had a same or similar license revoked.
   C.   No licenses shall be issued to applicants who have failed to provide
all of the information requested in the application, failed to pay the full
license fee, or failed to cooperate with the city in review of the application.
   D.   Licenses shall not be issued if the facilities or property fails to
meet any provision in an interim use permit or other zoning restriction. (Ord.
24, 6-26-2008)
6-4B-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   An application for an animal shelter license shall be made on forms
provided by the city. The applicant shall provide:
      1.   A description of the property to be used;
      2.   The names and addresses of the owner, lessee, if any, and the
operator or manager;
      3.   The names, residences, and addresses of two (2) persons, residents
of the county, who are familiar with the applicant's, manager's, or operator's
character;
      4.   Any convictions of a crime or offense other than a traffic offense
and, if so, information as to the time, place, and nature of such crime or
offense;
      5.   Names and contact information (phone numbers and addresses) of those
persons who will be from time to time designated as contact persons; and
      6.   Any other information as may be required by the city.
   B.   If the application is made on behalf of a corporation or a partnership,
it shall be accompanied by appropriate business records showing the names and
addresses of all individuals having an interest in the business and, in the
case of a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and
shareholders. An applicant shall furnish to the city with his application
documents establishing the applicant's interest in the premises on which the
business will be located. Documentation shall be in the form of a lease, deed,
contract for deed, or any other document that establishes the applicant's
interest.
   C.   Applications shall be signed and notarized. If the applicant is a
natural person, it shall be signed by such person; if a partnership, by one of
the partners; and if a corporation, by the manager or managing officer. (Ord.
24, 6-26-2008)
6-4B-4: FEES:
The application and license fees shall be as established by the city fee
schedule. The application, investigation, and license fees shall be paid when
the application is filed. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4B-5: REVIEW OF APPLICATION; GRANT OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
License applications shall be reviewed by such departments as the city
administrator shall direct. The review shall include an inspection of the
premises covered by the application to determine whether the premises conforms
to all requirements of this code. Licenses shall be granted or denied by the
city administrator, subject to the provisions of this article. The city
administrator shall approve the license if the provisions of this code are met
and deny the license if the provisions are not met. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4B-6: EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Licenses shall expire on December 31 following the issuance of the license.
Applications to renew an existing license must be submitted by December 31.
(Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4B-7: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
The licensee shall display the license at all times in a prominent place in the
licensed business. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4B-8: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
Animal shelters must comply with all applicable provisions of this code and the
city zoning ordinance. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4B-9: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
All animal shelters must operate according to the following rules and
regulations:
   A.   The licensee shall permit the inspection of the premises during
business hours by all appropriate city employees.
   B.   Housing and shelter must be provided that will keep animals comfortable
and protected from the elements, and housing or shelter shall be so located as
to not create a nuisance.
   C.   All accumulations of feces shall be removed at such periods as will
ensure that no leaching or objectionable odors exist, and the premises shall
not be allowed to become unsightly.
   D.   The following regulations apply to the site's animal quarters:
      1.   Indoor housing facilities must be structurally sound with ample
heat, light, and ventilation. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
      2.   If animals are confined by chains, such chains must be attached so
as not to become entangled with chains of other animals. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008;
amd. 2011 Code)
      3.   Individual animal enclosures must be of a size to allow each animal
to turn around fully and stand, sit, and lie in a comfortable position.
   E.   Animals are provided wholesome, palatable food and water free from
contamination and of sufficient quality and nutritive value to maintain all
animals in good health. Adequate storage and refrigeration is provided to
protect food supplies against contamination and deterioration. Shelters shall
not make food available to animals that are not housed with the facility.
   F.   Disposal facilities are provided to minimize virus infestation, odors,
and disease hazards.
   G.   A room separate from the kennel area is provided of sufficient size to
adequately separate animals that are sick or injured from healthy animals.
   H.   Indoor floors and walls are constructed of nonporous materials or
sealed concrete to make nonporous, or there is an adequate provision of
controlling waste odor.
   I.   The animal shelters must at all times have a designated contact person
available. The designated contact person must be available to correct and
mitigate violations of this article and this code whenever they occur. The
licensee shall notify the city in writing of the designated contact person
along with contact information. The licensee shall notify the city in writing
of any change in the contact person. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
   J.   Facility employees shall ensure that animals are not allowed to create
noise in violation of this code. When a citizen complaint is received, facility
employees must make affirmative steps to reduce animal noise. (Ord. 24, 6-26-
2008; amd. 2011 Code)
   K.   The shelter shall maintain a record of a all animals accepted by the
shelter including license number, name, owner, age, type, breed, identifying
markings, and date of admittance. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4B-10: DENIAL, REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR NONRENEWAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Grounds: The license may be denied, revoked, suspended or not renewed
by the city administrator upon a showing that the licensee or its owner,
manager, employee or agent has engaged in: (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
      1.   Fraud, deception or misrepresentation in connection with securing or
retaining the license.
      2.   Any conduct that would constitute grounds for refusal to issue a
license under this article.
      3.   Any conduct constituting a violation of any of the rules and
regulations provided under this article.
      4.   Any conduct constituting a violation of any provision of an interim
use permit or other zoning restriction.
      5.   Any conduct constituting a nuisance. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
   B.   Appeal: The licensee may appeal a license denial, suspension,
revocation, or nonrenewal to the city council. The licensee must file with the
city clerk a notice of appeal within ten (10) days of a revocation, suspension,
or nonrenewal. The council shall consider the appeal at a regularly or
specially scheduled council meeting on or after fifteen (15) days from service
of the notice of appeal upon the city clerk by the licensee. Hearing on the
appeal shall be open to the public, and the licensee shall have the right to
appear and be represented by legal counsel and to offer evidence. At the
conclusion of the hearing, or as soon as thereafter as practicable, the council
may order:
      1.   The denial, revocation, suspension, or nonrenewal of the license.
      2.   The denial, revocation, suspension, or nonrenewal by the city
administrator be lifted and the license be returned to the licensee. (Ord. 24,
6-26-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
      3.   Additional terms, conditions and stipulations to be imposed on the
licensee to mitigate problems. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
ARTICLE C. COMMERCIAL ANIMAL KENNELS
SECTION:
6-4C-1: License Required
6-4C-2: Ineligibility For License
6-4C-3: Application For License
6-4C-4: Fees
6-4C-5: Review Of Application; Grant Or Denial Of License
6-4C-6: Expiration And Renewal Of License
6-4C-7: Display Of License
6-4C-8: Compliance With Regulations
6-4C-9: Rules And Regulations
6-4C-10: Denial, Revocation, Suspension Or Nonrenewal Of License
6-4C-11: Exemptions From Provisions
6-4C-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No commercial animal kennel may be operated without first being issued a
commercial animal kennel license. A separate license shall be obtained for each
place of business. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
6-4C-2: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
   A.   No license shall be issued if the applicants have been convicted of any
offense involving cruelty to animals, the operation of kennels, or animal
related nuisances.
   B.   No licenses shall be issued to applicants who have, within one year
prior to the date of application, been denied licensure or who have, within
such period, had a same or similar license revoked.
   C.   No licenses shall be issued to applicants who have failed to provide
all of the information requested in the application, failed to pay the full
license fee, or failed to cooperate with the city in review of the application.
   D.   Licenses shall not be issued if the facilities or property fails to
meet any provision in an interim use permit or other zoning restriction. (Ord.
24, 6-26-2008)
6-4C-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   An application for a commercial animal kennel license shall be made on
forms provided by the city. The applicant shall provide:
      1.   A description of the property to be used;
      2.   The names and addresses of the owner, lessee, if any, and the
operator or manager;
      3.   The names, residences, and addresses of two (2) persons, residents
of the county, who are familiar with the applicant's, manager's, or operator's
character;
      4.   Any convictions of a crime or offense other than a traffic offense
and, if so, information as to the time, place, and nature of such crime or
offense;
      5.   Names and contact information (phone numbers and addresses) of those
persons who will be from time to time designated as contact persons; and
      6.   Any other information as may be required by the city.
   B.   If the application is made on behalf of a corporation or a partnership,
it shall be accompanied by appropriate business records showing the names and
addresses of all individuals having an interest in the business and, in the
case of a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and
shareholders. An applicant shall furnish to the city with his application
documents establishing the applicant's interest in the premises on which the
business will be located. Documentation shall be in the form of a lease, deed,
contract for deed, or any other document that establishes the applicant's
interest.
   C.   Applications shall be signed and notarized. If the applicant is a
natural person, it shall be signed by such person; if a partnership, by one of
the partners; and if a corporation, by the manager or managing officer. (Ord.
24, 6-26-2008)
6-4C-4: FEES:
The application and license fees shall be as established by the city fee
schedule. The application, investigation, and license fees shall be paid when
the application is filed. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4C-5: REVIEW OF APPLICATION; GRANT OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
License applications shall be reviewed by such departments as the city
administrator shall direct. The review shall include an inspection of the
premises covered by the application to determine whether the premises conforms
to all requirements of this code. Licenses shall be granted or denied by the
city administrator, subject to the provisions of this article. The city
administrator shall approve the license if the provisions of this code are met
and deny the license if the provisions are not met. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4C-6: EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Licenses shall expire on December 31 following the issuance of the license.
Applications to renew an existing license must be submitted by December 31.
(Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4C-7: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
The licensee shall display the license at all times in a prominent place in the
licensed business. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4C-8: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
Commercial animal kennels must comply with all applicable provisions of this
code and the city zoning ordinance. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4C-9: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
All commercial animal kennels must operate according to the following rules and
regulations:
   A.   The licensee shall permit the inspection of the premises during
business hours by all appropriate city employees.
   B.   Housing and shelter must be provided that will keep animals comfortable
and protected from the elements, and housing or shelter shall be so located as
to not create a nuisance.
   C.   All accumulations of feces shall be removed at such periods as will
ensure that no leaching or objectionable odors exist, and the premises shall
not be allowed to become unsightly.
   D.   The following regulations apply to the site's animal quarters:
      1.   Indoor housing facilities must be structurally sound with ample
heat, light, and ventilation. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
      2.   If animals are confined by chains, such chains must be attached so
as not to become entangled with chains of other animals. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008;
amd. 2011 Code)
      3.   Individual animal enclosures must be of a size to allow each animal
to turn around fully and stand, sit, and lie in a comfortable position.
   E.   Animals are provided wholesome, palatable food and water free from
contamination and of sufficient quality and nutritive value to maintain all
animals in good health. Adequate storage and refrigeration is provided to
protect food supplies against contamination and deterioration. Kennels shall
not make food available to animals that are not kenneled with the facility.
   F.   Disposal facilities are provided to minimize virus infestation, odors,
and disease hazards.
   G.   A room separate from the kennel area is provided of sufficient size to
adequately separate animals that are sick or injured from healthy animals.
   H.   Indoor floors and walls are constructed of nonporous materials or
sealed concrete to make nonporous, or there is an adequate provision of
controlling waste odor.
   I.   The commercial animal kennel must at all times have a designated
contact person available. The designated contact person must be available to
correct and mitigate violations of this article and this code whenever they
occur. The licensee shall notify the city in writing of the designated contact
person along with contact information. The licensee shall notify the city in
writing of any change in the contact person. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
   J.   Facility employees shall ensure that animals are not allowed to create
noise in violation of this code. When a citizen complaint is received, facility
employees must make affirmative steps to reduce animal noise. (Ord. 24, 6-26-
2008; amd. 2011 Code)
   K.   The kennel shall maintain a record of all animals accepted by the
kennel facility including license number, name, owner, age, type, breed,
identifying markings, and date of admittance. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4C-10: DENIAL, REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR NONRENEWAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Grounds: The license may be denied, revoked, suspended or not renewed
by the city administrator upon a showing that the licensee or its owner,
manager, employee or agent has engaged in: (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
      1.   Fraud, deception or misrepresentation in connection with securing or
retaining the license.
      2.   Any conduct that would constitute grounds for refusal to issue a
license under this article.
      3.   Any conduct constituting a violation of any of the rules and
regulations provided under this article.
      4.   Any conduct constituting a violation of any provision of an interim
use permit or other zoning restriction.
      5.   Any conduct constituting a nuisance. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
   B.   Appeal: The licensee may appeal a license denial, suspension,
revocation, or nonrenewal to the city council, The licensee must file with the
city clerk a notice of appeal within ten (10) days of a revocation, suspension,
or nonrenewal. The council shall consider the appeal at a regularly or
specially scheduled council meeting on or after fifteen (15) days from service
of the notice of appeal upon the city clerk by the licensee. Hearing on the
appeal shall be open to the public, and the licensee shall have the right to
appear and be represented by legal counsel and to offer evidence. At the
conclusion of the hearing, or as soon as thereafter as practicable, the council
may order:
      1.   The denial, revocation, suspension, or nonrenewal of the license.
      2.   The denial, revocation, suspension, or nonrenewal by the city
administrator be lifted and the license be returned to the licensee. (Ord. 24,
6-26-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
      3.   Additional terms, conditions and stipulations to be imposed on the
licensee to mitigate problems. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
6-4C-11: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by a licensed veterinarian
exclusively for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from the
provisions of this article, provided the premises complies with all applicable
provisions of federal, state, and local laws. (Ord. 24, 6-26-2008)
CHAPTER 5
MISDEMEANOR OFFENSES; NUISANCES
SECTION:
6-5-1: Purpose; Constitutional Rights Preserved
6-5-2: Definitions
6-5-1: PURPOSE; CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS PRESERVED:
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit certain conduct that is harmful to
the health, safety, and welfare of the community. Nothing herein is meant to
limit constitutional rights under the federal or state constitution. (New
Market 2004 Code § 5-4-1)
6-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter the following words, terms, and phrases shall have
the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
PUBLIC OFFICER: A police officer, fire marshal or inspector, animal control
officer, building inspector, environmental health inspector, public health
nurse, or assessor.
PUBLIC PLACE: An area generally visible to public view, including streets,
sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles
(whether moving or not), and buildings open to the general public, including
those buildings in which food or drink is served or entertainment or lodging is
provided. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-4-2; amd. 2011 Code)
EL836   6-5A.txt
ARTICLE A. MISDEMEANOR OFFENSES
SECTION:
6-5A-1: State Criminal Code Adopted
6-5A-2: Trespassing
6-5A-3: Unlawful Gatherings
6-5A-4: Disorderly Houses
6-5A-5: Public Indecency
6-5A-6: Improper Display Of Sexually Oriented Materials
6-5A-7: Vandalism Of Public Property
6-5A-8: Graffiti
6-5A-9: Controlled Substances
6-5A-10: Drug Paraphernalia
6-5A-11: Social Hosts
6-5A-12: Firearms And Weapons
6-5A-13: Fireworks
6-5A-14: Possession Of Catalytic Converte
6-5A-1: STATE CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or
inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all
of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and
sections of the Minnesota criminal code, as amended 1 , are hereby adopted by
the city. Any and all violations thereof shall be considered violations of this
code, and each such violation shall subject the violator thereof to penalty
provisions under section
1-4-1 of this code. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-4A-1)
 
Notes
1 1. MSA ch. 609.
6-5A-2: TRESPASSING:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to enable private owners of
real property situated within the city, and to which the public has some
implicit right of access, to exclude persons from that property where the
person has committed a crime on the premises or violated the properly posted
rules of conduct for the property.
   B.   Definitions: The following words and terms, when used in this section,
shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
COMMON AREAS: All areas of the property which are maintained for the common use
of its tenants or the general public incidental to the conduct of the normal
and legitimate activities upon the premises, including, but not limited to,
parking lots and ramps, private roadways, reception areas, rotundas, waiting
areas, hallways, restroom facilities, elevators, escalators, and staircases.
COVERED PREMISES: Any improved real property, or portion thereof, to which the
public has an implicit right of access, including, but not limited to, places
of worship, shopping malls, retail sales facilities, hotels, motels, nursing
homes, restaurants, multiple-family residential buildings, hospitals, medical
and dental offices, clubs, lodges, office buildings, banks and financial
institutions, transit stations, athletic and recreational facilities, personal
service establishments, theaters, and daycare facilities.
PROPERTY MANAGER: Any owner of a covered premises or the agent thereof who is
authorized to exercise control over the property, including common areas. The
term property manager includes any tenant who is an owner of the property or
agent of the owner and authorized to exercise control over the property,
including common areas.
TENANT: Any authorized occupant of a covered premises, or the agent thereof.
TRESPASS NOTICE: A written notice which contains, minimally, the following
information:
      1.   A verbatim copy of subsection C of this section.
      2.   The name, date of birth, and address of the person to whom the
notice is issued and the name of the person's custodial parent or guardian
where that person is a juvenile.
      3.   A description of the specific conduct which serves as a basis for
the notice issuance.
      4.   A description of the specific property to which the trespass notice
applies.
      5.   The period during which the trespass notice is in effect, including
the date of its expiration.
      6.   The name, title and telephone number of a person with authority to
modify, amend or rescind the trespass notice prior to its normal expiration.
      7.   The method by which the trespass notice was served upon the person
to whom it was issued.
   C.   Prohibited Conduct:
      1.   Prohibitions Enumerated:
         a.   No person shall trespass in or upon any private property and,
without claim of right, refuse to depart therefrom on demand of the property
manager or tenant.
         b.   No person who has been served with a trespass notice in
conformity with this section shall enter the premises described therein during
its effective period without the written permission of the issuing property
manager or tenant, or the authorized agent thereof, named in the notice.
Violation of the terms of the notice will result in criminal prosecution as a
misdemeanor under Minnesota law.
         c.   No person shall enter any area of private property in violation
of conspicuously posted signs prohibiting or restricting access thereto,
including, but not limited to, the following signs: "No Trespassing",
"Authorized Personnel Only", "Private", "Employees Only", and "Emergency Exit
Only".
      2.   Misdemeanor Violation: A violation of this subsection shall be
punishable as a misdemeanor.
   D.   Trespass Notice:
      1.   Issuance Of Notice: A property manager or tenant may issue a
trespass notice as provided under this section only under the following
circumstances:
         a.   Where there is probable cause to believe that the person has
committed an act prohibited by state statute or city ordinance while on the
covered premises, whether on common areas or a tenant's space; or
         b.   Where there is probable cause to believe that the person has
violated the rules of conduct for the property which have been conspicuously
posted at all public entrances to the property or have been personally provided
to the person in writing by the property manager or tenant.
      2.   Service Of Notice: All trespass notices issued pursuant to this
section must be properly served upon the person named therein as follows:
         a.   Personal service documented by either a receipt signed by the
person to whom it was issued or a written statement of the issuer.
         b.   Where the person named in the trespass notice is arrested by a
police officer for an act prohibited by state statute or city ordinance, the
arresting officer may personally serve the notice on behalf of the property
manager or tenant and so document that fact in the officer's official police
report detailing the incident.
      3.   Effect Of Notice:
         a.   Where a trespass notice is issued by a tenant who is not the
property manager, the notice is effective only as to that portion of the
premises over which the tenant is entitled to exercise control.
         b.   No trespass notice shall be effective for more than one year from
the date of its original issuance. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-4A-2)
6-5A-3: UNLAWFUL GATHERINGS:
   A.   Definition: When used in this section, the term "unlawful gathering"
shall mean any party or gathering where there is any of the following conduct
or behavior:
      1.   The unlawful sale, use, or possession of alcoholic beverages in
violation of Minnesota law;
      2.   The unlawful sale, use, or possession of "controlled substances" as
defined in Minnesota statutes section 152.01;
      3.   The unlawful sale, use, or possession of "tobacco related products"
as defined in Minnesota law; or
      4.   An unreasonable disturbance of other nonparticipating persons by
creating any of the following conditions:
         a.   Noise of sufficient volume, or of such nature by virtue of its
type, persistence, time of day or location, to disturb the peace, quiet, or
repose of nonparticipating persons nearby;
         b.   Assaultive and boisterous behavior;
         c.   Consumption of alcohol in a "public place" as defined in section
6-5-2 of this chapter;
         d.   Urinating in public; or
         e.   "Public indecency" as defined in section
6-5A-5 of this article. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-4-2)
   B.   Participation In Unlawful Gatherings:
      1.   No person shall congregate because of or participate in any party or
gathering of people from which noise emanates of a sufficient volume or of such
nature to disturb the peace, quiet, or repose of other persons.
      2.   No person shall keep or permit an unlawful gathering.
   C.   Failure To Abate:
      1.   Any person who is the owner, tenant, or person in control of any
building, who has knowledge of an unlawful gathering and who fails to
immediately abate the unlawful gathering shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
      2.   Any person, other than the owner, tenant, or person in control of a
building, who refuses to leave an unlawful gathering after being ordered to do
so by a police officer or by an owner, tenant, or person in control of any
building where an unlawful gathering is occurring shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
      3.   Any person who is the owner, tenant, or person in control of a
building and refuses to disperse an unlawful gathering at the building, after
being ordered to do so by a police officer, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   D.   Dispersal Order: A police officer may order all persons present at any
public or private place or building where an unlawful gathering is occurring to
immediately disperse.
   E.   Misdemeanor Violation: A violation of this section shall be a
misdemeanor. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-4A-3)
6-5A-4: DISORDERLY HOUSES:
   A.   Definition: When used in this section, the term "disorderly house"
shall mean a building, dwelling, place, establishment or premises in which
actions or conduct habitually occur in violation of laws relating to:
      1.   The unlawful sale, use, or possession of intoxicating liquor or 3.2
percent malt liquor in violation of Minnesota law;
      2.   The possession or use of gambling devices or the conduct of any
gambling in violation of Minnesota law; (New Market 2004 Code § 5-4-2)
      3.   Prostitution in violation of Minnesota law or acts relating to
prostitution, or the conduct of unlicensed escort services, sexually oriented
businesses or massage or massage services in violation of Minnesota law or this
code; (New Market 2004 Code § 5-4-2; amd. 2011 Code)
      4.   The unlawful sale, use, or possession of "controlled substances" as
defined in Minnesota statutes section 152.01, subdivision 4;
      5.   Three or more verified unlawful gathering incidents within a three
hundred sixty-five (365) day period. Repeated "unlawful gatherings" as said
term is defined in subsection
6-5A-3A of this article; or
      6.   Three or more verified public nuisance acts within a three hundred
sixty-five (365) day period. Repeated "public nuisance" acts as said term is
defined in section
6-5B-1 of this chapter. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-4-2)
   B.   Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful to do the following:
      1.   Keep, permit or be present in a disorderly house; or
      2.   Be an owner or person in control of any building and permit the
building to be used as a disorderly house.
   C.   A police officer may order all persons present at a disorderly house to
immediately disperse.
   D.   Abatement Provisions:
      1.   Where a police officer determines that a specific premises or
building is being operated in violation of subsection B of this section, said
officer may issue an abatement notice specifically describing the basis for
that determination and advising the owner that any subsequent conduct will
violate subsection B of this section. The abatement notice may be served upon
the owner of said premises by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by
regular mail, supported by an affidavit of service by mailing, to the address
determined by the most recent property tax records maintained by the county for
said premises. The service of an abatement notice, as provided herein, shall be
prima facie evidence that an owner or person in control of a building has
knowledge of and has permitted subsequent conduct or behavior at said premises.
      2.   Contents of the Notice: The nuisance incident notice shall:
         a.   Identify the type and specific location of nuisance service call
(s), including tenant or lessee names where applicable;
         b.   Summarize the evidence of the nuisance occurring on the property;
         c.   Provide the dates on which the nuisance calls for service were
made and the dates of any prior responses by public officers to nuisance
incidents on the property; and
         d.   Warn the owner, occupant and persons in control of the property
that future nuisance service calls may subject them to criminal misdemeanor
prosecution.
   E.   Misdemeanor Violation: A violation of this section shall be a
misdemeanor. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-4A-4; amd. Ord. 248, 5-26-2022)
6-5A-5: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to prohibit public indecency in
order to deter criminal activity, to promote societal order and public health,
and to protect children.
   B.   Findings: The city council makes the following findings regarding the
need to prohibit public indecency:
      1.   Public indecency can increase the incidence of criminal activity,
including, but not limited to, prostitution, disorderly conduct, and sexual
assault.
      2.   Public indecency can expose children to an unhealthy and nurtureless
environment.
      3.   Public indecency can disrupt the orderly operation of public events
and public accommodations, thereby fostering societal disorder.
      4.   Public indecency can present health concerns in places of public
accommodation and other public settings. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-4A-5)
   C.   Definitions: The following words and terms, when used in this section,
shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
   NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below a
point immediately above the top of the areola; or the depiction or showing of
the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
   PERSON: A natural person twelve (12) years of age or older, including
employees or agents of a public accommodation. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-4A-5;
amd. 2011 Code)
   D.   Public Indecency Prohibited: A person who knowingly or intentionally,
in a public place or setting: 1) appears in a state of nudity; 2) fondles the
genitals of himself or herself; 3) fondles the genitals of another person; or
4) urinates or defecates, commits public indecency and is guilty of a
misdemeanor. It is not a violation of this subsection for a woman to breast
feed. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-4A-5)
6-5A-6: IMPROPER DISPLAY OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATERIALS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to protect minors in public
accommodations from exposure to materials that are harmful to children, thereby
protecting the health, safety and welfare of the community. (New Market 2004
Code § 5-4A-6)
   B.   Definitions: The following words and terms, when used in this section,
shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
HARMFUL TO MINORS: That quality of any description or representation, in
whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sadomasochistic
abuse when it:
      1.   Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest
of minors; and
      2.   Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community
as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors; and
      3.   Is utterly without redeeming social importance for minors.
KNOWINGLY: Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or
ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
      1.   The character and content of any material which is reasonably
susceptible to examination by the minor; and
      2.   The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake
shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a
reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.
MINOR: Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area with
less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less
than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; or the depiction or showing of the covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION: A business, accommodation, refreshment, entertainment,
recreation, or transportation facility of any kind, whether licensed or not,
whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations
are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the public.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE: Flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude
or clad in undergarments or in a sexually revealing costume, or the condition
of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one
so clothed or who is nude.
SEXUAL CONDUCT: Acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse, or
physical contact with a person's unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or,
if such a person is a female, her breast.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT: The condition of human male or female genitals when in a
state of sexual stimulation or arousal. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-4A-6; amd.
2011 Code)
   C.   Display Restrictions:
      1.   Sealed Wrapper: No person shall commercially and knowingly exhibit
or display any materials which are harmful to minors in its content in any
public accommodation where minors are or may be present and where minors are
able to view the material unless each item is kept in a sealed wrapper at all
times.
      2.   Opaque Cover: No person shall commercially and knowingly exhibit or
display any material, the cover or packaging of which, standing alone, is
harmful to minors, in any public accommodation where minors are or may be
present or allowed to be present and where minors are able to view the material
unless each item is blocked from view by an opaque cover. The opaque cover
requirement is satisfied if those portions of the cover or packaging containing
the material harmful to minors are blocked from view by an opaque cover.
      3.   Segregation Of Materials: Subsections C1 and C2 of this section
shall not apply to the exhibition or display of materials harmful to minors
under circumstances where minors are not present or are not able to view the
material or the material's cover or packaging. A person may comply with the
requirements of this subsection C3 by:
         a.   Physically segregating the material in a manner that physically
prohibits access to and view of the material by minors;
         b.   Prominently posting at the entrance to the restricted area:
"Adults only - you must be 18 to enter"; and
         c.   Enforcing the restriction.
   D.   Misdemeanor Violation: Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor
under Minnesota law. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-4A-6)
6-5A-7: VANDALISM OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
Every person who intentionally damages, displaces, removes, or destroys any of
the following shall be guilty of a misdemeanor:
   A.   A street or bridge.
   B.   A tree, rock, post, or other monument which has been erected or marked
for the purpose of designating a point in any boundary or any mark or
inscription thereon.
   C.   A mile board, a milestone, or guidepost erected upon a street, or any
inscription thereon.
   D.   A line of telegraph, cable or telephone, or any part thereof, or any
appurtenance or apparatus connected with the working of any magnetic or
electric telegraph, cable or telephone, or the sending or conveyance of
messages thereby.
   E.   A pipe or main for conducting gas or water or heat, or any works
erected for supplying buildings with gas or heat or water, or any appurtenance
or appendage connected therewith.
   F.   A sewer or drain, or a pipe or main connected therewith or forming part
thereof. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-4A-7)
6-5A-8: GRAFFITI:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to prevent the spread of
graffiti vandalism and to establish a program for the removal of graffiti from
public and private property thereby limiting its adverse impact on
neighborhoods.
   B.   Findings: The city council makes the following findings regarding the
need to promptly remove graffiti from private and public property:
      1.   Graffiti constitutes a form of vandalism defacing public and private
property without the permission of the owner, and causing citizens, businesses
and the city to incur the cost of repair and removal.
      2.   Graffiti is a visual symbol of disorder eroding public safety,
contributing to a downward spiral of blight and decay, lessening property
values, business viability and, ultimately, tax revenues and, as such, is
inconsistent with the city property maintenance goals and aesthetic standards.
      3.   There is substantial evidence that prompt eradication of graffiti is
an effective prevention strategy which discourages its return while failure to
promptly remove graffiti increases the likelihood that more graffiti will occur
on the same site and on other nearby property.
      4.   The failure to maintain one's property by removing graffiti which
has been declared by the city to constitute a public nuisance within a
reasonable period of time is injurious to the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the residents of the city.
   C.   Definitions: The following words and terms, when used in this section,
shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
GRAFFITI: Any inscription, word, figure, painting, or other defacement that is
written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or
otherwise affixed to any surface of a permanent structure, fixture or object,
including, but not limited to, buildings, walls, fences, bridges, benches,
shelters, sidewalks, hydrants, fountains, pavement, curbs, trees, rocks, signs,
utility poles or boxes situated on public or private property by any graffiti
implement, to the extent that the inscription, word, figure, painting or other
defacement was not authorized in advance by the responsible party for the
property, or, despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed a public
nuisance by the city.
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT: Paint, aerosol or pressurized containers of paint,
indelible broad tipped markers, paint stick, etching equipment or any other
device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or manmade
surface.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Real property within the city containing a condition that
defaces it or any permanent structure, fixture or object situated thereon
which, in turn, causes or tends to cause depreciation in the enjoyment and use,
or in the value, of the property in its immediate vicinity, or which has the
potential to unreasonably annoy, injure or endanger the safety, health, morals,
or general welfare of ordinary and reasonable members of the public.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: An owner, legal occupant, or an entity or person acting as
an agent for an owner by agreement, who has authority over the real property or
is responsible for the property's maintenance or management. Irrespective of
any arrangement to the contrary with any other party, each property owner shall
always be a responsible party for the purposes of this section. There may be
more than one "responsible party" for a particular property.
   D.   Graffiti Prohibited:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally place or apply,
or attempt to place or apply, graffiti on any surface of a permanent structure,
fixture or object located on public or private real property within the city
without the advance authorization of a responsible party for the property.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti
implement with the intent to use the same to place or apply graffiti on any
public or private real property within the city or any surface of a permanent
structure, fixture or object located thereon.
   E.   Abatement Provisions:
      1.   Duties Of Responsible Party: It shall be the duty of each
responsible party for real property within the city to remove any graffiti
placed upon any surface of a permanent structure, fixture or object located
thereon within ten (10) business days of being notified by the city that the
presence of the graffiti is a public nuisance, unless a longer abatement period
is set forth in the notice. The cost of such removal shall be paid by the
responsible party.
      2.   Declaration Of Public Nuisance: Where the existence of graffiti on
private property is determined to constitute a public nuisance, the public
officer, or the designee thereof, shall serve a written notice of that finding
to the responsible party or parties for the property by personal service or by
certified mail to the last known address, supplemented by a posting of the
notice in a conspicuous place on the property for at least twenty four (24)
hours. This notice shall contain the following:
         a.   The street address and/or legal description of the property
sufficient for identification of the property;
         b.   A statement that the property is a potential graffiti nuisance
property with a concise description of the conditions leading to that finding;
         c.   A description of what must be done to abate the graffiti;
         d.   A statement that, within the period set forth in the notice, the
responsible party must either abate the graffiti in the manner described in the
notice or serve the city with written demand for an administrative hearing and
that failure to either abate or demand a hearing shall be deemed an admission
that the graffiti constitutes a public nuisance subject to abatement by the
city with assessment of those costs against the property as set forth in
section
 6-5B-9 of this chapter; and
         e.   A statement that the written demand for a hearing must contain
the full names and dates of birth for all persons known to be responsible
parties for the property, the street address of the property, and a specific
statement of the grounds on which the responsible party contests the city's
determination that the graffiti constitutes a public nuisance.
      3.   Failure To Abate; Abatement By City; Assessment Of Costs: If, at the
end of the period fixed by the city or hearing examiner for the abatement of
graffiti, the graffiti is not abated by the responsible party, the city may
cause the same to be abated or removed by the city in any manner deemed
appropriate with the costs thereof subject to assessment against the property
in the manner set forth in section
6-5B-9 of this chapter.
   F.   Misdemeanor Violation: Violation of this section shall, in addition to
any civil fines, penalties or assessments, be punishable as a misdemeanor under
Minnesota law, except where a determination has been made by a hearing examiner
that the graffiti does not constitute a public nuisance. (New Market 2004 Code
§ 5-4A-8)
6-5A-9: CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, possess, sell, give away,
barter, exchange, distribute or otherwise transfer any "controlled substance"
as defined in Minnesota statutes section 152.01, subdivision 4; any "legend
drug" as defined in Minnesota statutes section 151.01, subdivision 17; or any
"legend medical gas" as defined in Minnesota statutes section 151.01,
subdivision 29, in a manner contrary to state or federal law. (New Market 2004
Code § 5-4A-11; amd. 2011 Code)
6-5A-10: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to regulate the possession,
manufacture, advertisement, and delivery of drug paraphernalia and thereby
deter the use of controlled substances in the city. This section is not
intended to allow what the Minnesota statutes prohibit nor to prohibit what the
Minnesota statutes expressly allow.
   B.   Definition:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection B2 of this section, "drug
paraphernalia" means all equipment, products, and materials of any kind, except
those items used in conjunction with permitted uses of controlled substances
under this chapter or the uniform controlled substances act 1 , which are
knowingly or intentionally used primarily in: a) manufacturing a controlled
substance; b) injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance; c) testing the strength, effectiveness, or
purity of a controlled substance; or d) enhancing the effect of a controlled
substance.
      2.   "Drug paraphernalia" does not include the possession, manufacture,
delivery, or sale of hypodermic needles or syringes in accordance with
Minnesota statutes section 151.40, subdivision 2.
   C.   Evidence: In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a
court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:
      1.   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use.
      2.   Prior convictions, if any, of any owner or anyone in control of the
object under state or federal law relating to any controlled substance.
      3.   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of this code.
      4.   The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
      5.   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
      6.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or
anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons who he or she knows,
or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation
of this code; the innocence of an owner or anyone in control of the object as
to a direct violation of this code should not prevent a finding that the object
is intended for use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
      7.   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use.
      8.   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use.
      9.   National and local advertising concerning its use.
      10.   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
      11.   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
      12.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.
      13.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
      14.   Expert testimony concerning its use.
   D.   Offenses:
      1.   Possession: It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with
intent to use, drug paraphernalia, to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of
this section.
      2.   Manufacture Or Delivery:
         a.   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to
deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia knowing, or
under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to
plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of this section.
         b.   It is unlawful for any person eighteen (18) years of age or over
to deliver drug paraphernalia, as described in subsection D2a of this section,
to a person who is under eighteen (18) years of age and at least three (3)
years his junior. Said person, in addition to being in violation of this
subsection D2b, shall also be in violation of subsection D2a of this section.
      3.   Advertisement: It is unlawful for any person to place in any
newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement knowing,
or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of
the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects
designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
   E.   Misdemeanor Violation: Violation of any provision of this section shall
be a misdemeanor, and each day of violation shall be considered a separate
offense.
   F.   Civil Forfeiture: All "drug paraphernalia", as defined in this section,
is subject to forfeiture, subject to the provisions set forth in Minnesota
statutes. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-4A-12)
 
Notes
1 1. MSA ch. 152.
6-5A-11: SOCIAL HOSTS:
   A.   Purpose And Findings: The city council intends to discourage underage
possession and consumption of alcohol, even if done within the confines of a
private residence, and intends to hold persons criminally responsible who host
events or gatherings where persons under twenty one (21) years of age possess
or consume alcohol regardless of whether the person hosting the event or
gathering supplied the alcohol. The city council finds:
      1.   Events and gatherings held on private or public property where
alcohol is possessed or consumed by persons under the age of twenty one (21)
are harmful to those persons and constitute a potential threat to public health
requiring prevention or abatement.
      2.   Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage persons,
as well as the general public, from injuries related to alcohol consumption,
such as alcohol overdose or alcohol related traffic collisions.
      3.   Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used irresponsibly, could
have drastic effects on those who use it as well as those who are affected by
the actions of an irresponsible user.
      4.   Often, events or gatherings involving underage possession and
consumption occur outside the presence of parents. However, there are times
when the parent(s) is/are present and condone the activity and, in some
circumstances, provide the alcohol.
      5.   Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage person is a
crime, it is difficult to prove, and an ordinance is necessary to help further
combat underage consumption.
      6.   A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person criminally
responsible for hosting an event or gathering where underage possession or
consumption occurs.
   B.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey,
rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions and
mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or
solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half
of one percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for
beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances.
EVENT OR GATHERING: Any group of three (3) or more persons who have assembled
or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
HOST: To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or
permit a gathering or event, whether that host is present or not.
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
      1.   As natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent;
      2.   As a legal guardian; or
      3.   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the
court.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, corporation, or any
association of one or more individuals.
RESIDENCE, PREMISES OR PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any home, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting
room, or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied on a
temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or for any other
social function, and whether owned, leased, or rented.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any individual under twenty one (21) years of age.
   C.   Prohibited Acts:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person(s) to:
         a.   Host or allow an event or gathering;
         b.   At any residence, premises, or on any other private or public
property;
         c.   Where alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present;
         d.   When the person knows that an underage person will or does:
            (1)   Consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage; or
            (2)   Possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage with the intent to
consume it; and
         e.   The person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent possession
or consumption by the underage person(s).
      2.   A person is criminally responsible for violating subsection C1 of
this section if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, or
conspires with or otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.
   D.   Exceptions:
      1.   This section does not apply to conduct solely between an underage
person and his or her parents while present in the parents' household.
      2.   This section does not apply to legally protected religious
observances.
      3.   This section does not apply to retail intoxicating liquor or 3.2
percent malt liquor licensees, municipal liquor stores, or bottle club permit
holders who are regulated by Minnesota statutes section 340A.503, subdivision 1
(a)(1).
      4.   This section does not apply to situations where underage persons are
lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and
scope of employment.
   E.   Misdemeanor Violation: Violation of this section is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 52, 3-25-2010; amd. 2011 Code)
6-5A-12: FIREARMS AND WEAPONS:
   A.   Definitions:
CARRY: The handling or transportation of a firearm, concealed or otherwise,
outside a person's domicile.
DANGEROUS WEAPONS: Slingshot, clubs, blackjacks, spring guns, brass or metal
knuckles or any knife with a switchblade which opens automatically under spring
pressure with a button or release mechanism or by any other mechanical
contrivance.
DISMANTLED FIREARM: Any unloaded firearm or bow which is dismantled in such a
manner so as to prevent shooting.
ENCASED FIREARM: Any unloaded firearm or bow placed in a case which is tied or
otherwise secured in the manner provided to prevent shooting it.
FINE SHOT: Shot sizes number BB through 9, inclusive.
FIREARMS: Shotguns, rifles, bows and arrows, air rifles, BB guns, and handguns,
regardless of the method of propulsion.
LANDOWNER: Any person, group, firm or corporation owning, leasing or legally
controlling any lands within the territorial limits of the city.
SHOOTING: The firing or discharge of any firearm.
SINGLE PROJECTILE: Any single projectile, whether contained in a metallic,
paper, plastic or other cartridge, including any method of loading a muzzle
loader, which results in a single projectile being discharged.
SUITABLE BACKSTOP: Any natural or manmade barrier of sufficient mass, size or
construction to wholly contain the projectile being discharged.
WRITTEN PERMISSION: The following information must be included: the full name,
address, date of birth and signature of the person authorized to hunt or shoot;
the full name, address, and signature of the landowner.
   B.   Permitted Use Of Firearms: The shooting or carrying of firearms which
are not encased or dismantled is permitted under the following circumstances so
long as no innocent party is endangered unless otherwise prohibited by state or
federal law:
      1.   By law enforcement officers in the line of duty or military
personnel in the line of duty.
      2.   By any person to resist or prevent an offense which that person
reasonably believes exposes himself or another to great bodily harm or death.
      3.   By a certified firearms safety training instructor while
participating in a department of natural resources approved firearms safety
program.
      4.   By any person while participating in a department of natural
resources approved firearms safety program.
      5.   By any person for the destruction of diseased, injured or dangerous
birds, animals or reptiles by persons authorized to do so in writing by the
chief of police.
      6.   By any person on a rifle, trap, archery or target range established
in accordance with the City zoning ordinance or as part of a City sponsored
activity.
      7.   By an owner, tenant or person having possession or control of land,
or a member of the household of the same, or an authorized guest who has
written consent of the landowner or possessor, tenant or person in control of
the land for discharge of a BB gun or bow and arrow for purposes of target
practice, but only after having obtained permission and a permit from the Chief
of Police. The permit shall be issued for a one year period of time, shall
include any conditions deemed reasonable by the Chief of Police, and shall be
revocable by the Chief of Police at any time for cause shown. The fee for
obtaining the permit shall be determined by the City Council.
      8.   By any person participating in a special hunting season, which
season may not conflict with State law or regulations established by the City
Council for the purpose of wildlife management. The season shall be established
by the City Council when, based upon competent professional advice such as a
conservation officer, a season is needed to reduce an animal population.
      9.   By any person possessing, transporting or carrying handguns as
specifically allowed by State law.
      10.   By any person slaughtering farm animals which they own or with the
owner's permission.
   C.   Prohibitions: Except as specifically allowed in subsection B of this
section:
      1.   The carrying of a firearm in a motor vehicle, in a place or area
open to the public or in any private place or area unless the private place or
area is owned by the person carrying the firearm or with the owner's permission
which is not encased is prohibited.
      2.   The shooting of a firearm is prohibited.
      3.   Carrying or shooting a firearm by any person under the age of
fourteen (14) is prohibited except when accompanied by a parent, adult guardian
or certified safety training instructor.
      4.   Hunting using a firearm with a single projectile or with a BB gun is
prohibited.
   D.   Dangerous Weapons: No person shall wear under his clothes, conceal
about his person or within a motor vehicle, display in a threatening manner, or
sell, offer for sale or carry or use any dangerous weapon. This prohibition
shall not be construed to forbid any law enforcement officer from carrying or
using dangerous weapons in the proper discharge of his or her duties. (2011
Code)
6-5A-13: FIREWORKS:
   A.   Fireworks Defined: For the purposes of this section, "fireworks" will
have the same definition as contained in Minnesota Statute section 624.20 subd.
1 or any superseding statute.
   B.   Sale And Use Of Fireworks Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or wholesale, or use
or explode any fireworks, except as otherwise provided under title 4, chapter 9
of this Code.
   C.   Permitted Consumer Fireworks:
      1.   Prohibited Areas: All use, display or discharge of those
nonexplosive, nonaerial pyrotechnic entertainment devices only, containing the
limited amounts of pyrotechnic chemical compositions described in and permitted
by Minnesota Statutes section 624.20, subdivisions 1(b) and (c), hereinafter
"permitted consumer fireworks", is strictly prohibited in the area on, below,
above or within, or in close proximity to:
         a.   Recreational areas, roadways, streets, highways, bicycle lanes,
pedestrian paths, sidewalks, rights-of-way, lakes, rivers, waterways and all
other property owned or leased by the City, County, State or Federal government
and located in whole or in part within the City limits.
         b.   Private property within the City limits that has conspicuously
posted a written sign or notice that no fireworks discharge is allowed.
         c.   Within three hundred feet (300') of any consumer fireworks retail
sales facility or storage area that has properly posted a written sign or
notice that no fireworks discharge is allowed.
         d.   Any property, area, structure or material that, by its physical
condition or the physical conditions in which it is set, would constitute a
fire or personal safety hazard.
      2.   Use Permitted; Safety Considerations: All other use, display or
discharge of permitted consumer fireworks must be conducted in a manner that
minimizes the risk of fire or injury to other persons or property. (Ord. 168,
4-12-2018)
6-5A-14: POSSESSION OF CATALYTIC CONVERTERS:
No person shall be in possession of a catalytic converter that is not attached
to a motor vehicle unless the individual can provide verification of legal
receipt of the catalytic converter or proof of compliance with the requirements
in Minnesota Statutes, Section 325E.21, Subdb. 1b. (Ord. 249, 5-26-2022)
ARTICLE B. PUBLIC NUISANCES
SECTION:
6-5B-1: Definition
6-5B-2: Public Nuisances Affecting Health
6-5B-3: Public Nuisances Affecting Morals And Decency
6-5B-4: Public Nuisances Affecting Peace And Safety
6-5B-5: Parking And Storage Nuisances
6-5B-6: Inoperable Motor Vehicles
6-5B-7: Enforcement; Inspections
6-5B-8: Abatement Procedures
6-5B-9: Costs
6-5B-10: Misdemeanor Violation
6-5B-1: DEFINITION:
Whoever, by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty, intentionally
does any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is
a misdemeanor:
   A.   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or
endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable
number of members of the public;
   B.   Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage any public
highway or right of way, or waters used by the public; or
   C.   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or any other
part of this code to be a public nuisance and for which no sentence is
specifically provided. (2011 Code)
6-5B-2: PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH:
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
   A.   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable
matter;
   B.   All diseased animals running at large;
   C.   All ponds or pools of stagnant water;
   D.   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within twenty four (24)
hours after death;
   E.   Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris;
   F.   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent free or flytight or
which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and
disagreeable odors;
   G.   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or
body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other substances;
   H.   All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or
private property 1 ;
   I.   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in unreasonable
quantities;
   J.   All public exposure of people having a contagious disease; and
   K.   Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not operating
under local license. (2011 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 5, chapter 3 of this code.
6-5B-3: PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY:
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals and
decency:
   A.   All gambling devices, slot machines and punchboards, except as
otherwise authorized by federal, state or local law;
   B.   Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in those occupations;
   C.   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual
intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;
   D.   All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or disposed of in
violation of law, or where, in violation of law, people are permitted to resort
for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where intoxicating liquor
is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of law, and all liquor and
other property used for maintaining that place;
   E.   Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of intoxicating
liquor, or for promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other immoral or illegal
purpose. (2011 Code)
6-5B-4: PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY:
The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety:
   A.   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks twenty four (24)
hours after the snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to
fall.
   B.   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
people from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection.
   C.   All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a
sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles.
   D.   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of
streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds except under conditions as are
permitted by this code or other applicable law.
   E.   Radio aerials or television antennas erected or maintained in a
dangerous manner.
   F.   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use
of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather,
obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk.
   G.   All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over streets
and sidewalks, so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed
and maintained as provided by ordinance 1 .
   H.   The allowing of rainwater, ice or snow to fall from any building or
structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk.
   I.   Any barbed wire fence less than six feet (6') above the ground and
within three feet (3') of a public sidewalk or way, except as otherwise
provided for agricultural property as allowed by the zoning ordinance.
   J.   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated
or operated on private property as to attract the public.
   K.   Wastewater cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other public
properties.
   L.   Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household
appliances, automobile bodies or other material in a manner conducive to the
harboring of rats, mice, snakes or vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation
among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire, health or safety
hazards from accumulation.
   M.   Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in
another condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming
onto the premises where it is located.
   N.   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a public
street drain, gutter or ditch with trash or other materials.
   O.   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public
property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substance which may
injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over the
substance.
   P.   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right of way or on
adjacent private property.
   Q.   Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting exceeding 0.5
foot-candle as measured on the property line of the property where the lighting
is located when abutting any residential parcel, and one foot-candle when
abutting any commercial or industrial parcel 2 .
   R.   All buildings, walls, and other structures which have been damaged by
fire, decay, or otherwise to an extent exceeding one-half (1/2) their current
fair market value and which are so situated as to endanger the safety of the
public.
   S.   All explosives, inflammable liquids, and other dangerous substances
stored in any manner or in any amount contrary to state law, federal law, or
this code.
   T.   All use or display of fireworks except as set forth in this code 3 .
   U.   Noises prohibited under title 5, chapter 5 of this code.
   V.   All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the
person or property of anyone. (2011 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 11, chapter 12 of this code.
2 1. See also subsection
  11-4-7D of this code.
3 2. See section
  6-5A-13 of this chapter.
6-5B-5: PARKING AND STORAGE NUISANCES 1 :
   A.   Nuisance Declaration: The outside parking and storage on residentially
zoned property of large numbers of vehicles and vehicles, materials, supplies
or equipment not customarily used for residential purposes in violation of the
requirements set forth in subsection B of this section is declared to be a
public nuisance because it:
      1.   Obstructs views on streets and private property;
      2.   Creates cluttered and otherwise unsightly areas;
      3.   Prevents the full use of residential streets for residential
parking;
      4.   Introduces commercial advertising signs into areas where commercial
advertising signs are otherwise prohibited;
      5.   Decreases adjoining landowners' and occupants' enjoyment of their
property and neighborhood; or
      6.   Otherwise adversely affects property values and neighborhood
patterns.
   B.   Unlawful Parking And Storage:
      1.   A person must not place or store, or allow the placement or storage,
of ice fish houses, skateboard ramps, playhouses or other similar nonpermanent
structures outside continuously for longer than twenty four (24) hours in the
front yard area of residential property unless more than one hundred feet
(100') back from the front property line.
      2.   A person must not place or store, or allow the placement or storage,
of pipe, lumber, forms, steel, machinery, or similar materials, including all
materials used in connection with a business, outside on residential property
unless shielded from public view by an opaque cover or fence.
      3.   A person must not cause, undertake, permit or allow the outside
parking and storage of vehicles on residential property unless it complies with
title 11 of this code (the city zoning ordinance).
      4.   No person shall park, keep, place or store, or permit the parking or
storage of, a junk vehicle 2  or allow the accumulation of junk on a public
street or alley, or on any private lands or premises which they own, occupy or
control unless it shall be within a building on such private premises. As used
in this subsection B4, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
   JUNK: Shall include parts of machinery or motor vehicles, unused stoves or
other appliances stored in the open; remnants of wood; decayed, weathered or
broken construction materials; metal or any other material or castoff material
of any kind, whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable use.
   JUNK VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle which is not in street operable condition,
or which is partially dismantled, or which is used for sale of parts or as
source of repair or replacement parts for other vehicles, or which is kept for
scrapping, dismantling or salvage of any kind, or which is not properly
licensed for operation within the state. (2011 Code)
 
Notes
1 3. See also section
  11-5-6 of this code.
2 1. See also title 5, chapter 6, article A of this code.
6-5B-6: INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES 1 :
   A.   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful to keep, park, store or abandon any
motor vehicle which is not in operating condition, partially dismantled, used
for repair of parts or as a source of repair or replacement parts for other
vehicles, kept for scrapping, dismantling or salvage of any kind, or which is
not properly licensed for operation with the state, pursuant to Minnesota
statutes section 168B.011, subdivision 3, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   B.   Health And Safety Hazard: Any motor vehicles described in this section
constitute a hazard to the health and welfare of the residents of the community
in that such vehicles can harbor noxious diseases, furnish a shelter and
breeding place for vermin and present physical danger to the safety and well
being of children and citizens; and vehicles containing fluids which, if
released into the environment, can and do cause significant health risks to the
community.
   C.   Exemptions: This section does not apply to a motor vehicle enclosed in
a building and/or kept out of view from any street, road or alley, and which
does not foster complaint from a resident of the city. A privacy fence is
permissible. (2011 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 5, chapter 6, article A of this code.
6-5B-7: ENFORCEMENT; INSPECTIONS:
The city administrator or authorized designee shall enforce the provisions
relating to nuisances. In abating or ordering the abatement of nuisances
defined in this chapter, the city administrator or authorized designee shall
cause or order the nuisance to be removed. Any enforcement official shall have
the power to inspect private premises and take all reasonable precautions to
prevent the commission and maintenance of public nuisances. Except in emergency
situations of imminent danger to human life and safety, no enforcement officer
(i.e. city administrator or authorized designee) shall enter private property
for the purpose of inspecting or preventing public nuisances without the
permission of the owner, resident, or other person in control of the property,
unless the enforcement officer has obtained a warrant or order from a court of
competent jurisdiction authorizing the entry, or the entry is otherwise as
authorized by law. (2011 Code; amd. Ord. 213, 5-14-2020)
6-5B-8: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Notice: The city administrator or authorized designee has the authority
to determine that a condition on a property constitutes a nuisance. Upon that
determination, an owner of record or occupant of the premises shall be notified
in writing that a public nuisance exists and that the nuisance shall be
terminated or abated. The city administrator or authorized designee shall
provide the notice to the owner of record or occupant in person or by mail. A
failure to receive the notice does not invalidate the service of the notice.
The notice shall describe the nuisance and provide ten (10) days, or a
reasonable timeframe as determined by the city administrator, for the nuisance
to be abated. If the nuisance is not abated within that timeframe, the city
administrator or authorized designee may issue an order pursuant to this
section. The notice must state that if the owner or occupant fails to remedy
the nuisance within the time provided in the notice, the city will abate the
nuisance at the expense of the owner or occupant.
   B.   An order shall be given as set forth in this subsection. The order
shall include the following:
      1.   The nuisance shall be abated within ten (10) days of the order,
unless the city administrator or authorized designee reasonably determines that
additional time is required to abate the nuisance.
      2.   The order shall identify and describe the nuisance and shall specify
the steps that may be taken to abate the nuisance.
      3.   The order shall state that the city will abate the nuisance and
assess the costs against the property if the nuisance is not abated within the
timeframe specified in the order.
      4.   The order shall be served by the city administrator or authorized
designee on the owner of record or occupant of the premises in person or by
mail. If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the
owner of record or occupant refuses to accept the order, the order shall be
served by posting it on the premises. A failure to receive the notice does not
invalidate the service of the notice.
      5.   The order shall include a statement that the order may be appealed
to city council by filing a written request with the city clerk before the
appeal deadline which shall be the abatement deadline designated in the order.
Upon receipt of a timely appeal notice, the city clerk shall schedule the
hearing at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting.
      6.   If the required actions specified in the order are not complied
with, the city administrator or authorized designee may obtain an
administrative search warrant to enter the property and inspect the nuisance
condition, obtain a court order permitting the city to abate the nuisance, or
take any other lawful action to abate the nuisance and assess the costs as
prescribed in 6-5B-9.
   C.   Hearing: The city council shall hold a hearing if requested as outlined
in this section. The city council shall give the appellant an opportunity to
present evidence and testimony. The city council may sustain, overrule, or
modify the order of the enforcement officer. If the city council determination
requires abatement, the city council shall, in a resolution, fix a time within
which the nuisance must be abated and may provide that, if the nuisance is not
eliminated within the time specified, the city may abate the nuisance and
assess the costs of the abatement to the subject property as a special
assessment.
   D.   Emergencies; Summary Abatement: In cases of emergency, where delay in
abatement required to complete the notice and procedure requirements set forth
in subsection A of this section will permit a continuing nuisance to
unreasonably endanger public health safety or welfare, the city council may
order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance. To proceed with summary
enforcement, the enforcement official shall determine that a public nuisance
exists or is being maintained on premises in the city and that delay in
abatement of the nuisance will unreasonably endanger public health, safety or
welfare. The enforcement official shall notify in writing the occupant or owner
of the premises of the nature of the nuisance and of the city’s intention to
seek summary enforcement and the time and place of the city council meeting
consider the question of summary enforcement. The city council shall determine
whether or not the condition identified in the notice to the owner or occupant
is a nuisance, whether public health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably
endangered by delay in abatement required to complete the procedure set forth
in subsection A of this section, and may order that the nuisance be immediately
terminated or abated. If the nuisance is not immediately terminated or abated,
the city council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.
   E.   Immediate Abatement: Nothing in this section shall prevent the city,
without notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition which
poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety and assessing the
costs of the abatement against the property in accordance with 6-5B-9. (2011
Code; amd. Ord. 213, 5-14-2020)
6-5B-9: COSTS:
   A.   Personal Liability For Costs: The owner of the premises on which a
nuisance has been abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost to
the city of the abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work
has been completed and the cost determined, the city clerk or other official
shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon, the
amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the city clerk.
   B.   Assessment: After notice and hearing, as provided in Minnesota statutes
section 429.061, as it may be amended from time to time, if the nuisance is a
public health or safety hazard on private property, the accumulation of snow
and ice on public sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside
the traveled portion of streets, or unsound or insect infected trees, the city
clerk shall, on or before September 1 next following abatement of the nuisance,
list the total unpaid charges along with all the other charges, as well as
charges for current services to be assessed under Minnesota statutes section
429.101 against each separate lot or parcel to which the charges are
attributable. The city council may then spread the charges against the property
under that statute and other pertinent statutes for certification to the county
auditor for collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual
installments, not exceeding ten (10), as the city council may determine in each
case 1 . (2011 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 3, chapter 2 of this code.
6-5B-10: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION:
Violation of any provision of this article, including maintaining a nuisance
after being notified in writing by first class mail of a violation of any
provision of this article, shall be a misdemeanor. (2011 Code)
CHAPTER 6
JUVENILES
SECTION:
6-6-1: Curfew Regulations
6-6-1: CURFEW REGULATIONS:
   A.   Findings And Purpose:
      1.   In recent years, there has been a significant increase in juvenile
victimization and crime. At the same time, the crimes committed by and against
juveniles have become more violent. A significant percentage of juvenile crime
occurs during curfew hours.
      2.   Because of their lack of maturity and experience, juveniles are
particularly susceptible to becoming victims of older perpetrators. The younger
a person is, the more likely he or she is to be a victim of crime.
      3.   While parents have the primary responsibility to provide for the
safety and welfare of juveniles, the city also has a substantial interest in
the safety and welfare of juveniles. Moreover, the city has an interest in
preventing juvenile crime, promoting parental supervision, and providing for
the well being of the general public.
      4.   A citywide curfew will reduce juvenile victimization and crime and
will advance public safety, health, and general welfare.
   B.   Definitions:
EMERGENCY: A circumstance or combination of circumstances requiring immediate
action to prevent property damage, serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business to which the public in
invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement, entertainment,
or refreshment.
GUARDIAN: An adult appointed pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 524.5-101
et seq., who has the powers and responsibilities of a "parent" as defined by
Minnesota statutes section 524.5-102.
JUVENILE: A person under the age of eighteen (18). The term does not include
persons under eighteen (18) who are married or have been legally emancipated.
PARENTS: Birth parents, adoptive parents, and stepparents.
PROPRIETOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and shops.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT: A person over the age of eighteen (18) specifically
authorized by law or by a parent or guardian to have custody and control of a
juvenile.
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death
or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or
impairment of the function of any body part or organ.
   C.   Prohibited Acts:
      1.   Juveniles; Age And Hour Restrictions:
         a.   It is unlawful for a juvenile under the age of twelve (12) to be
present in any public place or establishment within the city:
            (1)   Any time between nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on any Sunday,
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the
following day.
            (2)   Any time between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on any Friday or
Saturday and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on the following day.
         b.   It is unlawful for a juvenile, age twelve (12), thirteen (13), or
fourteen (14), to be present in any public place or establishment within the
city:
            (1)   Any time between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on any Sunday,
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the
following day.
            (2)   Any time between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on any Friday or
Saturday and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on the following day.
         c.   It is unlawful for a juvenile, age fifteen (15), sixteen (16), or
seventeen (17), to be present in any public place or establishment within the
city:
            (1)   Any time between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on any Sunday,
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the
following day.
            (2)   Any time between one minute past twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M.
and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on any Saturday or Sunday.
      2.   Parents And Guardians: It is unlawful for a parent or guardian of a
juvenile knowingly, or through negligent supervision, to permit the juvenile to
be in any public place or establishment within the city during the hours
prohibited in subsection C1 of this section.
      3.   Proprietors:
         a.   It is unlawful for a proprietor of an establishment within the
city to knowingly permit a juvenile to remain in the establishment or on the
establishment's property during the hours prohibited in subsection C1 of this
section.
         b.   If the proprietor is not present at the time of the curfew
violation, the responding officer shall leave written notice of the violation
with an employee of the establishment. A copy of the written notice shall be
served upon the establishment's proprietor personally or by certified mail.
   D.   Defenses:
      1.   Juveniles: It is an affirmative defense for a juvenile to prove
that:
         a.   The juvenile was accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or
other responsible adult.
         b.   The juvenile was engaged in a lawful employment activity or was
going to or returning home from his or her place of employment.
         c.   The juvenile was involved in an emergency situation.
         d.   The juvenile was going to, attending, or returning home from an
official school, religious, or other recreational activity sponsored and/or
supervised by a public entity or a civic organization.
         e.   The juvenile was on an errand at the direction of a parent or
guardian.
         f.   The juvenile was exercising first amendment rights protected by
the United States constitution or article I of the constitution of the state of
Minnesota.
         g.   The juvenile was engaged in interstate travel.
         h.   The juvenile was on the public right of way, boulevard or
sidewalk abutting the property containing the juvenile's residence or abutting
the neighboring property, structure, or residence.
      2.   Proprietors: It is an affirmative defense for a proprietor of an
establishment to prove that:
         a.   The proprietor or employee reasonably and in good faith relied
upon a juvenile's representations of proof of age. Proof of age may be
established pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 340A.503, subdivision 6, or
other verifiable means, including, but not limited to, school identification
cards and birth certificates.
         b.   The proprietor or employee promptly notified the responsible
police agency that a juvenile was present on the premises of the establishment
during curfew hours.
   E.   Violation; Penalties:
      1.   Violation of subsection C1 of this section will be prosecuted
pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 260B.235 and will be subject to the
penalties therein.
      2.   Violation of subsection C2 or C3 of this section is a misdemeanor
and will be subject to the penalty set forth in Minnesota statutes section
609.03.
   F.   Annual Review Of Provisions: The city council shall conduct a yearly
review of this section as to the effectiveness of a continuing need for a
juvenile curfew. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-5-1)
TITLE 7
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
General Traffic Provisions   1
Parking Regulations   2
Snowmobiles And Special Use Vehicles   3
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
7-1-1: State Regulations Adopted
7-1-1: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The regulatory provisions of Minnesota statutes chapter 169, as it may be
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted as a traffic provision regulating
the use of highways, streets and alleys within the city and are hereby
incorporated in and made a part of this section as completely as if set out
here in full. The penalty for violation of the provisions of state statutes
adopted by reference in this section shall be identical with the penalty
provided in the statutes for the same offense. (2011 Code)
CHAPTER 2
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Powers Of City Council And Chief Of Police
7-2-2: Designation Of Parking Spaces
7-2-3: Parking Prohibitions
7-2-4: Towing And Storage Procedures
7-2-1: POWERS OF CITY COUNCIL AND CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   City Council: The city council is authorized to designate parking zones
on both public and private property and restrict the length of time parking
shall be permitted at any place within the city. In establishing or changing
parking zones or parking restrictions, the council shall pass a resolution
adequately describing and defining said parking zones or parking restrictions.
   B.   Chief Of Police: The chief of police is hereby authorized to forbid
parking of all vehicles for temporary periods in case of emergency at any place
within the city. (2011 Code)
7-2-2: DESIGNATION OF PARKING SPACES:
The chief of police is hereby authorized to mark off individual parking spaces.
Parking spaces are to be designated by lines painted or durably marked on the
curbing or surface of the street. At each space so marked off, it shall be
unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way that said vehicle shall not be
entirely within the limits of the space so designated. (2011 Code)
7-2-3: PARKING PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   No owner of a motor vehicle shall leave, park, or permit the same to
stand on any city street or alley for more than forty-eight (48) hours.
Commercial and recreational vehicles, as defined in section
11-2-2 of the zoning ordinance, may not be parked on any city street or alley
except as follows:
      1.   Recreational vehicles may be parked on any city street or alley for
up to forty-eight (48) hours when being used for the purposes of loading and
unloading.
      2.   Commercial vehicles may be parked on any city street or alley when
being used for the purposes of loading, unloading, rendering a temporary
service benefitting the premises or providing emergency services.
   B.   No owner of a motor, recreational, or commercial vehicle shall leave,
park, or permit the same to stand on a street or alley between the hours of two
o’clock (2:00) a.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. between November 1 and April
1 of the following year, or at any other time when the national weather service
forecast accumulation is two (2) or more inches of snow, until the street or
alley has been plowed. Residences without an established driveway, to include
new construction, are exempt from winter parking restrictions.
   C.   No owner of a motor, recreational, or commercial vehicle shall leave,
park, or permit the same to block access to a driveway or block access to a
mailbox. (2011 Code; amd. Ord. 210, 2-13-2020)
7-2-4: TOWING AND STORAGE PROCEDURES 1 :
   A.   Authority To Tow: The chief of police is hereby authorized and
empowered to have removed any vehicle on or stalled on any street or alley in
violation of this chapter and to have such vehicle placed in a garage or
outdoor area by any person engaged in the general garage or filling station
business.
   B.   Costs: Such vehicle shall not be recovered until reasonable costs of
storing and towing the same have been fully paid. The chief of police shall
have the further authority to direct employees of the city to remove any such
vehicle, and the chief of police may impose a charge to be paid to the city
clerk before the said vehicle may be taken or recovered by the owner thereof.
   C.   Lien Provisions: In the event that any vehicle held or stored by the
direction of the chief of police upon which there are charges for storage or
towing, or both, shall not be reclaimed, recovered or taken by the owner
thereof, there shall be deemed to be imposed upon such vehicle a possessory
lien in the amount so charged and unpaid, and should the owner thereof fail to
pay the same, then the possessory lien may be foreclosed in the manner provided
by law. (2011 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. See also title 5, chapter 6, article A of this code.
CHAPTER 3
SNOWMOBILES AND SPECIAL USE VEHICLES
SECTION:
7-3-1: Purpose
7-3-2: Application And Scope; Exemptions
7-3-3: Definitions
7-3-4: Snowmobiles
7-3-5: Special Use Vehicles
7-3-6: Emergencies
7-3-7: Obedience To Police
7-3-8: Locked Vehicles Required
7-3-9: Compliance With Other Laws; State Regulations Adopted
7-3-10: No Assumption Of Liability
7-3-11: Misdemeanor Violation
7-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide reasonable regulations for the use of
snowmobiles and special use vehicles on public and private property in the
city. This chapter is intended to protect life and property and to prevent
public nuisances. (2011 Code; amd. Ord. 201, 10-24-2019)
7-3-2: APPLICATION AND SCOPE; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Conflicts With State Law: If any provision in this chapter contradicts
the regulations pertaining to snowmobiles, ATVs, UTVs or golf carts set forth
in Minnesota statutes chapter 168 (motor vehicle registration), chapter 169
(traffic regulations), chapter 169A (driving while impaired), chapter 171
(driver license regulations) or chapter 84 (snowmobile and all-terrain vehicle
registrations), the state regulations shall control.
   B.   Scope: This chapter shall apply to the control of traffic and the
regulation of that certain class of vehicles falling within the definition of
snowmobiles, ATVs, UTVs or golf carts as to matters set forth herein. All
provisions of other ordinances not relating to matters herein stated apply as
equally to snowmobiles, ATVs, UTVS or golf carts as to other vehicles. Nothing
contained in this chapter shall be construed to change state law, and said laws
shall remain in full force and effect.
   C.   Exemption: This chapter shall not apply to privately owned golf carts
when operated solely on the golf course or when crossing Oxford Lane or
Glenborough Drive at designated golf course cart crossings. (2011 Code; amd.
Ord. 201, 10-24-2019)
7-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms defined in this section shall have
the meanings stated:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE OR ATV: A motorized vehicle with: not less than three (3),
but not more than six (6) low pressure or non-pneumatic tires; a total dry
weight of two thousand (2,000) pounds or less; and a total width from outside
of tire rim to outside of tire rim that is sixty five inches (65") or less.
All-terrain vehicle includes a class 1 all-terrain vehicle and class 2 all-
terrain vehicle. All-terrain vehicle does not include a golf cart, mini-truck,
dune buggy, or go-cart or a vehicle designed and used specifically for lawn
maintenance, agriculture, logging, or mining purposes.
COMMISSIONER: The state commissioner of natural resources acting directly or
through the commissioner's authorized agent.
GOLF CART: An electric or gas-powered vehicle not completely enclosed,
generally having a small wheel base.
MINI-TRUCK: A motor vehicle that has four (4) wheels; is propelled by an
electric motor with a rated power of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) watts
or less or an internal combustion engine with a piston displacement capacity of
six hundred sixty (660) cubic centimeters or less; has a total dry weight of
nine hundred (900) to two thousand two hundred (2,200) pounds; contains an
enclosed cabin and a seat for the vehicle operator; commonly resembles a pickup
truck or van, including a cargo area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle;
and was not originally manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety
standards required of motor vehicles in the Code of Federal Regulations, title
49, sections 571.101 to 571.404, and successor requirements.
NATURAL TERRAIN: Areas other than roadways or driveways (private or public),
parking lots and other areas of which the surface has been intentionally
modified for motor vehicle operation thereon.
OPERATE: To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile or special
use vehicle.
OPERATOR: Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile or special use vehicle.
OWNER: A person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to a
snowmobile or special use vehicle and entitled to the use or possession
thereof.
PERSON: Includes an individual, partnership, corporation, the state and its
agencies and subdivisions, and any body of persons, whether incorporated or
not.
ROADWAY: That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel.
SHARED USE PATH: A multi-use trail or other path, physically separated from
motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier, either within a
highway right- of-way or within an independent right- of-way, and typically
used by pedestrians, bicyclists, skaters, and other nonmotorized users.
SIDEWALK: The portion of a street between the curb line, or the lateral line of
a roadway, and the adjacent property line that is paved and intended for use by
pedestrians.
SNOWMOBILE: A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice and
steered by skis or runners.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between boundary lines or any way or place
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right,
for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
UTILITY TASK VEHICLE OR UTV: A side-by-side, four-wheel drive, off- road
vehicle that has four (4) wheels, is propelled by an internal combustion engine
with a piston displacement capacity of one thousand two hundred (1,200) cubic
centimeters or less, and has a total dry weight of one thousand eight hundred
(1,800) but less than two thousand six hundred (2,600) pounds. (2011 Code; amd.
Ord. 201, 10-24-2019)
7-3-4: SNOWMOBILES:
   A.   Operation Regulations:
      1.   Prohibited Hours; Exceptions: No person shall operate a snowmobile
upon any public property, street, alley, lot, lake or stream within the city
between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.;
provided, however, that if the snowmobile is being driven for the purpose of
going in the most direct, practicable route possible from a point outside the
city limits to the residence of the operator within the city limits, or from
the residence of the operator inside the city limits in the most direct,
practicable route to a specific destination outside the city limits, then, and
for that purpose only, operation of a snowmobile between the aforesaid hours
shall be lawful.
      2.   Operation On Banks Of Highways: Upon county state aid and county
highways within the corporate limits, snowmobiles shall only be operated upon
the ditch bottom or outside bank, except as otherwise provided by this section.
      3.   Driving On Roadways: It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile on the
portion of any right-of-way of any public highway, street, road or alley used
for motor vehicle travel except as otherwise provided in this section. It is
lawful to operate a snowmobile upon the most right hand lane of a municipal
street or alley and may, in passing or making a left hand turn, operate on
other lanes which are used for vehicle traffic in the same direction, only when
going to or from a designated trail or non-highway area of permissible
operation outside the city limits to the operator’s place of residence or
establishment within the city limits.
      4.   Direct Crossing:
         a.   A snowmobile may make a direct crossing of a street or highway,
except an interstate highway or freeway, provided:
            (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety
degrees (90°) to the direction of the street or highway and at a place where no
obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;
            (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing
the shoulder or main traveled way;
            (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic
which constitutes an immediate hazard; and
            (4)   In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing is made
only at an intersection of the street or highway with another public street or
highway.
         b.   If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half (1/2) hour
after sunset to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced
visibility, the crossing may be made only if both front and rear lights are on.
      5.   Compliance With State Law: No snowmobile shall be operated within
the city in violation of the requirements under Minnesota Statutes section
84.87, subdivision 1.
   B.   Prohibited Operation:
      1.   On Sidewalks Or Shared Use Path: No snowmobile shall be operated at
any time whatsoever upon any sidewalk or shared use path within the corporate
limits of the city.
      2.   In Parks: It shall be unlawful to operate a snowmobile in any city
park unless authorized by the city as part of an event.
      3.   Occupants: The number of occupants on the snowmobile shall not
exceed the design occupancy load. Each occupant must be seated in a seat
designed for occupants.
      4.   Hurting Or Chasing Animals: It is unlawful to intentionally drive,
chase, run over or kill any animal with a snowmobile.
      5.   Established Public Places: In addition to the regulations provided
in this subsection, it is unlawful to operate a snowmobile on any public place
where prohibited by order of the city council. The city council shall have the
power, by resolution, to prohibit the operation whenever, in its discretion,
the same would be likely to produce damage to property or endanger the safety
or repose of other persons. The areas shall be appropriately signposted
following the enactment of the city resolution, and the prohibition shall
become effective upon the posting.
   C.   Unsafe Operation: It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or
operate any snowmobile in the following unsafe or harassing ways:
      1.   Speed: At a rate of speed greater than the posted limit or
reasonable or proper under all surrounding circumstances.
      2.   Carelessness, Negligence: In a careless, reckless, or negligent
manner so as to endanger the person or property of another or to cause injury
or damage thereto.
      3.   Noisy Conditions: In such a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary
and excessive noise or in any way which shall unduly disturb the peace and
quiet of other persons in the city or in any manner which creates a public
nuisance thereby.
      4.   Lights: Without a lighted headlight and taillight when required for
safety.
      5.   Tree Nurseries: In any tree nursery or planting in a manner which
damages or destroys growing stock.
      6.   Private Property: On private property of another without specific
permission of the owner or person in control of said property.
      7.   Under Influence Of Intoxicants: At any place while under the
influence of "alcohol" or a "controlled substance", as those terms are defined
in Minnesota Statutes. Minnesota Statutes section 169A.20, "driving while
impaired", is incorporated herein by reference.
   D.   Equipment Requirements: It is unlawful for any person to operate a
snowmobile to any place within the city unless it is equipped with the
following:
      1.   Mufflers: Standard mufflers which are properly attached and which
reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for
operation (no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass, straight pipe or
similar device on a snowmobile motor);
      2.   Brakes: Brakes adequate to control movement of and to stop and hold
the snowmobile under any condition of operation;
      3.   Safety Throttle: A safety or so called "dead man" throttle in
operating condition;
      4.   Lights: When operated between the hours of one-half (1/2) hour after
sunset to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise or at a time of reduced
visibility, at least one (1) clear lamp attached to the front, with sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least one hundred
feet (100') ahead during the hours of darkness and under normal atmospheric
conditions; and the headlamp shall be so aimed that glaring rays are not
projected into the eyes of an oncoming snowmobile operator. It shall also be
equipped with at least one (1) red taillamp having a minimum power of
sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of
five hundred feet (500') to the rear during the hours of darkness under normal
atmospheric conditions; and
      5.   Reflective Material: Reflective material at least sixteen (16)
square inches on each side, forward of the handlebars or steering device of a
snowmobile and at the highest practicable point of any towed object, as to
reflect light at a ninety degree (90°) angle.
   E.   Age Of Operator:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of fourteen (14) years
to operate a snowmobile on streets and city parks or other public land or on
the roadway surface of highways or to make the crossing of a trunk, county
state aid or county highway as the operator of a snowmobile.
      2.   All other persons operating a snowmobile within the city must have
in their possession a safety certificate issued by the commissioner of natural
resources, a driver's license that has a valid snowmobile qualification
indicator, or an identification card that has a valid snowmobile qualification
in accordance with and to the extent required under Minnesota Statutes section
84.862.
      3.   It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile to permit the
snowmobile to be operated contrary to the provisions of this section. (Ord.
201, 10-24-2019; amd. Ord. 217, 5-28-2020)
7-3-5: SPECIAL USE VEHICLES:
   A.   Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to operate a special use
vehicle on public streets in the city without first obtaining a permit as
provided herein. Persons who obtain a permit as required below are authorized
to operate a special use vehicle on designated public roadways and shared use
paths or portions thereof under the jurisdiction of the city. Operators must
have proof of insurance in possession while operating a special use vehicle on
designated streets and shared use paths and shall produce such proof of
insurance on demand of a police officer as specified in Minnesota Statutes
section 169.791.
      1.   Term Of Permit: Except as otherwise provided herein, all permits
issued shall be issued for a specified three (3) year term and must be renewed
following their expiration. All permits issued during 2019, shall be issued for
the remainder of 2019 and the three (3) year term beginning on January 1, 2020.
      2.   Permit Fee: All applications for a permit under this chapter shall
be accompanied by the fee set forth in the city fee schedule, as it may be
amended from time to time. The permit fee shall not be prorated.
         a.   Replacement Permit: If the issued permit is lost or damaged, a
new application for a permit shall be required and shall be accompanied by the
fee set forth in the city fee schedule, as it may be amended from time to time.
      3.   Exemption: Authorized city staff may operate city owned special use
vehicles without obtaining a permit within the city on city streets, sidewalks,
shared use paths, rights-of-way, and other public property when conducting city
business.
   B.   Application For Permit: Application for a permit shall be made at least
two (2) regular business days before the applicant desires to begin operating
special use vehicles unless otherwise approved by the city clerk or their
designee. Application for a permit shall be made on a form available from the
office of the city clerk. All applications shall be signed by the applicant and
include the following information:
      1.   The name, address and contact information of the applicant.
      2.   The make, model name, year and serial number of the special use
vehicle.
      3.   Proof of insurance complying with Minnesota Statutes section 65B.48.
      4.   All additional information deemed necessary by the city.
   C.   Permit Display: All permits shall be issued for a specific special use
vehicle. A current city-issued permit tag/sticker shall be plainly visible from
the front or driver's side of the special use vehicle.
   D.   Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit: The police chief may suspend or
revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a finding that the holder thereof has
violated any of the provisions of this section or Minnesota Statute chapter
169, as it may be amended from time to time, or if there is evidence that the
permit holder cannot safely operate the special use vehicle on the designated
roadways.
      Appeal: The permit holder may appeal a permit suspension, revocation or
nonrenewal to the city council. The permit holder must file with the city clerk
a notice of appeal within ten (10) days of a suspension, revocation or
nonrenewal. The council shall consider the appeal at a regularly or specially
scheduled council meeting on or after fifteen (15) days from service of the
notice of appeal upon the city clerk by the permit holder. Hearing on the
appeal shall be open to the public. At the conclusion of the hearing, or as
soon thereafter as practicable, the council may order:
      1.   The revocation, suspension or non-renewal of the permit; or
      2.   The revocation, suspension or non-renewal by the police chief be
lifted and the permit be returned to or re-issued to the permit holder.
   E.   Operation Regulations:
      1.   Prohibited Hours; Exceptions: No person shall operate a special use
vehicle upon any public property, street, alley, lot, lake or stream within the
city between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.;
provided, however, that if the special use vehicle is being driven for the
purpose of going in the most direct, practicable route possible from a point
outside the city limits to the residence of the operator within the city
limits, or from the residence of the operator inside the city limits in the
most direct, practicable route to a specific destination outside the city
limits, then, and for that purpose only, operation of a special use vehicle
between the aforesaid hours shall be lawful.
      2.   Operation On Banks Of Highways: Upon county state aid and county
highways within the corporate limits, special use vehicles shall only be
operated upon the ditch bottom or outside bank of trunk, except as otherwise
provided by this section.
      3.   Driving On Roadways: Upon any public highway, street, road, or alley
used for motor vehicle travel, a special use vehicle shall only be operated
upon the most right hand portion, except as otherwise provided by this section.
In passing or making a left hand turn, it is lawful for a special use vehicle
to operate on other lanes which are used for vehicle traffic in the same
direction, only when going to or from a designated trail or non-highway area of
permissible operation outside the city limits to the operator’s place of
residence or establishment within the city limits.
      4.   Compliance With State Law: No special use vehicle shall be operated
within the city in violation of the requirements under Minnesota Statutes
sections 84.92 through 84.928.
   F.   Prohibited Operation:
      1.   On Sidewalks: No special use vehicle shall be operated at any time
whatsoever upon any sidewalk within the corporate limits of the city.
      2.   On Shared Use Paths: No special use vehicle shall be operated at any
time whatsoever upon any shared use path within the corporate limits of the
city; except, along County Road 2 or County Road 91. All special use vehicles
must yield to pedestrians when operating on a shared use path.
      3.   In Parks: It shall be unlawful to operate a special use vehicle in
any city park unless authorized by the city as part of an event.
      4.   Occupants: The number of occupants on the special use vehicle shall
not exceed the design occupancy load. Each occupant must be seated in a seat
designed for occupants.
      5.   Hurting Or Chasing Animals: It is unlawful to intentionally drive,
chase, run over or kill any animal with a special use vehicle.
      6.   Established Public Places: In addition to the regulations provided
in this subsection, it is unlawful to operate a special use vehicle on any
public place where prohibited by order of the city council. The city council
shall have the power, by resolution, to prohibit the operation whenever, in its
discretion, the same would be likely to produce damage to property or endanger
the safety or repose of other persons. The areas shall be appropriately
signposted following the enactment of the city resolution, and the prohibition
shall become effective upon the posting.
      7.   Mini-Trucks: It shall be unlawful to operate a mini-truck upon any
public sidewalk, shared use path, street or other public place within the
corporate limits of the city.
   G.   Unsafe Operation: It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or
operate any special use vehicle in the following unsafe or harassing ways:
      1.   Speed: At a rate of speed greater than the posted limit or
reasonable or proper under all surrounding circumstances.
      2.   Carelessness, Negligence: In a careless, reckless, or negligent
manner so as to endanger the person or property of another or to cause injury
or damage thereto.
      3.   Noisy Conditions: In such a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary
and excessive noise or in any way which shall unduly disturb the peace and
quiet of other persons in the city or in any manner which creates a public
nuisance thereby.
      4.   Lights: Without a lighted headlight and taillight when required for
safety.
      5.   Tree Nurseries: In any tree nursery or planting in a manner which
damages or destroys growing stock.
      6.   Private Property: On private property of another without specific
permission of the owner or person in control of said property.
      7.   Under Influence Of Intoxicants: At any place while under the
influence of "alcohol" or a "controlled substance", as those terms are defined
in Minnesota Statutes. Minnesota Statutes section 169A.20, "driving while
impaired", is incorporated herein by reference.
   H.   Equipment Requirements:
      1.   ATVs And UTVs: It is unlawful for any person to operate an ATV or
UTV to any place within the city unless it is equipped with the following:
         a.   Mufflers: Standard mufflers which are properly attached and which
reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for
operation (no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass, straight pipe or
similar device on an ATV or UTV motor);
         b.   Brakes: Brakes adequate to control movement of and to stop and
hold the ATV or UTV under any condition of operation;
         c.   Safety Throttle: A safety or so called "dead man" throttle in
operating condition;
         d.   Lights: When operated between the hours of one-half (1/2) hour
after sunset to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise or at a time of reduced
visibility, at least one (1) clear lamp attached to the front, with sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least one hundred
feet (100') ahead during the hours of darkness and under normal atmospheric
conditions; and the headlamp shall be so aimed that glaring rays are not
projected into the eyes of an oncoming special use vehicle operator. It shall
also be equipped with at least one (1) red taillamp having a minimum power of
sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of
five hundred feet (500') to the rear during the hours of darkness under normal
atmospheric conditions; and
         e.   Reflective Material: Reflective material at least sixteen (16)
square inches on each side, forward of the handlebars or steering device of an
ATV or UTV and at the highest practicable point of any towed object, as to
reflect light at a ninety degree (90°) angle.
      2.   Golf Carts: It is unlawful for any person to operate a golf cart to
any place within the city unless it is equipped with the following:
         a.   Slow Moving Vehicle Emblem: Golf carts must display a slow moving
vehicle emblem in accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 169.522.
   I.   Age of Operator:
      1.   ATVs And UTVs:
         a.   A person sixteen (16) years of age or older may operate an ATV or
UTV, as permitted under this chapter, only if the individual has, in the
individual's possession, a safety certificate issued by the commissioner of
natural resources in accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 84.925 and a
valid driver's license.
         b.   A person fifteen (15) years of age or older may operate an ATV or
UTV, as permitted under this chapter, only if the individual has, in the
individual's possession, a safety certificate issued by the commissioner of
natural resources in accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 84.925 and a
valid learner's permit, and is accompanied by a person eighteen (18) years of
age or older who meets the requirements of subsection I1a of this section.
         c.   A person twelve (12) years of age or older, but less than fifteen
(15) years of age may operate an ATV or UTV upon the most right hand lane of a
municipal street or alley and may, in passing or making a left hand turn,
operate on other lanes which are used for vehicle traffic in the same
direction, for purposes of going to or returning from a nonhighway area of
permissible operation outside the city, by the most direct route, only if the
individual has, in the individual's possession, a safety certificate issued by
the commissioner of natural resources in accordance with Minnesota Statutes
section 84.925 and is accompanied by a person eighteen (18) years of age or
older who meets the requirements of subsection I1a of this section.
         d.   Any person born prior to July 2, 1987 is not required to have a
safety certificate issued by the commissioner of natural resources.
      2.   Golf Carts:
         a.   A person sixteen (16) years of age or older may operate a golf
cart, as permitted under this chapter, only if the individual has, in the
individual's possession, a valid driver's license.
         b.   A person fifteen (15) years of age or older may operate a golf
cart, as permitted under this chapter, only if the individual has, in the
individual's possession, a valid learner's permit and is accompanied by a
person eighteen (18) years of age or older who meets the requirements of
subsection I2a of this section.
      3.   It is unlawful for the owner of a special use vehicle to permit the
special use vehicle to be operated contrary to the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 201, 10-24-2019; amd. Ord. 217, 5-28-2020)
7-3-6: EMERGENCIES:
Notwithstanding any prohibitions in this chapter, a snowmobile or special use
vehicle may be operated on a public thoroughfare in an emergency during the
period of time and at locations where snow upon the roadway renders travel by
automobile impractical. (2011 Code; amd. Ord. 201, 10-24-2019)
7-3-7: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE:
It is unlawful for a snowmobile or special use vehicle operator, having
received a visual or audible signal from any law enforcement officer to come to
a stop, to operate a snowmobile or special use vehicle in wilful or wanton
disregard of the signal, to interfere with or endanger the law enforcement
officer or any other person or vehicle or to increase their speed or attempt to
flee or elude the officer. (2011 Code; amd. Ord. 201, 10-24-2019)
7-3-8: LOCKED VEHICLES REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to leave a snowmobile or special use vehicle on a
public place unless he or she shall lock the ignition, remove the key and take
the same with him or her. (2011 Code; amd. Ord. 201, 10-24-2019)
7-3-9: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS; STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
City ordinances relating to vehicular traffic shall apply to the operation of
snowmobiles and special use vehicles upon streets and highways within the city;
and Minnesota statutes sections 84.81 through 84.92, Minnesota statutes
chapters 169 and 169A, and applicable rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder by the state departments of natural resources and public safety are
hereby adopted by reference except those provisions which by their nature have
no application. (2011 Code; amd. Ord. 201, 10-24-2019)
7-3-10: NO ASSUMPTION OF LIABILITY:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as an assumption of liability by the
city for injuries to persons or property which may result from the operation of
any snowmobile or special use vehicle by a permit holder or the failure by the
police chief or city council to suspend or revoke a permit. (Ord. 201, 10-24-
2019)
7-3-11: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION:
Anyone who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of misdemeanor and
subject to punishment as provided by law. Any parent or legal guardian of a
juvenile found in violation of this chapter may be cited for the violation
committed under this chapter. (2011 Code; amd. Ord. 201, 10-24-2019)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Public Rights Of Way Management   1
City Parks   2
CHAPTER 1
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
8-1-1: Purpose And Scope
8-1-2: Statute Authority; Interpretation
8-1-3: Definitions
8-1-4: Administrative Official
8-1-5: Registration Requirements
8-1-6: Permits Required; Exemptions
8-1-7: Application For Permit
8-1-8: Permit Fees
8-1-9: Bond And Insurance Requirements
8-1-10: Issuance Of Permit; Conditions
8-1-11: Denial Of Permit
8-1-12: Display Of Permit
8-1-13: Extension Of Permit; Supplementary Notification
8-1-14: Supplementary Applications
8-1-15: Inspections
8-1-16: Work Without Permit
8-1-17: Right To Occupy Rights-Of-Way; Payment Of Fees
8-1-18: Installation And Restoration Requirements
8-1-19: Joint Installations And City Projects
8-1-20: Mapping Data
8-1-21: Location Of Equipment
8-1-22: Damage To Other Equipment
8-1-23: Vacation Of Right-Of-Way
8-1-24: Abandoned And Unusable Equipment
8-1-25: Other Obligations
8-1-26: Indemnification And Liability
8-1-27: Revocation Of Permits
8-1-28: Appeals
8-1-29: Franchise May Be Required; Supremacy Established
8-1-30: Reservation Of Regulatory And Police Powers
8-1-31: Severability
8-1-32: Nonexclusive Remedies
8-1-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
In order to provide for the health, safety, well-being, and convenience of its
citizens, as well as to ensure the structural integrity of its streets and the
use of the rights- of-way, the City strives to keep its rights-of-way in a
state of good repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances. Accordingly, the
City hereby enacts this chapter relating to rights-of-way permits and
management. This chapter imposes regulations on the placement and maintenance
of equipment currently within the City rights-of-way or to be placed therein at
a future time. This chapter is intended to complement the regulatory roles of
State and Federal agencies. Under this chapter, persons excavating and
obstructing the rights-of-way will bear the financial responsibility for their
impacts and for City costs incurred in administering this chapter. (Ord. 186,
4-11-2019)
8-1-2: STATUTE AUTHORITY; INTERPRETATION:
This chapter is created to manage and regulate the public use of the City
rights-of-way along City roads and infrastructure pursuant to the authority
granted to the City under State and Federal statutory, administrative and
common law. The City hereby elects to manage the rights-of-way under its
jurisdiction. All rights-of-way users, including the City, are subject to the
provisions in this chapter. The City is exempt from the obligation of paying
for permits or other fees imposed by this chapter. This chapter shall be
interpreted consistent with Minnesota Statutes sections 237.16, 237.162,
237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the "Act"), Minnesota Statutes chapter
216D and the other laws governing applicable rights of the City and users of
the rights-of-way as they are amended from time to time. This chapter shall
also be interpreted consistent with Minnesota Rules 7819.0050 - 7819.9950 as
they are amended from time to time where possible. To the extent any provision
of this chapter cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota Rules,
that interpretation most consistent with the Act and other applicable statutory
and case law is intended. This chapter shall not be interpreted to limit the
regulatory and police powers of the City to adopt and enforce general
ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
"Manage the right-of-way" means the authority of the City to do any or all of
the following:
   A.   Require registration;
   B.   Require construction performance bonds and insurance coverage;
   C.   Establish installation and construction standards;
   D.   Establish and define location and relocation requirements for equipment
and facilities;
   E.   Establish coordination and timing requirements;
   F.   Require rights-of-way users to submit, henceforth required by the City,
project data reasonably necessary to allow the City to develop a right-of-way
mapping system including GIS system information;
   G.   Require rights-of-way users to submit, upon request of the City,
existing data on the location of the user's facilities occupying the public
rights-of-way within the City. The data may be submitted in the form maintained
by the user in a reasonable time after receipt of the request based on the
amount of data requested;
   H.   Establish rights-of-way permitting requirements for access, excavating/
grading, utility services, landscaping, collocation, and obstruction;
   I.   Establish removal requirements for abandoned equipment or facilities,
if required, in conjunction with other rights-of- way repair, excavation or
construction; and
   J.   Impose reasonable penalties for unreasonable delays in construction.
(Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ADMINISTRATOR: The City Administrator or his designee.
APPLICANT: Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-of-
way.
CITY: The City of Elko New Market, Minnesota. For purposes of section
8-1-26 of this chapter, "City" means its elected officials, officers,
employees, agents or any commission, committee or subdivision acting pursuant
to lawfully delegated authority.
CITY COST: The actual costs incurred by the City for managing rights-of-way
including, but not limited to, costs associated with registering of applicants;
issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way permit or small wireless
facility permit applications; revoking right-of-way permits or small wireless
facility permits; inspecting job sites; creating and updating mapping systems;
determining the adequacy of right- of-way restoration; restoring work
inadequately performed; maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user
equipment during right-of-way work; budget analyses; recordkeeping; legal
assistance; systems analyses; and performing all of the other tasks required by
this chapter, including other costs the City may incur in managing the
provisions of this chapter except as expressly prohibited by law. City costs do
not include payment by telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the
right-of-way, unreasonable fees of a third party contractor used by the City
including fees tied to or based on customer counts, access lines, or revenues
generated by the right-of-way or for the City, the fees and costs of litigation
relating to interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws 1997, chapter 123;
Minnesota Statutes sections 237.162 or 237.163; or any ordinance enacted under
those sections, or the City fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to
section
8-1-28 of this chapter.
CITY INSPECTOR: Any person authorized by the City to carry out inspections
related to the provisions of this chapter.
COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a small
wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing wireless
support structure or utility pole that is owned privately, or by the City or
other governmental unit.
DEGRADATION: The accelerated depreciation of the right-of-way caused by
excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation
did not occur.
EMERGENCY: A condition that:
   A.   Poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health, or of a
significant loss of property; or
   B.   Requires immediate repair or replacement in order to restore service to
a customer.
EQUIPMENT: Any tangible thing located in any right-of-way, but shall not
include boulevard plantings or gardens planted or maintained in the right-of-
way between a person's property and the street curb.
EXCAVATE: To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate
any part of a right-of-way, except horticultural practices of penetrating the
boulevard area to a depth of less than twelve inches (12").
EXCAVATION PERMIT: The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained
before a person may excavate in a right-of- way. An "excavation permit" allows
the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit.
EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE: Money paid to the City by an applicant to cover the
costs as provided in section
8-1-8 of this chapter.
IN: Over, above, in, within, on, or under a right-of-way when used in
conjunction with right-of-way.
JOINT TRENCH: The placement of two (2) or more conductors and/or conduits owned
and operated by separate utilities in the same excavation to minimize occupied
space; reduce costs, disruption, and construction time; and simplify mapping
and future location of the facilities.
LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE: The person or persons, or designee of such person or
persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions for
that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter.
OBSTRUCT: To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free
and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
OBSTRUCTION PERMIT: The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be
obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of a right-of-way by
placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way for the duration
specified therein.
OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE: Money paid to the City by a registrant to cover the
costs as provided in section
8-1-8 of this chapter.
PERFORMANCE AND RESTORATION BOND: A performance bond or letter of credit posted
to ensure the availability of sufficient funds to assure that all obligations
pursuant to this chapter, including, but not limited to, right-of-way
excavation and obstruction work, is timely and properly completed.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way
or collocate a small wireless facility or erect or install a wireless support
structure in a right-of-way has been granted by the City under this chapter.
PERSON: Any natural or corporate person, business association or other business
entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole proprietorship, a
political subdivision, a public or private agency of any kind, a utility, a
successor or assign of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity which
has or seeks to have equipment located in any right-of- way.
PROBATION: The status of a person that has not complied with the conditions of
this chapter.
REGISTRANT: Any person who: a) has or seeks to have its equipment located in
any right-of-way; or b) in any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use,
the right-of-way or any equipment located in the right-of-way and, accordingly,
is required to register with the City.
REGISTRATION FEE: An amount of money paid to the City by a registrant to cover
the costs of registration.
RESTORATION FEE: An amount of money paid to the City by a permittee to cover
the cost of restoration.
RESTORE OR RESTORATION: The process by which an excavated or obstructed right-
of-way and surrounding area including, but not limited to, pavement and
foundation, is returned to the same condition that existed before the
commencement of excavation.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above any real property in which the City
has an interest including, but not limited to, any street, road, highway,
alley, sidewalk, parkway, park, skyway, or any other place, area, or real
property owned by or under the control of the City, including other dedicated
rights-of-way for travel purposes and easements for drainage, utilities,
trails, or other purposes.
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT: Either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit, or
both, depending on the context, required by this chapter.
SERVICE LATERAL: An underground facility that is used to transmit, distribute,
or furnish gas, electricity, communication, or water from a common source to an
end use customer. A service lateral is also an underground facility that is
used in the removal of wastewater, stormwater, or groundwater from a customer's
premises.
SERVICE OR UTILITY SERVICE: A. Those services provided by a public utility as
defined in Minnesota Statutes section 216B.02, subdivisions 4 and 6, as they
may be amended from time to time;
   B.   Services of a telecommunications right-of- way user; including
transporting of voice or data information;
   C.   Service of a cable communications system defined in Minnesota Statutes
chapter 238, as it may be amended from time to time;
   D.   Natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications services provided
by the City;
   E.   Service provided by a cooperative electric association organized under
Minnesota Statutes chapter 308A, as it may be amended from time to time;
   F.   Water and sewer, including service laterals, steam, cooling or heating
services; and
   G.   Privately owned utility services, including drain tiles.
SMALL UTILITIES: The buried facilities required to provide electricity, gas,
telephone, cable TV and other telecommunications facilities to users in a
subdivision or along a street. This definition is based on how these facilities
are typically referred to in the industry.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications: 1) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or could fit within such an enclosure;
and 2) all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility
provided such equipment is, in aggregate, no more than twenty eight (28) cubic
feet in volume, not including electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding
equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment
concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or
concealment; and
   B.   A micro wireless facility.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT: The permit which, pursuant to this chapter,
must be obtained before a person may collocate a small wireless facility or
erect a wireless support structure in a right-of-way. A "small wireless
facility permit" allows the holder to collocate a small wireless facility or
install a wireless support structure at that part of the right-of-way described
in such permit.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT FEE: Money paid to the City by an applicant to
cover the City costs as provided in section
8-1-8 of this chapter.
SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION: An application made to excavate or obstruct more of
the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had already been
issued.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY USER: A person or entity owning or controlling
a facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control the same, that is
used or is intended to be used for providing wireless service, or transporting
telecommunications or other voice or data information. For purposes of this
chapter, a cable communications system defined and regulated under Minnesota
Statutes chapter 238, and telecommunications activities relating to providing
natural gas or electric energy services, a public utility as defined in
Minnesota Statutes section 216B.02, a municipality, a municipal gas or power
agency organized under Minnesota Statutes chapters 453 and 453A, or a
cooperative electric association organized under Minnesota Statutes chapter
308A, are not included in this definition for purposes of this chapter except
to the extent such entity is offering wireless service. This definition shall
be consistent with Minnesota Statutes section 237.162, subdivision 4.
UNUSABLE EQUIPMENT: Equipment located in the right-of-way which has remained
unused for one year and for which the registrant is unable to provide proof
that it has either a plan to begin using it within the next twelve (12) months
or a potential purchaser or user of the equipment.
UTILITY POLE: A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate
telecommunications or electric service.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision of
wireless services between the user equipment and a wireless service network,
including equipment associated with wireless service, a radio transceiver,
antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies and a
small wireless facility, but not including wireless support structures,
wireline backhaul facilities, or cables between utility poles or wireless
support structures, or not otherwise immediately adjacent to and directly
associated with a specific antenna.
WIRELESS SERVICE: Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum,
including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means of a mobile
device that is provided using wireless facilities. Wireless service does not
include services regulated under title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as
amended, including cable service.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A new or existing structure in a right-of-way
designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities, as
reasonably determined by the City.
WIRELINE BACKHAUL FACILITY: A facility used to transport communications data by
wire from a wireless facility to a communications network. (Ord. 186, 4-11-
2019)
8-1-4: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL:
The City may designate a principal City official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, rights-of-way permits, and the ordinances
related thereto. The City may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.
(Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-5: REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Registration Required:
      1.   Each person who occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the
right-of-way or any equipment located in the right- of-way, including by lease,
sublease or assignment, or who has, or seeks to have, equipment located in any
right-of-way must register with the City. Registration will consist of
providing application information to and as required by the City and paying a
registration fee. Permit applicants may register at the time of permit
application or once annually. A separate permit is required for each project.
Users placing no permanent facilities in the right-of-way are exempt from
registration but not from permit requirements.
      2.   No person may construct, install, repair, remove, collocate,
relocate, or perform any other work on or use any equipment or any part thereof
located in any right-of-way without first being registered with the City.
   B.   Registration Information:
      1.   Information Required: The information provided to the City at the
time of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
         a.   The registrant's name, gopher one-call registration certificate
number, addresses and e-mail address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers.
         b.   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and
telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local
representative or designee shall be available at all times. Current information
regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency shall be
provided at the time of registration.
         c.   A copy of the registrant's certificate of authority from the
Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other authorization or approval from
the applicable State or Federal agency to lawfully operate, where the
registrant is lawfully required to have such certificate, authorization or
approval from said commission.
         d.   Such other information as the City may reasonably require.
      2.   Changes To Information: The registrant shall keep all of the
information listed above current at all times by providing changes to the City
within fifteen (15) days following the date of which the registrant has
knowledge of any change. (Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-6: PERMITS REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Required Permits: Except as otherwise provided by City ordinance, no
person may obstruct or excavate or collocate or install or place a wireless
support structure in any right-of- way without first having obtained the
appropriate right-of-way permit from the City to do so. The following permits
may be required:
      1.   Excavation Permit: An excavation permit is required to allow the
holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and/
or to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-
way by placing equipment described therein, to the extent and for the duration
specified therein.
      2.   Obstruction Permit: An obstruction permit is required to allow the
holder to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-
of-way for activities not associated with an excavation permit by placing
materials, equipment, vehicles, or other obstructions described therein on the
right-of-way for the duration specified therein. This permit will be issued at
the Administrator's discretion and will be denied if a reasonable alternative
to the obstruction is available.
      3.   Small Wireless Facility Permit: A small wireless facility permit is
required by a registrant to erect or install a wireless support structure, to
collocate a small wireless facility, or to otherwise install a small wireless
facility in the specified portion of the right-of-way, to the extent specified
therein, provided that such permit shall remain in effect for the length of
time the facility is in use, unless lawfully revoked.
   B.   Exemptions From Permits:
      1.   Plantings Within Right-Of-Way: Nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent persons from planting or maintaining boulevard grasses, flowers, and/or
other garden plants, but not woody shrubs or trees, in the area of the right-
of-way between their property and the street curb. Persons planting or
maintaining boulevard plantings or gardens shall not be deemed to use or occupy
the right-of-way, and shall not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy
any other requirements for planting or maintaining such boulevard plantings or
gardens under this chapter. However, these plantings are subject to disturbance
or damage by City operations or permitted users. Required restoration in these
cases will consist only of boulevard grade turf grasses. Persons planting or
maintaining vegetation in the right-of-way will not be compensated for damaged
plantings or vegetation. Excavations for plantings deeper than twelve inches
(12") are subject to the permit requirements of subsection A of this section.
      2.   Irrigation And Pet Containment Facilities: Nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent owners of a Residential or Commercially zoned parcel from
placing irrigation lines or pet containment wires in easements in favor of the
City and located on their own property within twelve inches (12") of the
surface, provided all other applicable regulations are met. The City and other
permitted users will not be responsible for the location, protection, repair or
replacement of facilities if City work is performed in the easement. No
irrigation or pet containment facilities are allowed in any City owned right-
of-way unless a permit is obtained under this chapter.
      3.   Mailboxes: Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent persons from
locating a mailbox for the use of receiving mail from the United States Postal
Service or a newspaper delivery in the area of the right-of-way between their
property and the street curb, provided it meets the mailbox guidelines of the
United States Postal Service. (Ord. 186, 4-11-2019; amd. Ord. 227, 1-28-2021)
8-1-7: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Application for a permit is made to the City. Right-of-way permit applications
shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with, the
requirements of the following provisions:
   A.   Registration with the City pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all existing and proposed equipment.
   C.   Payment of all monies due the City for:
      1.   Permit fees and costs due;
      2.   Prior obstructions or excavations;
      3.   Any loss, damage, or expense suffered by the City as a result of the
applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or any
emergency actions taken by the City; and
      4.   Franchise fees, if applicable. (Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-8: PERMIT FEES:
   A.   Fees Established:
      1.   Excavation Permit: The excavation permit fee shall be established by
the City in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs. Fees shall be
listed on the schedule of fees updated and adopted annually by the City
Council.
         a.   The City cost to administer the permit, inspect the work, and
enforce provisions of this chapter and permit for each project.
         b.   The degradation of the right-of-way that will result from the
excavation.
         c.   Restoration, if done or caused to be done by the City.
         d.   Creating and updating City maps.
      2.   Obstruction Permit: The obstruction permit fee shall be established
by the City and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the City's
administration costs. This fee may be waived for local residents for activities
at their residence at the discretion of the Administrator.
      3.   Small Wireless Facility Permit Fee: The City shall impose a small
wireless facility permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover:
         a.   City costs;
         b.   City engineering, make-ready, and construction costs associated
with collocation of small wireless facilities and installation and placement of
wireless support structures.
   B.   Payment Of Fees: No excavation permit, obstruction permit, or small
wireless facility permit shall be issued without payment of all fees required
prior to the issuance of such a permit unless the applicant shall agree (in a
manner, amount, and substance acceptable to the City) to pay such fees within
thirty (30) days of billing thereafter. Permit fees that were paid for a permit
which was revoked for a breach are not refundable. Any refunded permit fees
shall be less all City costs up to and including the date of refund.
   C.   Use Of Fees: All obstruction, excavation, and small wireless permit
fees shall be used solely for City management, construction, maintenance and
restoration costs of the right- of-way. (Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-9: BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Bond Requirements:
      1.   Performance And Restoration Bond: The performance and restoration
bond required in this subsection A1 and in subsection A2 of this section and
subsections
8-1-18C2b and
8-1-24A2c of this chapter shall be in an amount determined in the City's sole
discretion, sufficient to serve as security for the full and complete
performance of the obligations under this chapter, including any costs,
expenses, damages, or loss the City pays or incurs because of any failure to
comply with this chapter or any other applicable laws, regulations or
standards. A minimum bond amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be
required for all projects unless waived by the Administrator. Alternative forms
of security such as cash escrow or an irrevocable letter of credit may also be
accepted at the discretion of the Administrator. During periods of
construction, repair or restoration of rights-of- way or equipment in rights-
of-way, the performance and restoration bond shall be in an amount sufficient
to cover one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of such work, as
documented by the person proposing to perform such work, or in such lesser
amounts as may be determined by the City, taking into account the amount of
equipment in the right-of-way, the location and method of installation of the
equipment, the conflict or interference of such equipment with the equipment of
other persons, and the purposes and policies of this chapter. Sixty (60) days
after completion of the work, the performance and restoration bond may be
reduced in the sole determination of the City.
      2.   Additional Bond: When an excavation permit is required for purposes
of installing additional equipment, and a performance and restoration bond
which is in existence is insufficient with respect to the additional equipment,
in the sole determination of the City, the permit applicant may be required by
the City to post an additional performance and restoration bond in accordance
with subsection A of this section.
   B.   Insurance Requirements: Before any permit shall be issued allowing work
in the right-of-way, the applicant or registrant shall provide a certificate of
insurance or self-insurance:
      1.   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the applicant/
registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of
Minnesota, or a form of self- insurance acceptable to the Administrator;
      2.   Verifying that the applicant/registrant is insured against claims
for bodily injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage
arising out of the: a) use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant,
its officers, agents, employees and permittees; and b) placement and use of
facilities in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents,
employees and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection against
liability arising from contracts, independent contractors, products and
completed operations, explosions, damage of underground facilities and collapse
of property;
      3.   Naming the City, its officers, employees and agents, as an
additional insured as to whom the coverage required herein is in force and
applicable and for whom defense will be provided as to all such coverage;
      4.   Requiring that the Administrator be notified thirty (30) days in
advance of cancellation of the policy, nonrenewal or material adverse
modification of a coverage term;
      5.   Indicating commercial general liability coverage, business
automobile liability coverage, workers' compensation and umbrella coverage
established by the Administrator in amounts sufficient to protect the City and
the public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter. (Ord.
186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-10: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS:
   A.   Issuance: If the City determines that the applicant has satisfied the
requirements of this chapter, the City may issue a permit.
   B.   Conditions: The City may impose any reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of a permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder in order
to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to ensure the structural
integrity of the right-of-way, to protect the property and safety of other
users of the right-of-way, to minimize the disruption and inconvenience to the
traveling public, and to otherwise efficiently manage the use of the right-of-
way.
   C.   Small Wireless Facility Conditions: In addition to subsection B of this
section, the erection or installation of a wireless support structure, the
collocation of a small wireless facility, or other installation of a small
wireless facility in the right-of-way, shall be subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the particular
wireless support structure, under those attachment specifications, and at the
height indicated in the applicable permit application.
      2.   No new wireless support structure installed within the right-of-way
shall exceed fifty feet (50') above ground level in height without the City's
written authorization, provided that the City may impose a lower height limit
in the applicable permit to protect the health, safety and welfare or to
protect the right-of-way in its current use, and further provided that a
registrant may replace an existing wireless support structure exceeding fifty
feet (50') above ground level in height with a structure of the same height
subject to such conditions or requirements as may be imposed in the applicable
permit.
      3.   No wireless facility may extend more than ten feet (10') above its
wireless support structure.
      4.   Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support
structure in the right-of-way, the City may impose separation requirements
between such structure and any existing wireless support structure or other
facilities in and around the right-of-way.
      5.   Where an applicant proposes installing a new wireless support
structure or replacing an existing wireless support structure, the new or
replacement wireless support structure shall be of monopole design not
exceeding eighteen inches (18") in diameter and compatible in design with
existing wireless support structures in the area.
      6.   The small wireless facility shall not interfere with public safety
wireless telecommunications.
      7.   Small wireless facilities in the right-of-way shall be removed and
relocated at the City's request and at no cost to the City when the City
determines that removal and relocation is necessary to prevent interference
with: a) present or future City use of the right-of-way for a public project;
b) the public health, safety, or welfare; or c) the safety and convenience of
travel over the right-of-way.
      8.   Small wireless facilities shall be mounted so there is vertical
clearance of at least eight feet (8') between the facility and any pedestrian
sidewalk.
      9.   No small wireless facilities may be located over street or parking
lanes.
      10.   Small wireless facilities shall be located so as not to obstruct
light fixtures. If small wireless facilities are to be located on a light pole,
a lighting plan shall be submitted to demonstrate the facilities will not block
light on the street or sidewalk.
      11.   Small wireless facilities and wireless support structures shall be
located so as not to obstruct traffic lights, traffic signs, street signs, or
wayfinding signage.
      12.   All wires servicing small wireless facilities and support
facilities must be located inside the associated wireless support structure.
      13.   All small wireless facilities shall be flush with the wireless
support structure it is collocated on to minimize visual impact.
      14.   Every small wireless facility shall be the same color and finish as
the wireless support structure it is collocated on.
      15.   No stickers, signs, or decals shall be visible on any small
wireless facility, except safety alerts required by law.
      16.   Brackets supporting small wireless facilities shall be designed to
minimize the appearance and profile of the facilities. Bracket colors and
materials should match the wireless support structures they are attached to.
      17.   Ground-mounted equipment associated with a small wireless facility
is prohibited unless the applicant can show that ground-mounted equipment is
necessary for operation of the small wireless facility. If ground-mounted
equipment is necessary, it shall be placed below grade unless not technically
feasible. If ground-mounted equipment is placed above grade, the design of
ground equipment shall minimize its visual impact in the right-of-way. Ground-
mounted equipment shall not disrupt traffic or pedestrian circulation or
interfere with vehicle and pedestrian sight lines.
      18.   Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless
support structure, sign or other structure not intended to support small
wireless facilities, the City may impose reasonable requirements to accommodate
the particular design, appearance or intended purpose of such structure.
      19.   Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support
structure, the City may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or
relocation requirements on the replacement of such structure.
   D.   Small Wireless Facility Agreement: A small wireless facility shall only
be collocated on a small wireless support structure owned or controlled by the
City, or any other City asset in the right-of-way, after applicant has executed
a standard small wireless facility collocation agreement with the City. The
standard collocation agreement shall require payment of the following:
      1.   One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year for rent to collocate
on the City structure;
      2.   Twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year for maintenance associated
with the collocation;
      3.   A monthly fee for electrical service as follows:
         a.   Seventy three dollars ($73.00) per radio node less than or equal
to one hundred (100) maximum watts;
         b.   One hundred eighty two dollars ($182.00) per radio node over one
hundred (100) maximum watts; or
         c.   The actual costs of electricity, if the actual costs exceed the
foregoing.
The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of,
the required small wireless facility permit, provided, however that the
applicant shall not be additionally required to obtain a license or franchise
in order to collocate. Issuance of a small wireless facility permit does not
supersede, alter or affect any then-existing agreement between the City and
applicant.
   E.   Action On Small Wireless Facility Permit Applications:
      1.   Deadline For Action: The City shall approve or deny a small wireless
facility permit application within ninety (90) days after filing of such
application. The small wireless facility permit, and any associated building
permit application, shall be deemed approved if the City fails to approve or
deny the application within the review periods established in this section.
      2.   Consolidated Applications: An applicant may file a consolidated
small wireless facility permit application addressing the proposed collocation
of up to fifteen (15) small wireless facilities, or a greater number if agreed
to by the City, provided that all small wireless facilities in the application:
         a.   Are located within a two (2) mile radius;
         b.   Consist of substantially similar equipment; and
         c.   Are to be placed on similar types of wireless support structures.
In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the City may
approve some small wireless facilities and deny others, but may not use denial
of one or more permits as a basis to deny all small wireless facilities in the
application.
      3.   Tolling Of Deadline: The ninety (90) day deadline for action on a
small wireless facility permit application may be tolled if:
         a.   The City receives applications from one or more applicants
seeking approval of permits for more than thirty (30) small wireless facilities
within a seven (7) day period. In such case, the City may extend the deadline
for all such applications by thirty (30) days by informing the affected
applicants in writing of such extension.
         b.   The applicant fails to submit all required documents or
information and the City provides written notice of incompleteness to the
applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application. Upon
submission of additional documents or information, the City shall have ten (10)
days to notify the applicant in writing of any still missing information.
         c.   The City and a small wireless facility applicant agree in writing
to toll the review period. (Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-11: DENIAL OF PERMIT:
The City may, in accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 237.163,
subdivision 4, deny any application for a permit as provided in this section.
   A.   Mandatory Denial: Except in the case of an emergency, no right-of-way
permit will be granted:
      1.   To any person required by section
 8-1-5 of this chapter to be registered who has not done so;
      2.   To any person who failed to use commercially reasonable efforts to
anticipate and plan for the project;
      3.   For any project which requires the excavation of any portion of a
right-of-way which was constructed or reconstructed within the preceding five
(5) years;
      4.   To any person who has failed within the past three (3) years to
comply or is presently not in full compliance with the requirements of this
chapter;
      5.   To any person as to whom there exists grounds for the revocation of
a permit under section
8-1-27 of this chapter; and
      6.   If, in the sole discretion of the City, the issuance of a permit for
the particular date and/or time would cause a conflict or interfere with an
exhibition, celebration, festival, or any other event. The City, in exercising
this discretion, shall be guided by the safety and convenience of ordinary
travel of the public over the right-of-way, and by considerations relating to
the public health, safety and welfare.
   B.   Permissive Denial: The City may deny a permit in order to protect the
public health, safety and welfare, to prevent interference with the safety and
convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way, or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its users. The City may consider one or more of
the following factors:
      1.   The extent of which right-of-way space where the permit is sought is
available;
      2.   The competing demands for the particular space in the right-of-way;
      3.   The availability of other locations in the right-of-way or in other
rights-of-way for the equipment of the permit applicant;
      4.   The applicability of ordinance or other regulations of the right-of-
way that affect location of equipment in the right- of-way;
      5.   The degree of compliance of the applicant with the terms and
conditions of its franchise, if any, this chapter, and other applicable
ordinances and regulations;
      6.   The degree of disruption to surrounding communities and businesses
that will result from the use of that part of the right-of-way;
      7.   The condition and age of the right-of-way, and whether and when it
is scheduled for total or partial reconstruction; and
      8.   The balancing of the costs of disruption to the public and damage to
the right-of-way against the benefits to that part of the public served by the
expansion into additional parts of the right-of-way.
   C.   Discretionary Issuance: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A2
of this section, the City may issue a permit in any case where the permit is
necessary: 1) to prevent substantial economic hardship to a customer of the
permit applicant; or 2) to allow such customer to materially improve its
utility service; or 3) to allow a new economic development project; and where
the permit applicant did not have knowledge of the hardship, the plans for
improvement of service or the development project when said applicant was
required to submit its list of next year projects.
   D.   Permits For Additional Next Year Projects: Notwithstanding the
provisions of subsection A2 of this section, the City may issue a permit to a
registrant who demonstrates that it used commercially reasonable efforts to
anticipate and plan for the project, such permit to be subject to all other
conditions and requirements of law, including such conditions as may be imposed
under subsection
8-1-10B of this chapter.
   E.   Procedural Requirements: The denial of a permit must be made in writing
and must document the basis for the denial. The City must notify the applicant
or right-of-way user in writing within three (3) business days of the decision
to deny a permit. If an application is denied, the right-of-way user may
address the reasons for denial identified by the City and resubmit its
application. If the application is resubmitted within thirty (30) days of
receipt of the notice of denial, no additional application fee shall be
imposed. The City must approve or deny the resubmitted application within
thirty (30) days after submission. (Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-12: DISPLAY OF PERMIT:
Permits issued under this chapter shall be conspicuously displayed at all times
at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the City
inspector and authorized City personnel. (Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-13: EXTENSION OF PERMIT; SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION:
   A.   No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way beyond the date or
dates specified in the permit unless such person: 1) makes a supplementary
application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration of the
initial permit; and 2) a new permit or permit extension is granted.
   B.   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or
ends sooner than the date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the
City of the accurate information as soon as this information is known. (Ord.
186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-14: SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Limitation On Area: A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of
the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may perform any work
outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must, before working in that greater
area:
      1.   Make application for permit extension and pay any additional fees
necessitated thereby; and
      2.   Be granted a new permit or permit extension; or
      3.   Verbally request the Administrator make a determination that the
change is minor and authorize the additional area by note on the application
and City copy of the permit.
   B.   Limitation On Dates: A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates
specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit
start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date.
If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must, before
working after the end date of the permit:
      1.   Make application for a new permit for the additional time it needs;
      2.   Pay the new permit fee or permit extension fee;
      3.   Pay the delay penalty required under subsection
8-1-18D of this chapter; or
      4.   Verbally request the Administrator make a determination that the
change is minor and authorize the additional time by note on the application
and City copy of the permit. (Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-15: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Notice Of Completion: When the work under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall notify the City.
   B.   Site Inspection: The permittee shall make the work site available to
the City inspector and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the work.
   C.   Authority Of City Inspector: At the time of inspection, the City
inspector may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious
threat to the life, health, safety or well-being of the public. The City
inspector may issue an order to the registrant for any work which does not
conform to the applicable standards, conditions or codes. The order shall state
that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the
permit. Within ten (10) days after issuance of the order, the registrant shall
present proof to the City that the violation has been corrected. If such proof
has not been presented within the required time, the City may revoke the permit
pursuant to section
 8-1-27 of this chapter. (Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-16: WORK WITHOUT PERMIT:
   A.   Emergency Situations:
      1.   Each registrant shall immediately notify the City or the City's
designee of any event regarding its equipment which it considers to be an
emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in
order to respond to the emergency. Within two (2) business days after the
occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the necessary
permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the
requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for
the actions it took in response to the emergency.
      2.   In the event that the City becomes aware of an emergency regarding a
registrant's equipment, the City may attempt to contact the local
representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the
emergency. In any event, the City may take whatever action it deems necessary
in order to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the
registrant whose equipment occasioned the emergency.
   B.   Nonemergency Situations: Except in the case of an emergency, any person
who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates
a right-of-way, is in breach of this chapter. (Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-17: RIGHT TO OCCUPY RIGHTS-OF-WAY; PAYMENT OF FEES:
   A.   Any person required to register under section
8-1-5 of this chapter who occupies, uses, or places its equipment in the right-
of-way is hereby granted a right to do so if and only so long as said person:
1) timely pays all fees as provided herein; and 2) complies with all other
requirements of law.
   B.   The grant of right in subsection A of this section is expressly
conditioned on, and is subject to, the police powers of the City, continuing
compliance with all provisions of law now or hereinafter enacted, including
this chapter, as it may be from time to time amended, and further, is
specifically subject to the obligation to obtain any and all additional
required authorizations, whether from the City or other body or authority.
(Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-18: INSTALLATION AND RESTORATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Requirements: The excavation, backfilling, patching and
restoration, and all other work performed in the right-of- way, shall be done
in conformance with Minnesota Rules 7819.1100 and 7819.5000 and shall conform
to MnDOT standard specifications and other applicable local requirements,
insofar as they are not inconsistent with Minnesota Statutes sections 237.162
and 237.163, as may be amended from time to time.
   B.   Installation Requirements:
      1.   Installation of service laterals shall be performed in accordance
with Minnesota Rules chapter 7560 and this chapter. Service lateral
installation is further subject to those requirements and conditions set forth
by the City in the applicable permits and/or agreements referenced in
subsection
8-1-20H of this chapter.
      2.   The City will generally require small utilities to be installed
within five feet (5') of concrete roadway features such as curbs and sidewalks
or within five feet (5') of the right-of-way line where no such features exist.
The City will generally require any trees or shrubs permitted in the right- of-
way to be at least five feet (5') from curbs, walks, or roadways.
   C.   Restoration Of Rights-Of-Way:
      1.   Timing: The work to be done under the permit, and the restoration of
the right-of-way as required herein, must be completed within the dates
specified in the permit, increased by as many days as work could not be done
because of circumstances constituting force majeure or when work was prohibited
as unseasonal or unreasonable under subsection
8-1-25B of this chapter, all in the sole determination of the City. In addition
to repairing its own work, the permittee must restore the general area of the
work and the surrounding areas, including the paving and its foundations, to
the same condition that existed before the commencement of the work and must
inspect the area of the work and use reasonable care to maintain the same
condition for twenty four (24) months thereafter.
      2.   Repairs And Restoration; Costs: In its application for an excavation
permit, the permittee may choose to have the City restore the right-of-way. In
any event, the City may determine to perform the right-of-way restoration and
shall require the permittee to pay a restoration fee to provide for
reimbursement of all costs associated with such restoration. In the event the
permittee elects not to perform restoration, the City may, in lieu of
performing the restoration itself, impose a fee to fully compensate for the
resultant degradation as well as for any and all additional City costs
associated therewith. Such fee for degradation shall compensate the City for
costs associated with a decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused
by excavation and shall include a restoration fee component. Payment of such
fee does not relieve a permittee from any restoration obligation.
         a.   City Restoration: If the City restores the right-of-way, the
permittee shall pay the costs thereof within thirty (30) days of billing. If,
during the twenty four (24) months following such restoration, the right-of-way
settles due to the permittee's excavation or restoration, the permittee shall
pay to the City, within thirty (30) days of billing, the cost of repairing said
right-of-way.
         b.   Permittee Restoration: If the permittee chooses at the time of
application for an excavation permit to restore the right- of-way itself, such
permittee shall post an additional performance and restoration bond in an
amount determined by the City to be sufficient to cover the cost of restoring
the right-of-way to its pre-excavation condition. If, twenty four (24) months
after completion of the restoration of the right- of-way, the City determines
that the right-of-way has been properly restored, the surety on the performance
and restoration bond posted pursuant to this subsection C2b shall be released.
      3.   Repair And Restoration Standards: The permittee shall perform the
work according to the standards and with the materials specified by the City.
The City shall have the authority to prescribe the manner and extent of the
restoration, and may do so in written procedures of general application or on a
case by case basis. The City, in exercising this authority, shall be guided,
but not limited, by the following standards and considerations:
         a.   The number, size, depth and duration of the excavations,
disruptions or damage to the right-of-way;
         b.   The traffic volume carried by the right-of-way;
         c.   The character of the neighborhood surrounding the right-of- way;
         d.   The pre-excavation condition of the right-of-way;
         e.   The remaining life expectancy of the right-of-way affected by the
excavation;
         f.   Whether the relative cost of the method of restoration to the
permittee is in reasonable balance with the prevention of an accelerated
depreciation of the right-of-way that would otherwise result from the
excavation, disturbance or damage to the right-of-way; and
         g.   The likelihood that the particular method of restoration would be
effective in slowing the depreciation of the right- of-way that would otherwise
take place.
      4.   Guarantees: By choosing to restore the right-of-way itself, the
permittee guarantees its work and shall maintain it for twenty four (24) months
following its completion. During this twenty four (24) month period, it shall,
upon notification from the City, correct all restoration work to the extent
necessary, using the method required by the City. Said work shall be completed
within five (5) calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the City, not
including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances
constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonal or
unreasonable under subsection
8-1-25B of this chapter, all in the sole determination of the City.
      5.   Failure To Restore: If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-
way in the manner and to the condition required by the City, or fails to
satisfactorily and timely complete all repairs required by the City, the City,
at its option, may perform or cause to be performed such work. In that event,
the permittee shall pay to the City, within thirty (30) days of billing, the
cost of restoring the right-of-way. If the permittee fails to pay as required,
the City may exercise its rights under the performance and restoration bond.
   D.   Delay Penalty: The City may establish and impose a charge or penalty
for unreasonable delays in excavations, obstructions, or restoration. (Ord.
186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-19: JOINT INSTALLATIONS AND CITY PROJECTS:
   A.   Joint Installations: It is in the City's interest that utilities be
located in a joint trench whenever possible. Applicants may be required to
place their facilities in the same excavation at the same time; however, a
separate permit application will be required for each facility. A shared or
joint application will not be accepted. Each permit will reference other
operators using the same excavation. No work may proceed until all applications
are submitted and approved. Registrants who apply for permits for the same
excavation will not be charged a permit fee.
   B.   City Projects: Registrants whose planned activities are necessary
because of a City project will not be charged a permit fee; however, a permit
is still required. (Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-20: MAPPING DATA:
   A.   Information Required: Each registrant and permittee shall provide
project data necessary to allow the City to develop a right-of-way mapping
system in accordance with Minnesota Rules 7819.4000 and 7819.4100.
   B.   Permit Required; Application: The City requires a permit for excavation
in or obstruction of its public right-of-way. A person wishing to undertake a
project within the public right- of-way shall submit a right-of-way permit
application, which will require the filing of mapping information pursuant to
subsection C of this section.
   C.   Mapping Information: The City requires as part of its permit the filing
of the following information for placement of utilities:
      1.   Location and elevation of the applicant's mains, cables, conduits,
switches, and related equipment and facilities, with the location based on one
of the following methods:
         a.   The preferred method is X, Y, and Z coordinates in NAD 83 1996
adjustment (also known as HARN adjustment), horizontal datum and NGVD 88
vertical datum. This information is to be supplied in an electronic format in
an ASCII comma-delimited file including: point number, northing, easting,
elevation and description. The alignment position shall be collected at minimum
intervals of two hundred feet (200') or as required by changes in direction of
the utility being located to define the horizontal alignment. Elevation "as
built" depth locations shall be collected at a minimum of ten (10) per mile.
The horizontal and vertical accuracy requirements for all collected positions
shall be within 0.5 foot of their reported position as evidenced by the
certification of a licensed land surveyor or engineer registered in the State
of Minnesota.
         b.   Offsets from property lines, distances from the centerline of the
public right-of-way, and curb lines as determined by the City.
         c.   Any other system agreed upon by the right-of-way user and the
City.
      2.   The type and size of the utility facility.
      3.   A description of aboveground appurtenances.
      4.   Any facilities to be abandoned, if applicable, in conformance with
Minnesota Statutes section 216D.04, subdivision 3, as it may be amended from
time to time.
   D.   Changes And Corrections: The application must provide that the
applicant agrees to submit "as built" data, reflecting any changes and
variations from the information provided under subsection C of this section
within sixty (60) days of completion.
   E.   Additional Construction Information: In addition, the right-of-way user
shall submit a completion certificate to the City at the time the project is
completed.
   F.   Manner Of Conveying Permit Data: A right-of-way user is not required to
provide or convey mapping information or data in a format or manner that is
different from what is currently used and maintained by that operator. A permit
application fee may include the cost to convert the data furnished by the
right- of-way user to a format currently in use by the City. These data
conversion costs, unlike other costs that make up permit fees, may be included
in the permit fee after the permit application process.
   G.   Data On Existing Facilities: A right-of-way user shall promptly provide
existing data on its existing facilities within the public right-of-way in the
form maintained by the user if requested by the City.
   H.   Service Laterals: All permits issued for the installation or repair of
service laterals, other than minor repairs, as defined in Minnesota Rules
7560.0150, subparagraph 2, shall require the permittee's use of appropriate
means of establishing the horizontal locations of installed service laterals
and the service lateral vertical locations in those cases where the City
reasonably requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to the
City evidence satisfactory to the City of the installed service lateral
locations. Compliance with this subsection and with applicable Gopher State
One-Call Law and Minnesota Rules governing service laterals installed after
December 31, 2005, shall be a condition of any City approval necessary for: 1)
payments to contractors working on a public improvement project; and 2) City
approval of performance under development agreements, or other subdivision or
site plan approval under Minnesota Statutes chapter 462. The City shall
reasonably determine the appropriate method of providing such information to
the City. Failure to provide prompt and accurate information on the service
laterals installed may result in the revocation of the permit issued for the
work or for future permits to the offending permittee or its subcontractors.
   I.   Trade Secret Information: At the request of any registrant, any
information requested by the City which qualifies as a trade secret under
Minnesota Statutes section 13.37(b) shall be treated as trade secret
information as detailed therein. (Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-21: LOCATION OF EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Undergrounding: Unless otherwise permitted by an existing franchise or
other agreement, or unless existing aboveground equipment is repaired or
replaced, or unless infeasible such as in the provision of electric service at
certain voltages, new construction, the installation of new equipment, and the
replacement of old equipment shall be done underground or contained within
buildings or other structures and in conformity with applicable codes unless
otherwise agreed to by the City in writing, and such agreement is reflected in
applicable permits.
   B.   Corridors:
      1.   The City may assign specific corridors within the right-of- way, or
any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of equipment
that is or, pursuant to current technology, the City expects will someday be
located within the right-of-way. Excavation, obstruction, or other permits
issued by the City involving the installation or replacement of equipment may
designate the proper corridor for the equipment at issue, and such equipment
must be located accordingly.
      2.   Any registrant whose equipment is located prior to the effective
date hereof in the right-of-way in a position at variance with the corridors
established by the City shall, no later than at the time of the next
reconstruction or excavation of the area where its equipment is located, move
that equipment to its assigned position within the right-of- way, unless this
requirement is waived by the City for good cause shown, upon consideration of
such factors as the remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety,
customer service needs and hardship to the registrant.
   C.   Nuisance Equipment: One year after the effective date hereof, any non-
permitted equipment found in a right-of-way shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
The City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity,
including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking possession of the
equipment and restoring the right-of-way to a usable condition.
   D.   Limitation Of Space: To protect health, safety and welfare, the City
shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional
equipment within the right-of- way if there is insufficient space to
accommodate all of the requests of registrants or persons to occupy and use the
right-of-way. In making such decisions, the City shall strive to the extent
possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-of-way,
but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest, the
public's needs for the particular service, the condition of the right-of-way,
the time of year with respect to essential utility, the protection of existing
equipment in the right-of- way, and future City plans for public improvements
and development projects which have been determined to be in the public
interest.
   E.   Relocation Of Equipment:
      1.   The person must promptly and at his own expense, with due regard for
seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and relocate his equipment and
facilities in the right-of-way whenever the City requests such removal and
relocation, and shall restore the right-of-way to the same condition it was in
prior to said removal or relocation. The City may make such requests in order
to prevent interference by the company's equipment or facilities with:
         a.   A present or future City use of the right-of-way;
         b.   A public improvement undertaken by the City;
         c.   An economic development project in which the City has an interest
or investment;
         d.   When the public health, safety and welfare require it; or
         e.   When necessary to prevent interference with the safety and
convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way.
      2.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person shall not be required to
remove or relocate his equipment from any right- of-way which has been vacated
in favor of a nongovernmental entity unless and until the reasonable costs
thereof are first paid by such nongovernmental entity to the person therefor.
(Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-22: DAMAGE TO OTHER EQUIPMENT:
   A.   When the City performs work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary
to maintain, support, or move a registrant's equipment in order to protect it,
the City shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably
possible. The costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and
must be paid within thirty (30) days from the date of billing.
   B.   Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any
permitted equipment in the right-of-way which it or its equipment damages. Each
registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the
equipment of another registrant caused during the City's response to an
emergency occasioned by that registrant's equipment. (Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-23: VACATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY:
   A.   Reservation Of Right: If the City vacates a right-of-way which contains
the equipment of a registrant, and if the vacation does not require the
relocation of registrant or permittee equipment, the City shall reserve, to and
for itself and all registrants having equipment in the vacated right-of- way,
the right to install, maintain and operate any equipment in the vacated right-
of-way and to enter upon such right-of- way at any time for the purpose of
reconstructing, inspecting, maintaining or repairing the same.
   B.   Relocation Of Equipment: If the vacation requires the relocation of
registrant or permittee equipment and: 1) if the vacation proceedings are
initiated by the registrant or permittee, the registrant or permittee must pay
the relocation costs; or 2) if the vacation proceedings are initiated by the
City, the registrant or permittee must pay the relocation costs unless
otherwise agreed to by the City and the registrant or permittee; or 3) if the
vacation proceedings are initiated by a person or persons other than the
registrant or permittee, such other person or persons must pay the relocation
costs. (Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-24: ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Discontinued Operations: A registrant who has determined to discontinue
its operations with respect to any equipment in any right-of-way, or segment or
portion thereof, in the City must either:
      1.   Provide information satisfactory to the City that the registrant's
obligations for its equipment in the right-of-way under this chapter have been
lawfully assumed by another registrant; or
      2.   Submit to the City a proposal and instruments for transferring
ownership of its equipment to the City. If a registrant proceeds under this
clause, the City may, at its option:
         a.   Purchase the equipment; or
         b.   Require the registrant, at its own expense, to remove it; or
         c.   Require the registrant to post an additional bond or an increased
bond amount sufficient to reimburse the City for reasonably anticipated costs
to be incurred in removing the equipment.
   B.   Abandoned Equipment: Equipment of a registrant which fails to comply
with subsection A of this section and which, for two (2) years, remains unused
shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned equipment is deemed to be a
nuisance. The City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in
equity, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Abating the nuisance;
      2.   Taking possession of the equipment and restoring it to a usable
condition;
      3.   Requiring removal of the equipment by the registrant or by the
registrant's surety; or
      4.   Exercising its rights pursuant to the performance and restoration
bond.
   C.   Removal Required: Any registrant who has unusable equipment in any
right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way during the next scheduled
excavation, unless this requirement is waived by the City. (Ord. 186, 4-11-
2019)
8-1-25: OTHER OBLIGATIONS:
   A.   Compliance With Other Laws: Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not
relieve the permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits,
licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by the City or other
appropriate jurisdiction or other applicable rule, law or regulation. The
permittee shall comply with other local codes and with road load restrictions.
A permittee shall comply with all requirements of local, State and Federal
laws, including, but not limited to, Minnesota Statutes sections 216D.01
through 216D.09 ("Gopher One-Call Excavation Notice System") and Minnesota
Rules chapter 7560. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all
applicable codes and established rules and regulations and is responsible for
all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who
performs the work.
   B.   Prohibited Work: Except in the case of an emergency, and with the
approval of the City, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be
performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for
such work.
   C.   Interference With Right-Of-Way: A permittee shall not so obstruct a
right-of-way that there is interference with the natural free and clear passage
of water through the gutters or other waterways. Private vehicles may not be
parked within or adjacent to a permit area. The loading or unloading of trucks
adjacent to a permit area is prohibited unless specifically authorized by the
permit.
   D.   Traffic Control: Traffic control shall conform to the "Minnesota Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MMUTCD) and its field manual and any
written directions of the City Engineer.
   E.   Trenchless Excavation: As a condition of all applicable permits,
permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including, but not limited
to, horizontal directional drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in
Minnesota Statutes chapter 216D and Minnesota Rules chapter 7560 and shall
require potholing or open cutting over existing underground utilities before
excavating, as determined by the City. (Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-26: INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY:
   A.   Limitation Of Liability: By reason of the acceptance of a registration
or the grant of a right-of-way permit, the City does not assume any liability:
      1.   For injuries to persons, damage to property, or loss of service
claims by parties other than the registrant or the City; or
      2.   For claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the installation,
presence, maintenance, or operation of equipment by registrants or activities
of registrants.
   B.   Indemnification: By registering with the City, a registrant agrees, or
by accepting a permit under this chapter, a permittee is required to defend,
indemnify, and hold the City whole and harmless, from all costs, liabilities,
and claims for damages of any kind arising out of the construction, presence,
installation, maintenance, repair or operation of its equipment, or out of any
activity undertaken in or near a right-of-way, whether or not any act or
omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by a right-of-way
permit. It further agrees that it will not bring, nor cause to be brought, any
action, suit or other proceeding claiming damages, or seeking any other relief
against the City for any claim nor for any award arising out of the presence,
installation, maintenance or operation of its equipment, or any activity
undertaken in or near a right-of-way, whether or not the act or omission
complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by a right-of-way permit.
The foregoing does not indemnify the City for its own negligence except for
claims arising out of or alleging the City's negligence where such negligence
arises out of or is primarily related to the presence, installation,
construction, operation, maintenance or repair of said equipment by the
registrant or on the registrant's behalf, including, but not limited to, the
issuance of permits and inspection of plans or work. This section is not, as to
third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the
registrant or to the City; and the registrant, in defending any action on
behalf of the City, shall be entitled to assert in any action every defense or
immunity that the City could assert in its own behalf.
   C.   Future Uses: In placing any equipment or allowing it to be placed in
the right-of-way, the City is not liable for any damages caused thereby to any
registrant's equipment which is already in place. No registrant is entitled to
rely on the provisions of this chapter, and no special duty is created as to
any registrant. This chapter is enacted to protect the general health, welfare
and safety of the public at large. (Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-27: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
   A.   Substantial Breach: Registrants hold permits issued pursuant to this
chapter as a privilege and not as a right. The City reserves its right, as
provided herein and in accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 237.163,
subdivision 4, to revoke any right-of-way permit, without fee refund, in the
event of a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute,
ordinance, rule or regulation, or any condition of the permit. A substantial
breach by the permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
      1.   The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
      2.   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-
of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit
upon the City or its citizens;
      3.   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
      4.   The failure to maintain the required bonds and/or insurance;
      5.   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; or
      6.   The failure to correct a condition indicated on an order issued
pursuant to subsection
8-1-15C of this chapter.
   B.   Written Notice Of Breach: If the City determines that the permittee has
committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute,
ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit, the City shall make
a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall
state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit.
Further, a substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the City, at the
City's discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit.
   C.   Response To Notice Of Breach: Within twenty four (24) hours of
receiving notification of the breach, the permittee shall contact the City with
a plan, acceptable to the City inspector, for its correction. The permittee's
failure to so contact the City inspector, the permittee's failure to submit an
acceptable plan, or the permittee's failure to reasonably implement the
approved plan shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further,
the permittee's failure to so contact the City inspector, or the permittee's
failure to submit an acceptable plan, or the permittee's failure to reasonably
implement the approved plan shall automatically place the permittee on
probation for one full year.
   D.   Cause For Probation: From time to time, the City may establish a list
of conditions of the permit which, if breached, will automatically place the
permittee on probation, such as, but not limited to, working out of the
allotted time period or working on a right-of-way outside of the permit.
   E.   Automatic Revocation: If a permittee, while on probation, commits a
breach as outlined above, the permittee's permit will automatically be revoked,
and the permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year, except
for emergency repairs.
   F.   Notice Of Revocation: Revocation of a small wireless facility permit
shall be made in writing within three (3) business days of the decision to
revoke the permit and shall document the basis for the revocation.
   G.   Reimbursement Of City Costs: If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall also reimburse the City for the City's reasonable costs, including
restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorney fees,
incurred in connection with such revocation.
   H.   Work With No Permit: Upon written notice of a breach for work in the
right-of-way without first obtaining a permit, the violator must subsequently
obtain a permit, pay the normal fee for said permit, pay all the other fees
required by City ordinance, including, but not limited to, criminal fines and
penalties, deposit with the City the fees necessary to correct any damage to
the right-of-way and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
Registrants will be placed on indefinite probation after the first violation.
Fees and penalties for all subsequent violations will be doubled for
registrants on probation. (Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-28: APPEALS:
A person that: a) has been denied registration; b) has been denied a right-of-
way permit; c) has had its right-of-way permit revoked; d) believes that the
fees imposed are invalid; or e) disputes a determination of the Administrator
may have the denial, revocation, fee imposition, or determination reviewed,
upon written request, by the City Council. The City Council shall act on a
timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by
the City Council affirming the denial, revocation, fee imposition, or decision
will be in writing and supported by written findings establishing the
reasonableness of the decision. (Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-29: FRANCHISE MAY BE REQUIRED; SUPREMACY ESTABLISHED:
The City may, in addition to the requirements of this chapter, require any
person which has or seeks to have equipment located in any right-of-way to
obtain a franchise to the full extent permitted by law, now or hereinafter
enacted. The terms of any franchise which are in direct conflict with any
provisions of this chapter, whether granted prior or subsequent to enactment of
this chapter, shall control and supersede the conflicting terms of this
chapter; provided, however, that requirements relating to insurance, bonds,
penalties, Security Funds, letters of credit, indemnification or any other
security in favor of the City may be cumulative in the sole determination of
the City or unless otherwise negotiated by the City and the franchise grantee.
All other terms of this chapter shall be fully applicable to all persons
whether franchised or not. (Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-30: RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS:
   A.   The City, by the granting of a right-of-way permit or by registering a
person under this chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive,
impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights which it has now or may be
hereafter vested in the City under the Constitution and Statutes of the State
of Minnesota to regulate the use of the right-of-way by the permittee; and the
permittee, by its acceptance of a right-of- way permit or of registration under
this chapter, agrees that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or
police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested
in or reserved to the City, shall be in full force and effect and subject to
the exercise thereof by the City at any time. A permittee or registrant is
deemed to acknowledge that its rights are subject to the regulatory and police
powers of the City to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the
safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all
applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the City pursuant to such
powers.
   B.   Any conflict between the provisions of a registration or of a permit
and any other present or future lawful exercise of the City's regulatory or
police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter. (Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-31: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or
administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. If a regulatory body or
a court of competent jurisdiction should determine by a final non-appealable
order that any permit, right or registration issued under this chapter or any
portion of this chapter is illegal or unenforceable, any such permit, right or
registration granted or deemed to exist hereunder shall be considered as a
revocable permit with a mutual right in either party to terminate without cause
upon giving sixty (60) days' written notice to the other. The requirements and
conditions of such a revocable permit shall be the same requirements and
conditions as set forth in the permit, right or registration, respectively,
except for conditions relating to the term of the permit and the right of
termination. If a permit, right or registration shall be considered a revocable
permit as provided herein, the permittee must acknowledge the authority of the
City Council to issue such revocable permit and the power to revoke it. Nothing
in this chapter precludes the City from requiring a franchise agreement with
the applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to requirements set forth herein.
(Ord. 186, 4-11-2019)
8-1-32: NONEXCLUSIVE REMEDIES:
The remedies provided in this chapter and other City ordinances are not
exclusive or in lieu of other rights and remedies that the City may have at law
or in equity. The City is hereby authorized to seek legal and equitable relief
for actual or threatened injury to the public rights-of-way, including damages
to the rights-of-way, whether or not caused by a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or other provisions of City ordinances. (Ord. 186,
4-11-2019)
CHAPTER 2
CITY PARKS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Definitions
8-2-2: Park Hours
8-2-3: Garbage, Refuse And Brush Disposal
8-2-4: Open Fires
8-2-5: Alcoholic Beverages And Glass Containers
8-2-6: Animals In Parks
8-2-7: Camping Prohibited; Parking Campers
8-2-8: Motor Vehicles
8-2-9: Additional Restricted And Prohibited Activities
8-2-10: Reservations For Elko Park Shelter
8-2-11: Rules And Regulations
8-2-12: Misdemeanor Violation
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES: Any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent
(0.5%) alcohol by volume.
CITY PARKS: Any lands owned, leased, or controlled by the city for the use of
the public for active or passive recreation. For purposes of this chapter, the
term "city park" shall also include city trails and shelters.
LEGAL FIREWORKS: Wire or wood sparklers of not more than one hundred grams (100
g) of mixture per item, other sparkling items which are nonexplosive and
nonaerial and contain seventy five grams (75 g) or less of chemical mixture per
tube or a total of five hundred grams (500 g) or less for multiple tubes,
snakes and glow worms, smoke devices, or trick noisemakers which include paper
streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop pops, each
consisting of not more than twenty-five hundredths (0.25) grain of explosive
mixture.
RECREATIONAL FIRE: A fire set for cooking, warming, or ceremonial purposes,
which is not more than three feet (3') in diameter by three feet (3') high, and
has had the ground five feet (5') from the base of the fire cleared of all
combustible material.
3.2 PERCENT MALT LIQUOR: "Malt liquor" containing not less than one-half of one
percent (0.5%) alcohol by volume nor more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight.
WINE: The product made from the normal alcoholic fermentation of grapes,
including still wine, sparkling and carbonated wine, wine made from condensed
grape must, wine made from other agricultural products than sound, ripe grapes,
imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider, perry and sake, in
each instance containing not less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) nor more
than twenty four percent (24%) alcohol by volume for nonindustrial use. (Elko
2004 Code § 93.01; amd. 2011 Code)
8-2-2: PARK HOURS:
The hours of operation of city parks will be seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. Any person found in city parks between ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (New
Market 2004 Code § 6-2-2)
8-2-3: GARBAGE, REFUSE AND BRUSH DISPOSAL:
No person shall litter or cast or throw brush, rubbish, trash or garbage in any
public park/trail including any adjacent water area within the city, but shall
place such materials in proper receptacles. Where receptacles are not provided
in the public park/trail, the person responsible for the presence shall carry
all such brush, rubbish, trash or garbage away from the park. (Elko 2004 Code §
93.02)
8-2-4: OPEN FIRES:
Recreational fires are allowed only in designated areas. No person shall build
a fire in a city park/trail/shelter except in the provided fireplace or
receptacle. Fires must be attended at all times and must be fully extinguished
immediately after use. (Elko 2004 Code § 93.04)
8-2-5: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND GLASS CONTAINERS:
The consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages in city parks is subject
to the following provisions:
   A.   Consumption And Possession Of Alcoholic Beverages: The consumption and
possession of intoxicating liquor, except for wine and 3.2 percent malt liquor,
is prohibited in city owned parks.
   B.   Glass Containers Prohibited: Glass beverage containers are prohibited
in city owned parks.
   C.   3.2 Percent Malt Liquor Kegs: Kegs and barrels used as containers for
3.2 percent malt liquor are prohibited in city parks, except as follows:
      1.   Groups, associations, or organizations desiring to bring kegs or
barrels into city parks may do so only after obtaining a permit for such use
from the city.
      2.   The fee for the permit shall be as set forth in the city fee
schedule.
      3.   The permit shall be issued by the city park supervisor. The city
shall grant the application if, in its judgment, the use for which the permit
is sought will not interfere with the health, safety, welfare, and the use of
the park by the general public and if the applicant meets all other conditions
that may be contained in the permit issued by the city. Such use may only be
conducted in areas designated on the permit. (New Market 2004 Code § 6-2-2;
amd. 2011 Code)
8-2-6: ANIMALS IN PARKS:
   A.   No person shall kill, trap, hunt, pursue, or in any manner disturb or
cause the disturbance of any wildlife.
   B.   No owner of a dog shall permit his or her dog to be at large in city
parks/trails, but shall keep such dog under restraint at all times.
"Restraint", as used herein, shall be deemed to mean controlled by a leash not
exceeding six feet (6') in length. The owner must dispose of all feces and have
in possession at all times feces disposal equipment or device.
   C.   No person shall ride, lead or permit a horse, pony, donkey or other
similarly sized animal in any public park/trail except in those areas where
such animals are specifically allowed by resolution of the council. (Elko 2004
Code § 93.07)
8-2-7: CAMPING PROHIBITED; PARKING CAMPERS:
No person shall be permitted to camp overnight in a city park. No person shall
park a camper or camp trailer in a city park parking lot except during the
hours of operation of city parks. (Elko 2004 Code § 93.08)
8-2-8: MOTOR VEHICLES:
   A.   Designated Areas: No vehicle shall be operated in any city park except
in the designated parking or travel areas.
   B.   Parking Hours: No vehicle shall be parked in the parking areas later
than or before the hours of operation.
   C.   Exemptions: This section shall not apply to city maintenance or
emergency vehicles or to work being performed in city parks or under city
control or directions. (Elko 2004 Code § 93.09)
8-2-9: ADDITIONAL RESTRICTED AND PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Selling or offering for sale any article in any city park is
prohibited; provided, that refreshments or other articles may be sold by the
city or by persons authorized by the city to do so.
   B.   No person shall post, paste, fasten, paint or affix any placard, bill,
notice or sign upon any structure, tree, stone, fence, object or enclosure in
any park without the prior written permission of the city.
   C.   No person shall distribute or display within any park any circulars,
cards or announcements, printed or not, for events other than those sponsored
by or with the participation or endorsement of the city when the intention of
such activity is to promote a commercial enterprise.
   D.   Gambling or abusive, profane or indecent language, or conduct, in any
city park is prohibited.
   E.   Park users must comply with all city ordinances relating to noise 1
and nuisances 2 .
   F.   No person shall disobey any lawful order or direction of any police
officer or city official/employee.
   G.   No person involved in any park event or in any use of the city parks
shall commit an unfair discriminatory practice, deny another person access to
admission to utilization of or benefit from any such events or park use because
of race, sex, color, creed, religion, national origin, marital status,
disability, sexual orientation, or age.
   H.   No person may fire or discharge a firearm within any city park
including, but not limited to, paint pistols and firearms that use a carbon
monoxide propellant.
   I.   No person may sell or use legal fireworks in a city park. (Elko 2004
Code § 93.05; amd. 2011 Code)
   J.   No person shall injure, damage, destroy, diminish or impair the value
of any city park including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, signs,
trees, shrubs or vegetation. (Elko 2004 Code § 93.12)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 5, chapter 5 of this code.
2 2. See title 6, chapter 5, article B of this code.
8-2-10: RESERVATIONS FOR ELKO PARK SHELTER:
Any group wishing to reserve the use of the Elko Park shelter for a particular
purpose shall request such date at city hall and shall execute a user agreement
in a form approved by the city council. Residents shall have priority in
reservations. If nonresidents request reservations, they shall not be finalized
until thirty (30) days prior to the date. If no resident requests such date, it
will be considered finalized. (Elko 2004 Code § 93.10)
8-2-11: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Rules and regulations may be adopted from time to time by the city
council governing the use and enjoyment of the parks.
   B.   Any person who violates a rule or regulation so posted may be excluded
from the use of the park and may, in addition, be prosecuted for a misdemeanor.
(Elko 2004 Code § 93.11)
   C.   The park and recreation commission, in unique, unusual or hazardous
situations, may implement emergency rules and regulations. They shall remain in
effect for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. (Elko 2004 Code § 93.11;
amd. 2011 Code)
8-2-12: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION:
Violation of any of the terms or conditions of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor. (Elko 2004 Code § 93.98)
TITLE 9
PUBLIC UTILITIES
Water Use And Service   1
Sewer Use And Service   2
User Rates And Charges   2A
Stormwater Drainage Utility   3
Illicit Discharge, Detection And Elimination   3A
Streetlights And Tornado Siren Utility Systems   4
CHAPTER 1
WATER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
9-1-1: Water Department
9-1-2: Private Water Systems
9-1-3: Permit Requirements
9-1-4: Supply From One Service
9-1-5: Installation And Connection Requirements
9-1-6: Water Meters
9-1-7: Fees And Charges; Billing Requirements
9-1-8: Contract For Service
9-1-9: Leak In Service Line
9-1-10: Conservation And Emergency Measures
9-1-11: Prohibited And Restricted Acts And Conditions
9-1-12: Liability Provisions
9-1-13: Connections Outside City Limits
9-1-14: Discontinuance Of Service
9-1-15: Fire Hydrants
9-1-16: Privately Owned Fire Hydrants
9-1-17: Misdemeanor Violation
9-1-1: WATER DEPARTMENT:
A water department is established, under the direct supervision of the city
council. The city council may appoint a utilities superintendent, who shall see
that all rules and regulations pertaining to the water system, the tapping of
same by persons or plumbers authorized by the city, and the use of water be
complied with in all respects, and to see that no person shall open any hydrant
for any purpose whatsoever without the superintendent's permission, except
members of the fire department. Unless some other agent or employee of the city
is designated as water superintendent by the city council, the city clerk shall
be designated as water superintendent. (New Market 2004 Code § 6-3-1)
9-1-2: PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to install a private water system
which is intended to provide water for human consumption in the city except in
cases where the public water system is not accessible to the premises where
such private systems are requested. To determine whether or not such public
water system is available for connection, each person or applicant desiring to
install a private water system must first make application for connection to a
public system. Upon determination by the city that it is not feasible to
connect the applicant's premises to the public water system, the applicant
shall be granted a permit to install a private water system in accordance with
all appropriate state and local requirements.
   B.   Within twenty four (24) months after the public water system is
extended to serve property, all property served by private water must connect
to public water, or if it is available on the effective date hereof, within
twenty four (24) months after said effective date. (New Market 2004 Code § 6-3-
2)
9-1-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall make any type of connection to, repair
of, or alteration in the water system, except after having made an application
on a form provided by the city and receiving a permit issued by the city.
   B.   Application For Permit: The application shall include the legal
description, official address of the property to be served, the uses for which
the connection is requested, and the size of the service line to be used. The
application shall be signed by the owner of the property or an authorized agent
of the owner. The city shall examine all applications before a permit is
issued.
   C.   Inspection Requirements:
      1.   Inspections Required: No part of the system shall be covered until
it has been inspected and accepted by the city. It shall be the responsibility
of the applicant for the permit to notify the city that the job is ready for
inspection or reinspection, and the city shall make the indicated inspection
after notice has been given. (New Market 2004 Code § 6-3-3)
      2.   Fee: The applicant shall pay an inspection fee set by ordinance of
the city council. (New Market 2004 Code § 6-3-3; amd. 2011 Code)
      3.   Entry Powers: The owner or occupant of the property shall give the
city free access to the property at reasonable times for the purpose of making
inspections.
      4.   Defects: If the city discovers that any part of the system is not
constructed in accordance with the standards provided in the state plumbing
code and this section, the city shall give the applicant written notification
describing the defects. The applicant shall be responsible for the correction
or elimination of all defects, and no system shall be placed or replaced in
service until all defects have been corrected or eliminated.
   D.   Payment Of Connection Charges Required Prior To Permit Issuance:
      1.   No permit shall be issued to tap or connect with the city water
system, either directly or indirectly, from any lot or tract of land unless the
city clerk shall have certified:
         a.   That the lot or tract of land, or portion of said lot or tract,
to be served by such connection has been assessed for the cost of construction
of the municipal utility facility with which the connection is made; or
         b.   If no assessment has been levied for said construction cost, that
proceedings for levying such assessment have been or will be commenced in due
course; or
         c.   If no assessment has been levied and no assessment proceedings
will be completed in due course, but a sum equal to the portion of cost of
construction of the water has been paid to the city pursuant to subsection D2
of this section. (New Market 2004 Code § 6-3-3)
      2.   If no such certificate can be issued by the city and except as
otherwise allowed to be deferred pursuant to the city's utility connection fee
deferral program, no permit to tap or connect to any water main shall be issued
unless the applicant pays an additional connection fee equal to the portion of
the cost of construction of the main which would be assessable against the lot
or tract to be served by such tapping connection, which will be determined by
the city upon the same basis as an assessment previously levied against other
property for the main. If no such assessment has been levied, the assessable
cost is determined upon the basis of the uniform charge which may have been or
which shall be charged for similar tapping or connection with said main
determined on the basis of the total assessable cost of the main allocated on a
frontage basis. Any sum received by the city under this subsection D2 shall be
paid into the water fund; and the lot or tract, or portion thereof, shall be
deemed to have been assessed for the improvement to the same extent as other
similarly served and situated tracts. (Ord. 122, 10-8-2015)
      3.   No permit shall be issued to tap or connect to water mains when any
assessment or connection charge for such sewer or water main against the
property to be connected is in default or delinquent. If such assessment or
connection charges are payable in installments, no permit shall be granted
unless all installments then due and payable have been paid. (New Market 2004
Code § 6-3-3)
9-1-4: SUPPLY FROM ONE SERVICE:
No more than one house or building shall be supplied from one service
connection except by special permission of the water department. Whenever two
(2) or more parties are supplied from one pipe connecting with the distribution
main, each building or part of building must have a separate stop box and a
separate meter. (New Market 2004 Code § 6-3-4)
9-1-5: INSTALLATION AND CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Service Pipes: Every service pipe must be laid in such manner as to
prevent rupture by settlement. The service pipe must be placed not less than
seven feet (7') below the surface and in all cases so arranged so as to prevent
rupture by freezing. Service pipes must extend from the curb box to the inside
of the building or, if not taken into a building, then to the hydrant or other
fixtures which it is intended to supply. There shall be a curb cock in every
service line. Said curb cock shall be placed as near as possible to the street
side of the sidewalk if on a street, or within one foot (1') of the alley line
if the main is located in the alley. Curb cocks shall be supplied with "T"
handles and shall be enclosed in a substantial iron case covered with a
tightfitting lid with the letter "W" cast upon it. A shutoff or other stopcock
with waste valve, of the size and strength required, shall be placed close to
the inside wall of the building, well protected from freezing. Copper tubing
shall be kept to a minimum without a joint used for a service up to one hundred
feet (100') in length. All joints shall be left uncovered until inspected. All
services over two inches (2") shall be iron. Connections with the mains for
residential supply shall be at least one inch (1"). (New Market 2004 Code § 6-
3-5; amd. 2011 Code)
   B.   Check Valves: Check valves are required on all water connections to
steam boilers or any other connection deemed by the Water Superintendent to
require one. Safety and relief valves shall be placed on all boilers or other
steam apparatus connections with the water system. (New Market 2004 Code § 6-3-
5)
9-1-6: WATER METERS:
   A.   Metered Water Required: Except for extinguishment of fires, no person
except authorized City employees shall use water from the water supply system
of the City or permit water to be drawn therefrom, unless the same is metered
by passing through a meter supplied or approved by the City. (New Market 2004
Code § 6-3-6)
   B.   Responsibility For Meters: Meters shall be installed by the property
owner at the property owner's expense and shall remain City property and may be
removed or replaced or changed as to size and type by the Water Department
whenever deemed necessary. Each customer shall pay a nonrefundable charge to
the City for the cost of the water meter in an amount fixed by ordinance of the
City Council. (New Market 2004 Code § 6-3-6; amd. 2011 Code)
   C.   Size Of Meters: All water meters shall be sized in accordance with
Minnesota Rules section 4715.3800, recommended guide for sizing water supply
systems.
   D.   Maintenance, Repair And Replacement:
      1.   The City shall maintain and repair or replace all meters when
rendered unserviceable through ordinary wear and tear. All applications for
installation, maintenance and repair of water meters shall be made to the City,
and the City shall proceed to comply with such application within a reasonable
time thereafter.
      2.   Where replacement, repair or adjustment of any meter is rendered
necessary by the act, neglect or carelessness of the owner or occupant of any
premises, any expense caused to the Water Department thereby shall be charged
against and collected from the owner or occupant of the premises.
      3.   Water service may be discontinued upon notice as provided in section
9-1-14 of this chapter until the cause is corrected and the charge collected.
(New Market 2004 Code § 6-3-6)
      4.   Whenever a water user questions the accuracy of the meter and
desires a replacement meter, the City shall replace the meter. If the water
meter tests accurate within the range of minus three percent (-3%) to plus one
and one-half percent (+1.5%), the water user shall pay a nonrefundable charge
to the City for the cost of the water meter in an amount fixed by ordinance of
the City Council. If the water meter is not accurate within this range, no
charge will be made for replacement, and an adjustment on the water bill will
be made for the period of time that the meter is assumed to be inaccurate, as
determined by the City, not to exceed three (3) billing periods. (New Market
2004 Code § 6-3-6; amd. 2011 Code)
   E.   Faulty Meters: If a meter fails to register or accurately measure the
water, the charge for water consumed shall be paid for at the established rate
based upon past average billings as determined by the City. (New Market 2004
Code § 6-3-6)
   F.   Meter Readings:
      1.   The City Council may provide a system of water meter reading by
postcard, meter reader or any other method deemed suitable to the purpose by
the Council. The Council may also establish billing areas or districts and
provide for the reading of meters and billing charges monthly or such period
intervals as the Council shall determine suitable and necessary from time to
time. (New Market 2004 Code § 6-3-6; amd. 2011 Code)
      2.   City employees delegated for that purpose shall have free access at
reasonable hours of the day to all parts of every building and premises
connected with the Municipal water supply system for reading of meters and
inspections. Refusal of admission by any owner or occupant of any premises
wherein a water meter is installed after such owner or occupant has been
notified that admission is desired for the purpose of inspecting a water meter
installed on said premises shall constitute a violation of this chapter, and
the owner or occupant is prohibited from obstructing the meter so as to
prohibit the reading or repairing of the meter.
   G.   Tampering With Meters Prohibited 1 : No person shall connect,
disconnect, bypass, take apart, or in any manner change, or cause to be
changed, or interfere with the proper use and functioning of any meter or the
action thereof, unless authorized by the City. (New Market 2004 Code § 6-3-6)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  9-1-11C of this chapter.
9-1-7: FEES AND CHARGES; BILLING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   All charges, permit fees and user charges, together with the method
of payment therefor, shall be established by the Council from time to time
within the discretion of the Council, based on generally accepted accounting
principals.
      2.   The City Council shall have authority to prescribe by ordinance the
rates to be charged for water service to the customer from time to time and may
prescribe the date of billing, a discount for payment within a prescribed
period and/or penalty for failure to pay within such period and such further
rules and regulations relative to the use and operation of such system as may
be deemed necessary from time to time. (New Market 2004 Code § 6-3-7; amd. 2011
Code)
   B.   Owner Responsibility For Accounts:
      1.   All accounts shall be the responsibility of the property owner. The
owner shall be liable for all water supplied to the premises, whether the owner
occupies the property or not, and any charges unpaid shall be a lien upon the
property.
      2.   The City shall keep all accounts by the house and street number and
under the account number assigned thereto and the name of the owner. All bills
and notices sent out by the City shall be sent to the house or street number of
the property served.
      3.   If nonresident owners or agents desire personal notice sent to a
different address, they shall file an application therefor with the City.
      4.   Any error or change in any address shall be promptly reported to the
City and shall be the owner's responsibility.
   C.   Bills For Service; Delinquencies: Water bills shall be mailed to the
customer and shall specify the water consumed or estimated to have been
consumed and the charge in accordance with the established rates. All charges
for water service shall be due and payable thirty (30) days after billing by
the City and shall be delinquent thereafter. Interest, penalties and an
administrative charge on delinquent accounts shall be established in the City
fee schedule. The City shall endeavor to collect delinquent accounts promptly.
Annually, all delinquent accounts shall be certified against the property by
the City which shall prepare an assessment roll providing for assessment of the
delinquent amounts against the respective properties served. This assessment
roll shall be delivered to the City Council for adoption on or before October
31 of each year. Such action may be optional or may be in lieu of or in
addition to taking any other action to collect delinquent accounts.
   D.   Adjustments In Charges: The City shall be authorized to make
adjustments in water charges where, in the City's opinion, the amount billed is
erroneous due to meter deficiency or other mistake.
   E.   Water Fund: The City hereby creates and maintains a special fund to be
known as the "Water Fund". All collections of water charges and other such
monies as may from time to time be appropriated thereto shall be placed in the
Water Fund. All costs of operation and maintenance of the City water system
shall be paid out of the Water Fund. (New Market 2004 Code § 6-3-7)
   F.   New Lawn Irrigation: Within one year following issuance of a
certificate of occupancy (or temporary certificate of occupancy) for a newly
constructed home, residential properties may be billed at a modified rate
structure as provided in the City's fee schedule for the establishment of a new
lawn. In order for the modified rate structure to apply, the property owner
must submit a notice to the City that new sod will be installed. The modified
rate structure will apply for the two (2) billing months following the month
that the City receives notice concerning the installation of new sod. The
modified rate structure may be applied only once for each residential property
following construction of a new home on the property. (Ord. 174, 9-27-2018,
eff. 1-1-2019)
9-1-8: CONTRACT FOR SERVICE:
Every person or applicant applying for water service, every owner of property
for which any such application is made, and every person where such service is
accepted shall be deemed, upon making such application or accepting such
service, to consent to all rules, regulations and rates as established by this
chapter and as may hereafter be set forth and adopted by the Council by
resolution or ordinance. Provisions of this chapter relating to Municipal
utilities shall constitute portions of the contract between the City and all
consumers of Municipal utility services, and every such consumer shall be
deemed to assent to the same. (New Market 2004 Code § 6-3-8)
9-1-9: LEAK IN SERVICE LINE:
Any owner, occupant, or user of a premises who shall discover a leak in a
service line to the premises shall notify the City within twenty four (24)
hours. Any water wasted due to failure of such person to comply with this
regulation shall be estimated by the City and be charged against the owner of
the premises at the established rate. (New Market 2004 Code § 6-3-9)
9-1-10: CONSERVATION AND EMERGENCY MEASURES:
   A.   Conservation Measures:
      1.   Odd/Even Restriction: Use of the City water supply system for lawn
or garden sprinkling or other irrigation shall be limited to an odd/even
schedule corresponding to the property address effective each year from May 1
to September 30. Lawn or garden sprinkling or other irrigation is not permitted
between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
(New Market Ord. 180, 7-27-2005)
      2.   Exception: The watering of new seed or sod for a period of two (2)
weeks from the date of seeding or sodding shall be excepted from the odd-even
water use restrictions provided under subsection A1 of this section, but not
the restriction on hours of sprinkling or irrigation. This exception for seeded
or sodded areas shall not apply to previously established areas of the same
lot.
   B.   Emergency Restrictions: Whenever the city council determines it in the
public interest, the city council may, by resolution, further limit the use,
times and hours during which water may be used from the city water supply
system by giving notice by publication or by posting in the city hall and at
such public places as the city council may direct. (New Market 2004 Code § 6-3-
10)
9-1-11: PROHIBITED AND RESTRICTED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Cross Connections: Whenever any premises is connected to the city water
system, there shall be maintained a complete physical separation between the
city water supply system and any private water supply system so that it is
impossible to intentionally or unintentionally allow any water produced by a
private system to be introduced in the supply line of the city system.
   B.   Use Of Water Without Authority: It shall be unlawful for any person to
use water from any premises without the consent of the owner.
   C.   Tampering With System 1 : No person, except an authorized
representative of the city, shall turn on or off or tamper with any curb cock.
   D.   Use Of Hydrants: No person, other than an employee of the water
department or the fire department or an employee of the street department who
is engaged in sprinkling or washing the public streets or flushing sewers,
shall operate fire hydrants or interfere in any way with the municipal water
system without first obtaining authority to do so from the city. (New Market
2004 Code § 6-3-11)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  9-1-6G of this chapter.
9-1-12: LIABILITY PROVISIONS:
   A.   Repairs: Except as otherwise provided by written agreement with the
city, after the initial connection has been made to the curb stop box and the
water main, the applicant, owner, occupant, or user of the premises shall be
liable for all repairs required to any water line necessary for connection of
the premises to the curb stop, but excluding the curb stop box. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant, owner, occupant, or user to maintain the stop
box at such height as will ensure that it remains above the finished grade of
the property.
   B.   Failure To System: The city shall not be held liable at any time for
any deficiency or failure in the supply of water to any customer, whether the
same be occasioned by shutting off the water for repairs or connections or for
any cause whatsoever. (New Market 2004 Code § 6-3-12)
9-1-13: CONNECTIONS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
Premises located outside the city shall not be connected to or served by any
municipal utility, except such premises that are publicly owned or presently
served. Persons needing municipal utility service whose property is located
outside the corporate limits must initiate and complete annexation proceedings
prior to being provided with service by any municipal utility. (New Market 2004
Code § 6-3-13)
9-1-14: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
   A.   Violation Of Provisions: Water service may be shut off by the city at
any stop box connection whenever:
      1.   The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any person working
on any pipes or equipment thereon which are connected with the municipal water
system, has intentionally violated any of the requirements of this chapter
relating to the water supply system or connections therewith.
      2.   Any charge for water, service, meter, or any other financial
obligations imposed on the present or former owner or occupant of the premises
served by the provisions of this chapter is unpaid.
      3.   Fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant in connection
with an application for service.
   B.   Share Of Construction Costs Not Paid: Water service shall be shut off
by the city at the stop box connection when it is determined that the sum equal
to the portion of the cost of constructing mains and laterals attributable to
the parcel or property, as determined by assessment proceedings or pursuant to
the provisions of subsection
9-1-3D of this chapter, has not been paid or is not in the process of being
paid in regular installments. (New Market 2004 Code § 6-3-14)
   C.   Notice And Hearing: Water shall not be shut off under this chapter,
except in the case of an emergency, until notice and an opportunity for a
hearing have first been given the owner or occupant of the premises involved.
The notice shall state that if payment is not made before a day stated in the
notice, but not less than twenty (20) days after the date on which notice is
given, the water supply to the premises will be shut off. The notice shall also
state that the owner or occupant may, before such date, demand a hearing on the
matter, in which case, the supply will not be cut off until after the hearing
is held. If the customer requests a hearing before the date specified, a
hearing shall be held on the matter by the city administrative appeals board in
accordance with the city policies related to discontinuance of water service.
If, as a result of the hearing, the administrative appeals board finds that the
amount claimed to be owing is actually due and unpaid and that there is no
legal reason why the water supply of the delinquent customer may not be shut
off, the city may shut off the supply. (Ord. 36, 4-23-2009)
   D.   Renewal Of Service: When water service to any premises has been
discontinued, service shall not be restored except upon the payment of all
delinquent bills and a fee for the cost of disconnection and reconnection as
established by the city fee schedule. (New Market 2004 Code § 6-3-14)
9-1-15: FIRE HYDRANTS:
All publicly owned hydrants shall remain visible and accessible from the
roadway for maintenance and emergency use. All sides, including top, shall have
a minimum three (3) foot clear zone. No person other than authorized city
employees shall operate fire hydrants or interfere in any way with the water
system. (Ord. 204, 10-10-2019)
9-1-16: PRIVATELY OWNED FIRE HYDRANTS:
   A.   Section 508 of the Minnesota State Fire Code requires inspection,
testing and maintenance of fire protection water supplies which include water
lines and fire hydrant systems. Fire hydrant systems shall be subject to
periodic tests, maintained in an operative condition at all times and shall be
repaired where defective. Additions, repairs, alterations and servicing shall
comply with approved standards. Section 101 of the Minnesota State Fire Code
authorizes the city to adopt rules to implement the fire code. The city
considers the private hydrants part of the municipal waterworks system. It is
in the public interest that private hydrants be inspected and tested by
qualified personnel and repaired and maintained in good working order to
protect life and property.
   B.   Fire protection inspections shall be conducted annually by the city on
all private hydrants directly or indirectly connected to the municipal water
system. This inspection shall include testing of the operation and flow of the
hydrants.
   C.   A hydrant inspection fee shall be charged for each hydrant inspected by
the city or city's agent and the fee shall be billed once annually to the owner
of the private hydrant as part of the water bill. The city council must
establish the rates to be charged for a hydrant inspection to the customer
annually within the fee schedule.
   D.   In the event the inspection indicates that repairs are required, the
city shall notify the owner of the hydrant or water line, with a copy to the
fire department, setting forth the repairs required. If repairs are not made
within the time period set forth by the Public Works Department in the
notification, the necessary repairs shall be made by the city and the cost
billed to the owner.
   E.   The property owner may sign a waiver and petition the city for the
repairs. The city will contract for the repairs and assess the property in
accordance with the city's assessment policy.
   F.   Action To Collect Charges: Any amount due for the above charges in
excess of ninety (90) days past due shall be certified to the County Auditor
for collection with real estate taxes. This certification shall take place
regardless of who requested the inspection services, whether it was the owner,
tenant or other person. All applications for inspection services shall contain
an explanation in clear language that unpaid bills will be collected in real
estate taxes in the following year. The city shall also have the right to bring
a civil action or other remedies to collect unpaid charges.
   G.   Duty Of Owners: The owner of any privately owned fire hydrant shall
keep the fire hydrant visible and accessible for emergency use. (Ord. 204, 10-
10-2019)
9-1-17: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION:
Any person violating a provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Each day shall be a separate offense. (New Market 2004 Code § 6-3-
15; amd. Ord. 204, 10-10-2019)
CHAPTER 2
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
9-2-1: Definitions
9-2-2: Administrative Official
9-2-3: Use Of Public Sewers Required
9-2-4: Private Wastewater Disposal Systems
9-2-5: Building Sewers And Connections
9-2-6: Licensed Plumbers
9-2-7: Use Regulations
9-2-7-1: Discharges Into System
9-2-7-2: Pretreatment Or Flow Equalizing Facilities
9-2-7-3: Interceptors, Catch Basins And Waste Traps
9-2-7-4: Control Manhole
9-2-7-5: Measurements, Tests And Analyses
9-2-7-6: Protection From Accidental Discharges
9-2-7-7: Repair Of Service Connection
9-2-7-8: Special Agreements
9-2-8: Damage To, Tampering With System
9-2-9: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
9-2-10: Violations; Penalties
9-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ASTM: American Society For Testing Materials.
ACT: The federal water pollution control act, also referred to as the clean
water act, being 33 USC 1251 et seq., as amended.
AUTHORITY: This city or its representative.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C), expressed in terms of
milligrams per liter (mg/l).
BUILDING DRAIN: The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning three
feet (3') outside the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal; also referred to as a "house connection" or "service
connection".
CITY: The area within the corporate boundaries of the city as presently
established or as amended by ordinance or other legal actions at a future time.
The term "city", when used herein, may also be used to refer to the city
council and its authorized representative.
CONTROL MANHOLE: A structure specially constructed for the purpose of measuring
flow and sampling of wastes.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
GARBAGE: Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking and serving of food.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Gaseous, liquid and solid wastes resulting from industrial or
manufacturing processes, trade or business, or from the development, recovery
and processing of natural resources, as distinct from residential or domestic
strength wastes.
INDUSTRY: Any nongovernmental or nonresidential user of a publicly owned
treatment works which is identified in the "Standard Industrial Classification
Manual", latest edition, which is categorized in divisions A, B, D, E and I.
INFILTRATION: Water entering the sewage system (including building drains and
pipes) from the ground through means as defective pipes, pipe joints,
connections and manhole walls.
INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I): The total quantity of water from both infiltration
and inflow.
INFLOW: Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system (including
building drains) from sources such as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar
drains, yard and area drains, foundation drains, drains from springs and swampy
areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm sewers, catch basins,
surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage.
INTERFERENCE: The inhibition or disruption of the city wastewater disposal
system processes or operations which causes or significantly contributes to a
violation of any requirement of the city NPDES or SDS permit. The term includes
sewage sludge use or disposal by the city in accordance with published
regulations providing guidelines under section 405 of the act (33 USC 1345) or
any regulations developed pursuant to the solid waste disposal act (42 USC 6901
et seq.), the clean air act (42 USC 7401 et seq.), the toxic substances control
act (15 USC 2601 et seq.), or more stringent state criteria applicable to the
method of disposal or use employed by the city.
MPCA: The Minnesota pollution control agency.
MAY: The term is permissive.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: Federal regulations establishing
pretreatment standards for introduction of pollutants in publicly owned
wastewater treatment facilities which are determined not to be susceptible to
treatment by those treatment facilities or would interfere with the operation
of those treatment facilities pursuant to section 307(b) of the act (33 USC
1317(b)).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT: A permit issued
by the MPCA, setting limits on pollutants that a permittee may legally
discharge into navigable waters of the United States pursuant to sections 402
and 405 of the act (33 USC 1342 and 1345).
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewers, which
overflows into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water
or groundwater.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or during which the only pollutant
added is heat.
NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE: Wastewater that is primarily introduced by
residential users with a BOD5 concentration not greater than two hundred eighty
seven milligrams per liter (287 mg/l) and a suspended solids (TSS)
concentration not greater than two hundred eighty seven milligrams per liter
(287 mg/l).
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in
terms of grams per liter of solution.
PRETREATMENT: The treatment of wastewater from industrial sources prior to the
introduction of the waste effluent into a publicly owned treatment works.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to a degree that all particles will
be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2")(1.27 cm) in any
dimension.
SEWAGE: The spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater".
SEWER: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
Collection Sewer: A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect wastewaters from
individual point source discharges and connections.
Interceptor Sewer: A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport wastewater
from collection sewers to a treatment facility.
Private Sewer: A sewer which is not owned and maintained by a public authority.
Public Sewer: A sewer owned, maintained and controlled by a public authority.
Sanitary Sewer: A sewer intended to carry only liquid and water carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions,
together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface water
which are not admitted intentionally.
Storm Sewer Or Storm Drain: A drain or sewer intended to carry stormwaters,
surface runoff, groundwater, subsurface water, street wash water, drainage and
unpolluted water from any source.
SHALL: The term is mandatory.
SLUG: Any waste discharge into public sewers which, in concentration of any
given constituent, except pH, or in quantity of flow, exceeds four (4) times
the average concentration or flow rate for a normal operating day.
STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (SDS) PERMIT: Any permit (including any terms, conditions
and requirements thereof) issued by the MPCA pursuant to Minnesota statutes
section 115.07, as it may be amended from time to time, for a "disposal system"
as defined by Minnesota statutes section 115.01, subdivision 5, as it may be
amended from time to time.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) OR TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS): The total suspended
matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in water,
wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtering as
prescribed in "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And Wastewater",
latest edition, and referred to as "nonfilterable residue".
TOXIC POLLUTANT: The concentration of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants which, upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism, will
cause adverse effects as defined in standards issued pursuant to section 307(a)
of the act (33 USC 1317(a)).
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards, and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.
USER: Any person who discharges or causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the city wastewater disposal system.
UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT: The person appointed by the city council to supervise
the sewer and water systems of the city.
WPCF: The water pollution control federation.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community and referred to as "sewage". From
the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water
carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that
may be present.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS OR TREATMENT WORKS: An arrangement of any devices,
facilities, structures, equipment or processes owned or used by the city for
the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation
of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or industrial wastewater, or structures
necessary to recycle or reuse water including interceptor sewers, outfall
sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power and other equipment and their
appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations
thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled water supply such as
standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works including land
which is an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate
disposal of residues resulting from that treatment. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.001;
amd. 2011 Code)
9-2-2: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL:
The utilities superintendent, or other official designated by the city council,
shall have control and general supervision of all public sewers and service
connections in the city, and shall be responsible for administering the
provisions of this chapter to the end that a proper and efficient public sewer
is maintained. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.002)
9-2-3: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   Discharge Of Human And Animal Waste: It shall be unlawful for any
person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the city or in any area under the city's
jurisdiction any human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable waste.
(Elko 2004 Code § 51.015)
   B.   Discharges Into Natural Outlets: It shall be unlawful to discharge to
any natural outlet any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and the city NPDES/SDS permit. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.016)
   C.   Private Systems: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall
be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
(Elko 2004 Code § 51.017)
   D.   Connection To Sewer System Required: Any building used for human
habitation or occupancy and located on property adjacent to a sewer main, or in
a block to which the system extends, shall be connected to the city sanitary
sewer system within three hundred sixty five (365) days of the date the public
sewer becomes available to any such property. To determine whether or not such
public sewer is available for connection, each person desiring to be connected
to the sanitary public sewer must first make application for connection to a
public system pursuant to subsection
 9-2-5C of this chapter. All future buildings constructed on property adjacent
to the public sewer shall be required to immediately connect to the public
sewer. If sewer connections are not made pursuant to this subsection, an
official ten (10) day notice shall be served instructing the affected property
owner to make the connection. (Elko Ord. 151, 5-24-2005)
9-2-4: PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
   A.   Private Systems Permitted: Where a public sewer is not available under
the provisions of subsection
9-2-3D of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this section and
Minnesota rules chapter 7080, "individual sewage treatment systems program", as
it may be amended from time to time. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.035)
   B.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required; Application: Prior to commencement of construction
of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written
permit signed by the city. The application for the permit shall be made on a
form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications and other information as are deemed necessary to the city.
      2.   Inspections: A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall
not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of
the city or its authorized representative. The city or its representative shall
be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and in any event,
the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when work is ready for final
inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection
shall be made within twenty four (24) hours of the receipt of notice. (Elko
2004 Code § 51.036)
   C.   Specifications: The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private
wastewater disposal system shall comply with all requirements of Minnesota
rules chapter 7080, "individual sewage treatment systems program", as it may be
amended from time to time. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.037)
   D.   Operation And Maintenance: The owner shall operate and maintain the
private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no
expense to the city. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.039)
   E.   Availability Of Public Sewer; Connection Required: At the time a public
sewer becomes available to a property serviced by a private wastewater disposal
system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within three
hundred sixty five (365) days in compliance with this chapter, and within three
hundred sixty five (365) days, any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private
wastewater disposal systems shall be cleaned of sludge. The bottom shall be
broken to permit drainage and the tank or pit filled with suitable material.
(Elko 2004 Code § 51.038)
   F.   Additional Requirements: No statement contained in this section shall
be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed
by the MPCA or the Minnesota department of health. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.040)
9-2-5: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   New Connections Require Available Capacity: Any new connections to the
sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited unless sufficient capacity is
available in all downstream facilities, including, but not limited to, capacity
for flow, BOD5 and suspended solids, as determined by the utilities
superintendent. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.055)
   B.   General Requirements: Building sewer construction shall meet the
pertinent requirements of the Minnesota state building code, which are those
appropriate chapters of Minnesota rules, as they may be amended from time to
time, and the Minnesota plumbing code, Minnesota rules chapter 4715, as it may
be amended from time to time. The applicant shall notify the city clerk when
the building sewer and connection are ready for inspection. The connection
shall be made under the supervision of the building official or the building
official's representative. No backfill shall be placed until the work has been
inspected and approved, or until the certification has been received. (Elko
2004 Code § 51.003; amd. 2011 Code)
   C.   Permit To Connect:
      1.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
      2.   Application For Permit: Applications for permits shall be made by
the owner or authorized agent and the party employed to do the work, and shall
state the location, name of owner, street number of the building to be
connected and how occupied. No person shall extend any private building drain
beyond the limits of the building or property for which the service connection
permit has been given.
      3.   Classes Of Permits: There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer
permits: one for residential and commercial service, and one for service to
establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or any other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the city. The industry, as a condition
of permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater
constituents, characteristics and type of activity. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.056)
   D.   Separate Building Sewers Required: A separate and independent building
sewer shall be provided for every building; except, where one building stands
at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or
can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard
or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered one building sewer. The city does not
and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or
resulting from any connection. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.058)
   E.   Use Of Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test
by the utilities superintendent or his or her representative, to meet all
requirements of this chapter. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.059)
   F.   Construction And Connection Specifications:
      1.   The size, slopes, alignment, materials of construction of building
sewers and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling of the trench shall all conform to the requirements of
the state building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations
of the city.
      2.   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the state building and plumbing codes or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city. All connections shall be made
gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing to prevent the infusion
of infiltration/inflow. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the city prior to installation. (Elko 2004 Code §
51.060)
      3.   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.061)
      4.   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. (Elko 2004
Code § 51.063)
   G.   Surface Runoff Or Groundwater Connections Prohibited: No person shall
make connection of roof downspouts, sump pumps, foundation drains, areaway
drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or
indirectly to the wastewater disposal system. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.062)
   H.   Inspection And Connection: The applicant for the building sewer permit
shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection and inspection shall be made
under the supervision of the utilities superintendent or authorized
representative thereof. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.056)
   I.   Liability For Costs And Expenses: All costs and expenses incidental to
the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the
owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be
directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(Elko 2004 Code § 51.057)
9-2-6: LICENSED PLUMBERS:
All connections to the water system, sanitary sewer system or storm sewer
system shall be performed by a plumber licensed to do plumbing by the state of
Minnesota, except as permitted by rule as follows:
   A.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit an individual
who owns and occupies the premises, or that part of the premises occupied by
the worker as a residence, from obtaining a permit and installing such
connection by his/her own labor; provided, however, that said construction is
conducted under the regulations of this chapter and the requirements of the
city.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit an individual
who completed compilation training and earned a pipe laying card approved by
the Minnesota department of health from obtaining a permit and installing such
connection by his/her own labor; provided, however, that said construction is
conducted under the regulations of this chapter and the requirements of the
city. Persons other than pipe laying cardholders may assist in pipe laying so
long as there is at least one pipe laying cardholder in each trench where work
is proceeding. (2011 Code)
9-2-7: USE REGULATIONS:
9-2-7-1: DISCHARGES INTO SYSTEM:
   A.   Stormwater And Surface Water Runoff:
      1.   No person shall discharge or caused to be discharged any waters such
as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, surface drainage or noncontact cooling
water to any sanitary sewer.
      2.   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
those sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers or to a natural
outlet approved by the city and other regulatory agencies. Industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or
natural outlet on approval of the city and upon approval and the issuance of a
discharge permit by the MPCA. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.080)
   B.   Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewers:
      1.   Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or
quantity, are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
wastewater disposal system or to the operation of the system. Prohibited
materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha,
benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides,
chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides.
      2.   Solid or viscous substances which will cause obstruction to the flow
in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment
facilities such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater
than one- half inch (1/2") in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch
manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers,
ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood,
plastic, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or
lubricating oil, or mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
      3.   Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or greater than 9.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater disposal system.
      4.   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to inhibit or disrupt
any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or
create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater disposal
system. A "toxic pollutant" shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant
identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the act (33 USC 1317(a)). (Elko 2004
Code § 51.081)
   C.   Limited Discharges:
      1.   The following described substances, materials, waters or wastes
shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or
quantities which will not harm either sewers, the wastewater treatment works,
treatment process or equipment; will not have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream and soil, vegetation and groundwater; or will not otherwise
endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The utilities
superintendent may set limitations lower than limitations established in the
regulations below if, in his or her opinion, the more severe limitations are
necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming his or her opinion as to the
acceptability of wastes, the utilities superintendent will give consideration
to factors as the quantity of subject waste in reaction to flows and velocities
in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage
treatment process, the city NPDES/SDS permit, capacity of the sewage treatment
plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and
other pertinent factors.
      2.   The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of
waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be
violated without approval of the utilities superintendent are as follows:
         a.   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65.6°C), or causing, individually or in
combination with other wastewater, the influent at the wastewater treatment
plant to have a temperature exceeding one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit
(104°F) (40°C), or having heat in amounts which will inhibit biological
activity in the wastewater treatment works resulting in interference therein.
         b.   Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l), or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F) and one hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (150°F) (0°C and 65.6°C), and any wastewater containing oil and
grease concentrations of mineral origin of greater than one hundred milligrams
per liter (100 mg/l), whether emulsified or not.
         c.   Any quantities of flow, concentrations, or both, which constitute
a "slug" as defined in section
9-2-1 of this chapter.
         d.   Any garbage not properly shredded, as the term "properly shredded
garbage" is defined in section
9-2-1 of this chapter. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers
from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering
establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation
of food on the premises or when served by caterers.
         e.   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, are capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers
for their maintenance and repair.
         f.   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions.
         g.   Noncontact cooling water or unpolluted stormwater, drainage water
or groundwater.
         h.   Wastewater containing inert suspended solids such as, but not
limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues, or of dissolved
solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate, in
quantities that would cause disruption with the wastewater disposal system.
         i.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the utilities superintendent in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
         j.   Any waters or wastes containing the following substances to the
degree that any material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater
treatment works is detrimental to the treatment process, adversely impacts land
application, adversely affects receiving waters, or is in violation of
standards pursuant to section 307(b) of the act (33 USC 1317(b)): arsenic,
cadmium, copper, cyanide, lead, mercury, nickel, silver, total chromium, zinc
and phenolic compounds which cannot be removed by the city wastewater treatment
system.
         k.   Any wastewater which creates conditions at or near the wastewater
disposal system which violates any statute, rule, regulation or ordinance of
any regulatory agency, or state or federal regulatory body.
         l.   Any waters or wastes containing BOD5 or suspended solids of
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle
the materials at the wastewater treatment works, except as may be permitted by
specific written agreement subject to the provisions of section
9-2-7-8 of this chapter. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.082)
      3.   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers which contain substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in subsection C2 of this section, or which, in the
judgment of the utilities superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon
the wastewater treatment facilities, processes, or equipment, receiving waters
or soil, vegetation, and groundwater, or which otherwise create a hazard to
life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may:
         a.   Reject the wastes;
         b.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers, pursuant to section 307(b) of the act (33 USC 1317(b)), and
all amendments thereto;
         c.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and
         d.   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling, treating
and disposing of wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer service charges.
      4.   If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design, installation and maintenance of the facilities and equipment shall
be made at the owner's expense and shall be subject to the review and approval
of the city pursuant to the requirements of the MPCA. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.083)
   D.   Increasing Use Of Process Water: No user shall increase the use of
process water or, in any manner, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the
limitations contained in subsections B and C of this section, or contained in
the national categorical pretreatment standards or any state requirements.
(Elko 2004 Code § 51.084)
9-2-7-2: PRETREATMENT OR FLOW EQUALIZING FACILITIES:
Where pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided or required for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation at the expense of the owner. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.085)
9-2-7-3: INTERCEPTORS, CATCH BASINS AND WASTE TRAPS:
   A.   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the utilities superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as
specified in subsection
9-2-7-1C2b of this chapter, any flammable wastes as specified in subsection
9-2-7-1B1 of this chapter, sand or other harmful ingredients; except, that
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of the type to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. In maintaining these interceptors, the
owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal of the captured
materials by appropriate means, and shall maintain a record of dates and means
of disposal which are subject to review by the utilities superintendent. Any
removal and hauling of the collecting materials not performed by the owner's
personnel must be performed by a currently licensed waste disposal firm. (Elko
2004 Code § 51.086)
   B.   No person having charge of any building or other premises which drains
into the public sewer shall permit any substance or matter which may form a
deposit or obstruction to flow or pass into the public sewer. Within thirty
(30) days after receipt of written notice from the city, the owner shall
install a suitable and sufficient catch basin or waste trap, or if one already
exists, shall clean out, repair or alter the same, and perform other work as
the utilities superintendent may deem necessary. Upon the owner's refusal or
neglect to install a catch basin or waste trap, or to clean out, repair, or
alter the same, after the period of thirty (30) days, the utilities
superintendent may cause the work to be completed at the expense of the owner
or representative thereof. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.091)
   C.   The owner or operator of any motor vehicle washing or servicing
facility shall provide and maintain in serviceable condition at all times a
catch basin or waste trap in the building drain system to prevent grease, oil,
dirt or any mineral deposit from entering the public sewer system. (Elko 2004
Code § 51.093)
9-2-7-4: CONTROL MANHOLE:
Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure, or control
manhole, with necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of wastes. The structure
shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance
with plans approved by the city. The structure shall be installed by the owner
at his or her expense and shall be maintained by the owner to be safe and
accessible at all times. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.087)
9-2-7-5: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES:
   A.   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes may, at the discretion of the city, be required to provide
laboratory measurements, tests or analyses of waters or wastes to illustrate
compliance with this chapter and any special condition for discharge
established by the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the
discharge.
   B.   The number, type and frequency of sampling and laboratory analyses to
be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city. The industry must
supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to
assure that compliance with federal, state and local standards is being met.
   C.   The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory
analyses to the city at times and in the manner as prescribed by the city. The
owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses and reporting
required by the city. At those times as deemed necessary, the city reserves the
right to take measurements and supplies for analysis by an independent
laboratory. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.088)
   D.   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of
Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association.
Sampling methods, location, times, duration and frequencies are to be
determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the utilities
superintendent. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.089)
9-2-7-6: PROTECTION FROM ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES:
Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a sanitary
sewer shall provide protection from an accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Where necessary,
facilities to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited materials shall be
provided and maintained at the owner's expense. Detailed plans showing
facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be
submitted to the utilities superintendent for review and approval prior to
construction of the facility. Review and approval of the plans and operating
procedures shall not relieve any user from the responsibility to modify the
user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. Users
shall notify the utilities superintendent immediately upon having a slug or
accidental discharge of substances of wastewater in violation of this chapter
to enable countermeasures to be taken by the utilities superintendent to
minimize damage to the wastewater treatment works. The notification will not
relieve any user of any liability for any expense, loss or damage to the
wastewater treatment system or treatment process, or for any fines imposed on
the city on account thereof under any state or federal law. Employers shall
ensure that all employees who may cause or discover a discharge are advised of
the emergency notification procedure. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.090)
9-2-7-7: REPAIR OF SERVICE CONNECTION:
   A.   Whenever any service connection becomes clogged, obstructed, broken or
out of order, or detrimental to the use of the public sewer, or unfit for the
purpose of drainage, the owner shall repair or cause the work to be done as the
utilities superintendent may direct. Each day after thirty (30) days that a
person neglects or fails to so act shall constitute a separate violation of
this section, and the utilities superintendent may then cause the work to be
done, and recover from the owner or agent the expense thereof by an action in
the name of the city. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.092)
   B.   After the initial connection has been made to the sewer lead, it shall
be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain and repair the service
line from the sewer main, including the connecting fitting, to the structure
being served. In case of failure on the part of any owner to repair any leak
occurring in the service line within twenty four (24) hours after oral or
written notice has been given, or apply for a permit for any work required in
the city right of way, the city may repair the leak and bill the property owner
for the work and time incurred on the repair. (2011 Code)
9-2-7-8: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS:
No statement contained in this section
9-2-7 shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of
unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment,
subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern; provided, that national
categorical pretreatment standards and the city NPDES/SDS permit limitations
are not violated. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.094)
9-2-8: DAMAGE TO, TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM:
No person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this section shall
be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of a misdemeanor. (Elko 2004
Code § 51.004)
9-2-9: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   Entry Powers:
      1.   The utilities superintendent or other duly authorized employees of
the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, are authorized, with
the permission of the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of
property within the city, to enter all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to the
discharges to the city sewer system in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of
property within the city does not permit the entrance to the property, the city
may obtain an administrative search warrant. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.130)
      2.   The utilities superintendent or other duly authorized employees of
the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater
facilities lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Elko 2004
Code § 51.133)
   B.   Limitations On Requested Information: The utilities superintendent or
other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning
industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the type and source of
discharge to the wastewater collection system. An industry may withhold
information considered confidential; however, the industry must establish that
the revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an
advantage to competitors. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.131)
   C.   Safety Precautions: While performing necessary work on private
properties, the utilities superintendent or duly authorized employees of the
city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the company, and the property owner shall be held harmless for injury or death
to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the property owner against
loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company
and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as may be caused
by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required
in section
9-2-7-4 of this chapter. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.132)
9-2-10: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provisions of
this chapter, with the exception of article A of this chapter, shall be served
by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently
cease all violations.
   B.   Misdemeanor Violation; Penalty: Any person who shall continue any
violation beyond the time limit provided in subsection A of this section shall
be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day in which any violation occurs shall be deemed as a
separate offense.
   C.   Liability Of Violator; Costs Assessed:
      1.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, with the
exception of article A of this chapter, shall become liable to the city for any
expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of that violation.
(Elko 2004 Code § 51.999)
      2.   In addition to any penalties that may be imposed for violation of
any provision of this chapter, the city may assess against any person the cost
of repairing or restoring sewers or associated facilities damaged as a result
of the discharge of prohibited wastes by that person, and may collect the
assessment as an additional charge for the use of the public sewer system or in
any other manner deemed appropriate by the city. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.005)
   D.   Lien Provisions: Each and every sewer service charge levied by and
pursuant to article A of this chapter is made a lien upon the lot or premises
served, and all charges which are, on October 31 of each year, past due and
delinquent shall be certified to the county auditor by November 29 for
collection. Nothing in article A of this chapter shall be held or construed as
in any way stopping or interfering with the right of the city to levy taxes or
assessments against any premises affected any delinquent or past due sewer
service charges. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.999; amd. 2011 Code)
   E.   Additional Penalties: See section
1-4-1 of this code for further penalty provisions. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.999)
EL836   9-2A.txt
ARTICLE A. USER RATES AND CHARGES 1
SECTION:
9-2A-1: Purpose
9-2A-2: Payment And Compliance Required
9-2A-3: Definitions
9-2A-4: Sewer Service Charge System
9-2A-5: Determination Of Sewer Service Charges
9-2A-6: Sewer Service Fund
9-2A-7: Administration
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  9-2-10 of this chapter for penalties.
9-2A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to provide for sewer service charges to recover
costs associated with operation, maintenance and replacement to ensure
effective functioning of the city wastewater treatment system, and local
capital costs incurred in the construction of the city wastewater treatment
system. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.111)
9-2A-2: PAYMENT AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Each user of sewer service shall pay the charges applicable to the type of
service and in accordance with the provisions set forth in this article. (Elko
2004 Code § 51.110)
9-2A-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ADMINISTRATION COSTS: Those fixed costs attributable to administration of the
wastewater treatment works such as billing and associated bookkeeping and
accounting costs.
CITY: The area within the corporate boundaries of the city as presently
established or as amended by ordinance or other legal actions at a future time.
When used herein, the term "city" may also refer to the city council or its
authorized representative.
DEBT SERVICE CHARGE: A charge levied on users of wastewater treatment
facilities for the cost of repaying monies bonded to construct the facilities.
INCOMPATIBLE WASTE: Waste that either singly or by interaction with other
wastes interferes with any waste treatment process, constitutes a hazard to
humans or animals, creates a public nuisance or creates any hazard in the
receiving waters of the wastewater treatment works.
INDUSTRIAL USERS OR INDUSTRIES: A. Entities that discharge into a publicly
owned wastewater treatment works liquid wastes resulting from the processes
employed in industrial or manufacturing processes, or from the development of
any natural resources. These are identified in the "Standard Industrial
Classification Manual", latest edition, office of management and budget, as
amended and supplemental, under one of the following divisions:
Division A, agriculture, forestry and fishing
Division B, mining
Division D, manufacturing
Division E, transportation, communications, electric, gas, and sanitary sewers
Division I, services
   B.   For the purpose of this definition, domestic waste shall be considered
to have the following characteristics:   BOD5, less than two hundred eighty
seven milligrams per liter (287 mg/l); suspended solids, less than two hundred
eighty seven milligrams per liter (287 mg/l).
   C.   Any nongovernmental user of a publicly owned treatment works which
discharges wastewater to the treatment works which contains toxic pollutants or
poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of any municipal
system, or to injure or to interfere with any sewage treatment process, or
which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or
creates any hazard in or has an adverse effect on the waters receiving any
discharge from the treatment works.
MAY: The term is permissive.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE: Activities required to provide for the dependable
and economical functioning of the treatment works throughout the design or
useful life, whichever is longer, of the treatment works, and at the level of
performance for which the treatment works were constructed. The term includes
replacement.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS: Expenditures for operation and maintenance,
including replacement.
REPLACEMENT: Obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances
which are necessary during the design life or useful life, whichever is longer,
of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which the
works were designed and constructed.
REPLACEMENT COSTS: Expenditures for replacement.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer intended to carry only liquid and water carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions,
together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface water
which are not admitted intentionally.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE: The aggregate of all charges, including charges for
operation, maintenance, replacement, debt service, and other sewer related
charges, that are billed periodically to users of the city wastewater treatment
facilities.
SEWER SERVICE FUND: A fund into which income from sewer service charges is
deposited along with other income, including taxes, intended to retire debt
incurred through capital expenditure for wastewater treatment. Expenditure of
the "sewer service fund" will be for operation, maintenance and replacement
costs and to retire debt incurred through capital expenditure for wastewater
treatment.
SHALL: The term is mandatory.
TOXIC POLLUTANT: The concentration of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants as defined in standards issued pursuant to section 307(a) of the act
(33 USC 1317(a)) which, upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism,
will cause adverse effects.
USER CHARGE: A charge levied on a user of a treatment works for the user's
proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance, including
replacement.
USERS: Those residential, commercial, governmental, institutional and
industrial establishments which are connected to the public sewer collection
system.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community; also referred to as "sewage". From
the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water
carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that
may be present.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS OR TREATMENT WORKS: An arrangement of any devices,
facilities, structures, equipment or processes owned or used by the city for
the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation
of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or industrial wastewater, or structures
necessary to recycle or reuse water including interceptor sewers, outfall
sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power and other equipment and their
appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations
thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled water supply such as
standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works including land
which is an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate
disposal of residues resulting from the treatment. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.112)
9-2A-4: SEWER SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM:
   A.   The city hereby establishes a sewer service charge system whereby all
revenue collected from users of the wastewater treatment facilities will be
used to cover all expenditures incurred for annual operation, maintenance and
replacement and for debt service on capital expenditures incurred in
constructing the wastewater treatment works. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.113; amd.
2011 Code)
   B.   Each user shall pay its proportionate share of operation, maintenance,
and replacement costs of the treatment works, based on the user's proportionate
contribution to the total wastewater loading from all users.
   C.   Each user shall pay debt service charges to retire local capital costs
as determined by the city council.
   D.   Sewer service rates and charges to users of the wastewater treatment
facility shall be determined and fixed in a "sewer service charge system"
developed according to the provisions of this article. The sewer service charge
system shall be the system enacted prior to the adoption of this code.
   E.   Revenues collected for sewer service shall be deposited in a separate
fund known as the "sewer service fund". Income from revenues collected will be
expended to offset the cost of operation, maintenance and equipment replacement
for the facility and to retire the debt for capital expenditure.
   F.   Sewer service charges and the sewer service fund will be administrated
in accordance with the provisions of section
9-2A-7 of this article. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.113)
   G.   A connection fee, as established by ordinance, as it may be amended
from time to time, shall be charged to each user connecting a new service to
the sanitary sewer system. The connection fee shall be due and payable prior to
issuance of a building permit, except as otherwise allowed to be deferred
pursuant to the city's utility connection fee deferral program. (Ord. 122, 10-
8-2015)
9-2A-5: DETERMINATION OF SEWER SERVICE CHARGES:
The sewer service rates and charges to users of the wastewater treatment
facility shall be as established by ordinance. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.114; amd.
2011 Code)
9-2A-6: SEWER SERVICE FUND:
   A.   The city hereby establishes a "sewer service fund" as an income fund to
receive all revenues generated by the sewer service charge system, and all
other income dedicated to the operation, maintenance, replacement and
construction of the wastewater treatment works, including taxes, special
charges, fees and assessments intended to retire the construction debt. The
city also establishes the following accounts as income and expenditure accounts
within the sewer service fund:
      1.   Operation and maintenance account.
      2.   Equipment replacement account.
      3.   Debt retirement account.
   B.   All revenue generated by the sewer service charge system, and all other
income pertinent to the treatment system, including taxes and special
assessments dedicated to retire the construction debt, shall be held by the
city clerk separate and apart from all other funds of the city. Funds received
by the sewer service fund shall be transferred to the "operation and
maintenance account", the "equipment replacement account", and the "debt
retirement account" in accordance with state and federal regulations and the
provisions of this article.
   C.   Revenue generated by the sewer service charge system sufficient to
ensure adequate replacement throughout the design life or useful life,
whichever is longer, of the wastewater facility shall be held separate and
apart in the "equipment replacement account" and dedicated to effecting
replacement costs. Interest income generated by the "equipment replacement
account" shall remain in the "equipment replacement account".
   D.   Revenue generated by the sewer service charge system sufficient for
operation and maintenance shall be held separate and apart in the "operation
and maintenance account". (Elko 2004 Code § 51.115)
9-2A-7: ADMINISTRATION:
The sewer service charge system and sewer service fund shall be administrated
according to the following provisions:
   A.   Accounting: The city clerk shall maintain a proper system of accounts
suitable for determining the operation and maintenance, equipment replacement
and debt retirement costs of the treatment works, and shall furnish the city
council with a report of those costs annually in December. The city council
shall annually determine whether or not sufficient revenue is being generated
for the effective operation, maintenance, replacement and management of the
treatment works, and whether sufficient revenue is being generated for the debt
retirement. The council will also determine whether the user charges are
distributed proportionately to each user in accordance with subsection
 9-2A-4B of this article. The city shall thereafter, but not later than the end
of the year, reassess, and as necessary revise, the sewer service charge system
then in use to ensure the proportionality of the user charges and to ensure the
sufficiency of funds to maintain the capacity and performance to which the
facilities were constructed, and to retire the construction debt.
   B.   Annual Notice Of Operation, Maintenance And Repair: In accordance with
federal and state requirements, each user will be notified annually in
conjunction with a regular billing of that portion of the sewer service charge
attributable to operation, maintenance and replacement.
   C.   Records Kept: In accordance with federal and state requirements, the
city clerk shall be responsible for maintaining all records necessary to
document compliance with the sewer service charge system adopted. (Elko 2004
Code § 51.116)
   D.   Bills For Service; Delinquencies; Late Payment Penalty: Bills for sewer
service charges shall be rendered on a monthly basis succeeding the period for
which the service was rendered and shall be due ten (10) days from the date of
rendering. Any bill not paid in full thirty (30) days after the due date will
be considered delinquent. At that time, the city shall notify the delinquent
owner/occupant in writing regarding the delinquent bill and subsequent penalty.
The penalty shall be computed at ten percent (10%) of the original bill and
shall be increased the same ten percent (10%) for every month the bill is
outstanding. (Elko 2004 Code § 51.116; amd. 2011 Code)
   E.   Liability For Service: The owner of the premises shall be liable to pay
for the service to his or her premises, and the service is furnished to the
premises by the city only upon the condition that the owner of the premises is
liable therefor to the city.
   F.   Responsibility For Additional Costs: Any additional costs caused by
discharges to the treatment works of toxic or other incompatible wastes,
including the cost of restoring wastewater treatment services, cleanup and
restoration of the receiving waters and environs, and sludge disposal, shall be
borne by the discharger of the wastes, at no expense to the city. (Elko 2004
Code § 51.116)
CHAPTER 3
STORMWATER DRAINAGE UTILITY
SECTION:
9-3-1: System Established
9-3-2: Purpose
9-3-3: Definitions
9-3-4: Determining Residential Equivalency Factors For Land Uses
9-3-5: Rates And Charges Established
9-3-6: Adjustments To Charges; Disputes
9-3-7: Exemptions From Rates And Charges
9-3-8: Information Required; Failure To Provide
9-3-9: Bills For Service; Delinquent Payments
9-3-10: Methods Of Collection
9-3-1: SYSTEM ESTABLISHED:
The municipal storm sewer system shall be operated as a public utility pursuant
to Minnesota statutes section 444.075, as it may be amended from time to time,
from which revenues will be derived subject to the provisions of this chapter
and Minnesota statutes. (Elko 2004 Code § 53.01)
9-3-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of all funds derived from the stormwater drainage utility is to pay
for all or part of the construction, reconstruction, repair, enlargement,
improvement, acquisition, maintenance, operation, administration, and use of
the stormwater utility as established by the city. All revenues derived from
the fees shall be credited to the appropriate stormwater fund. (Elko 2004 Code
§ 53.02)
9-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
DEVELOPED: The portion of a parcel that has been altered such that the runoff
condition differs from presettlement conditions, other than agricultural and
associated use areas, no portion of a parcel will be considered undeveloped if
future subdivision of the parcel is not reasonably feasible.
PUBLICLY OWNED: Parcels owned by the federal, state, county, city or township
government.
RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENCY FACTOR (REF): "One REF" is defined as the ratio of the
average volume of stormwater runoff entering the storm sewer system from one
acre of any land use to the average volume of stormwater runoff entering the
storm sewer system from one acre of typical single-family residential land use
during a twenty four (24) hour, one year rainfall event of 2.8 inches for the
Elko New Market area.
SERVED: The portion of any parcel reliant upon city maintained stormwater
facilities to provide drainage, storage, and/or treatment of runoff from the
parcel. The developed portion of any parcel is considered to be served.
STORM SEWER SYSTEM: Publicly owned, manmade or natural facilities used for the
collection, conveyance, storage, treatment, infiltration, or discharge of
runoff from precipitation and/or groundwater, excluding culverts located in
roadway ditches. Culverts are required as a condition of an access permit from
a privately owned parcel to a public roadway and are considered privately
owned.
TYPICAL SINGLE-FAMILY PARCEL: Any parcel zoned for single- family use with an
upland area of one acre or less. All other parcels are nontypical.
UPLAND AREA: The portion of a parcel not covered by wetlands meeting the
definitions provided in the zoning ordinance. For the purpose of this section,
stormwater ponds and required buffer areas are not considered to be upland.
(Ord. 95, 5-10-2012)
9-3-4: DETERMINING RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENCY FACTORS FOR LAND USES:
The REF value for all single-family parcels up to one acre in area is 1. The
City Engineer will compute the REF for all nonresidential parcels and
residential parcels larger than one acre. (Elko Ord. 169, 12-28-2006)
9-3-5: RATES AND CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided herein, fees for the use and availability
of the storm sewer system shall be determined through the combination of a
monthly uniform base charge per parcel for the recovery of system costs, plus a
supplemental monthly charge based on the REF for the recovery of system costs
influenced by runoff events. Common areas and facilities within a common
interest community shall not be charged such fees; however, the total area of
the common areas and facilities shall be allocated to the units within the
common interest community based on the unit's undivided interest in the common
areas and facilities. The pro-rated area of the common areas and facilities
shall be added to each unit within the common interest community and the total
shall be used in computing the REF for each unit. (Ord. 173, 8-9-2018)
   B.   In determining charges, the Council shall, from time to time by
ordinance, establish the uniform monthly base charge per parcel and a
supplementary rate to be charged against a hypothetical one acre parcel having
an REF of 1.00. The sum of this monthly base charge and monthly supplementary
charge shall be the monthly charge for all typical single-family parcels. This
sum shall also be the minimum monthly charge for all nonexempt parcels. (Ord.
95, 5-10-2012)
   C.   A connection fee will be charged to each principal building prior to
issuance of a building permit, except as otherwise allowed to be deferred
pursuant to the City's utility connection fee deferral program. The Council
shall, from time to time by ordinance, establish the connection fee. (Ord. 122,
10-8-2015)
   D.   The charge to be made against nontypical, nonexempt parcels shall be
determined by multiplying the REF computed by the City Engineer for the upland
developed portion of the parcel by the parcel's upland developed acreage. This
product is then multiplied by the supplementary rate and added to the uniform
base charge. The undeveloped and unserved portion of a parcel will not increase
the charge above and beyond the computed charge for the developed portion of
the parcel, or above the minimum charge if no portion is developed. (Ord. 95,
5-10-2012)
9-3-6: ADJUSTMENTS TO CHARGES; DISPUTES:
   A.   Adjustments: The City Council may by resolution, from time to time,
adopt policies providing for the adjustment of stormwater drainage charges for
parcels or groups of parcels, based upon hydrologic data supplied by affected
property owners, demonstrating an actual hydrologic response substantially
different from the REF being used for the parcel or parcels. Such adjustment
shall be made only after receiving the recommendation of the City Engineer and
shall not be made effective retroactively. Adjustment of fees shall not be
retroactive. (Elko Ord. 169, 12-28-2006)
   B.   Disputes: If a property owner or person responsible for paying the
stormwater drainage fees or charges questions the correctness of an invoice for
such charge or fee, such person may have the determination of the charge
recomputed by written request to the Mayor made within ninety (90) days of
mailing of the invoice in question by the City. (Elko 2004 Code § 53.13)
9-3-7: EXEMPTIONS FROM RATES AND CHARGES:
The following land uses are exempt from stormwater utility fees:
   A.   Public rights-of-way.
   B.   Wetlands and public waters as defined by State law.
   C.   Publicly owned property with stormwater maintenance cost sharing
agreements in place outside of the ordinance codified herein.
   D.   Parcels that are deemed undevelopable in their entirety by the City
Council. (Ord. 95, 5-10-2012)
9-3-8: INFORMATION REQUIRED; FAILURE TO PROVIDE:
   A.   The owner, occupant or person in charge of any premises shall supply
the City with such information as the City may reasonably request related to
the use, development and area of the premises. Wilful failure to provide such
information or to falsify it is a violation of this subsection. (Elko 2004 Code
§ 53.09)
   B.   If the owner, occupant or person in charge of any premises fails or
refuses to provide the information requested, as provided herein, the charge
for such premises shall be estimated and billed in accordance with such
estimate, based upon information then available to the City. (Elko 2004 Code §
53.10)
9-3-9: BILLS FOR SERVICE; DELINQUENT PAYMENTS:
Statements for stormwater drainage utility fees will be computed every month
and collected by the City monthly, or along with other utilities such as sewer
and water. Such statement shall be due on or before the last day of the month
in which the statement is mailed. Any prepayment or overpayment of charges
shall be retained by the City and applied against subsequent monthly fees. If a
property is not connected to a City sewer or water system, the bill is to be
sent to the owner of the property on an annual basis. Delinquent accounts will
be treated the same as sewer and water accounts. (Elko 2004 Code § 53.11; amd.
2011 Code)
9-3-10: METHODS OF COLLECTION:
Any stormwater utility fees past due on October 1 of any year may be certified
to the County auditor for collection with Real Estate Taxes in the following
year or any year thereafter. In addition, the City shall also have the right to
bring a civil action or to take other legal remedies to collect unpaid fees.
(Elko 2004 Code § 53.12)
EL836   9-3A.txt
ARTICLE A. ILLICIT DISCHARGE, DETECTION AND ELIMINATION
SECTION:
9-3A-1: Purpose And Objectives
9-3A-2: Definitions
9-3A-3: Applicability
9-3A-4: Responsibility For Administration
9-3A-5: Severability
9-3A-6: Ultimate Responsibility
9-3A-7: Discharge Prohibitions
9-3A-8: Suspension Of MS4 Access
9-3A-9: Industrial Or Construction Activity Discharges
9-3A-10: Monitoring Of Discharges
9-3A-11: Requirement To Prevent, Control, And Reduce Stormwater Pollutants By
Use Of Best Management Practices
9-3A-12: Watercourse Protection
9-3A-13: Notification Of Spills
9-3A-14: Enforcement
9-3A-15: Appeal Of Notice Of Violation
9-3A-16: Enforcement Measures After Appeal
9-3A-17: Cost Of Abatement Of Violation
9-3A-18: Injunctive Relief
9-3A-19: Compensatory Action
9-3A-20: Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance
9-3A-21: Criminal Prosecution
9-3A-22: Remedies Not Exclusive
9-3A-1: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the city of Elko New Market through the regulation
of nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent
practicable as required by state and federal law. This article establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the
national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) MS4 permit process. The
objectives of this article are:
   A.   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system by stormwater discharges by any user;
   B.   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system; and
   C.   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance,
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article.
(Ord. 82, 12-1-2011)
9-3A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: Employees or designees of the city of Elko New
Market or the Minnesota pollution control agency as designated to enforce this
article.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
CITY: The city of Elko New Market.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251
et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These
include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more
and projects that disturb less than one acre if they are part of a larger
common plan of development. Such activities include, but are not limited to,
clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment, when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm
drain system, except as exempted in section
9-3A-7 of this article.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: Either of the following: a) any drain or conveyance,
whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to
enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances
which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater,
and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm
drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or
connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the city, or
b) any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use
to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by the city.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined
in 40 CPR, section 122.26(b)(14).
MPCA: Minnesota pollution control agency.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT: A permit issued by EPA (or by the state of Minnesota under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 USC section 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the state, whether the permit is applicable on an
individual, group, or general area wide basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquids, solid wastes, and yard wastes; refuse,
rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal
wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and boulevards.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is
collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, infiltration, retention and detention basins,
natural and humanmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other
drainage structures.
STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water
from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): A document which describes the
best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or
business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the
actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater
conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility or property.
WATERS OF THE STATE: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained
within, flow through, or border upon the state of Minnesota or any portion
thereof. (Ord. 82, 12-1-2011)
9-3A-3: APPLICABILITY:
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated
on any developed or undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency. (Ord. 82, 12-1-2011)
9-3A-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
The city of Elko New Market shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the MPCA
may be delegated in writing by the city administrator of the city of Elko New
Market to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the
employ of the township. (Ord. 82, 12-1-2011)
9-3A-5: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
article. (Ord. 82, 12-1-2011)
9-3A-6: ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are
minimum standards; therefore this article does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Ord. 82, 12-1-2011)
9-3A-7: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause
to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or waters of the state
any materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing
any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water
quality standards, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or
continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited
except as described as follows:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided herein, the following discharges are
exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this article: water line
flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering,
diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm
drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not
including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air
conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural
riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically
less than 1 ppm chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source
not containing pollutants.
      2.   Discharges specified in writing by the MPCA as being necessary to
protect public health and safety.
      3.   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the city engineer forty eight (48) hours prior to the start of
the test.
      4.   The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the MPCA or federal
environmental protection agency, provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
   B.   Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
      1.   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
      2.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      3.   A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection
to continue.
   C.   Sump Pump And Drain Tile Discharges:
      1.   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of piping
of private sump pump and/or drain tile discharges to a surface outlet located
within twenty feet (20') of public streets or sidewalks is prohibited.
      2.   Connection of private sump pump and/or drain tile lines to public
storm sewers is prohibited unless a right of way permit is obtained from the
city engineer. (Ord. 82, 12-1-2011)
9-3A-8: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
   A.   Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The city
of Elko New Market may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a
person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of
the state. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an
emergency, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the state, or to minimize danger to
persons.
   B.   Suspension Due To The Detection Of Illicit Discharge: Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4 access
terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The
city will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access.
   C.   Reinstatement: A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4
access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior
approval of the city. (Ord. 82, 12-1-2011)
9-3A-9: INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES:
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater
discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of
compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city
prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. (Ord. 82, 12-1-2011)
9-3A-10: MONITORING OF DISCHARGES:
   A.   Applicability: This section applies to all facilities that have
stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including
construction activity.
   B.   Access To Facilities:
      1.   The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine
compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force
which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
      2.   Facility operators shall allow the city ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying
of records that must be kept under the conditions of the NPDES permit to
discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined
by state and federal law.
      3.   The city shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility
such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring
and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
      4.   The city has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy per
manufacturer's recommendations.
      5.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced.
The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
      6.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a permitted
facility is a violation of the stormwater discharge permit and of this article.
A person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge
stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person
denies the city reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of
conducting any activity authorized or required by this article.
      7.   If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from
which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable
cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there
is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the
community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court
of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 82, 12-1-2011)
9-3A-11: REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORMWATER POLLUTANTS BY
USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
The city of Elko New Market has adopted requirements identifying best
management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause
or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain
system, or waters of the state. The owner or operator of a commercial or
industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable
protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes
into the municipal storm drain system or waters of the state through the use of
these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a
property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge,
may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural
and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions
of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with
industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliant with
the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements
of the NPDES permit. (Ord. 82, 12-1-2011)
9-3A-12: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse. (Ord. 82, 12-1-2011)
9-3A-13: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the state,
said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such a release. In the event of such a release of
hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response
agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a
release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the city in person
or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in
person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to
the city of Elko New Market within three (3) business days of the phone notice.
If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or
industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall
also retain an on site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to
prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3)
years. (Ord. 82, 12-1-2011)
9-3A-14: ENFORCEMENT:
Whenever the city of Elko New Market finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the city may order
compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such
notice may require without limitation:
   A.   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
   B.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
   C.   The violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
   D.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination
hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and
   E.   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
   F.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs; and
   G.   The deadline within which to remedy the violation.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation
or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should
the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the
work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the
expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. (Ord. 82, 12-1-2011)
9-3A-15: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the
city. The notice of appeal must be received by the city within fifteen (15)
days from the date of the notice of violation. The appeal shall be heard by the
city council within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the notice of
appeal. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 82, 12-1-2011)
9-3A-16: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth
in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within the deadline
extended by the decision of the city council, then representatives of the city
shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any
and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property.
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent, or person in possession of
any premises to refuse to allow the city or its designated contractor to enter
upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. (Ord. 82, 12-1-2011)
9-3A-17: COST OF ABATEMENT OF VIOLATION:
Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative
costs, and the deadline to pay the abatement costs. The property owner may file
a written protest objecting to the costs and payment terms of the abatement
within fifteen (15) days. The appeal shall be heard by the city council within
thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. If the
amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of
the city council after hearing the appeal, the charges be filed with Scott
County and shall become a special assessment against the property and shall
constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. (Ord. 82,
12-1-2011)
9-3A-18: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the authorized enforcement
agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the
person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the
person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. (Ord. 82, 12-1-
2011)
9-3A-19: COMPENSATORY ACTION:
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this
article, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. (Ord. 82, 12-1-2011)
9-3A-20: VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and
deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's
expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance may be taken. (Ord. 82, 12-1-2011)
9-3A-21: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
Any person that violates this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof, may be subject to the maximum fine and
imprisonment allowed by state law. Each such violation shall constitute a
separate offense punishable to the maximum extent of the law. The authorized
enforcement agency may recover all attorney fees, court costs and other
expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and
monitoring expenses. (Ord. 82, 12-1-2011)
9-3A-22: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the
discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ord. 82, 12-1-2011)
CHAPTER 4
STREETLIGHTS AND TORNADO SIREN UTILITY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Systems Established
9-4-2: Costs Of Systems
9-4-3: Bills For Service
9-4-4: Special Assessment For Unpaid Charges
9-4-1: SYSTEMS ESTABLISHED:
City street lighting and tornado siren utility systems are hereby established
and continued. The utility systems consists of all street lighting and tornado
siren facilities, whether owned by the city or otherwise, for which the city
purchases and supplies electrical energy from a public utility and any
additional facilities acquired or operated by the city in the future. (Elko
2004 Code § 54.07)
9-4-2: COSTS OF SYSTEMS:
The costs of the street lighting and tornado siren systems are the actual costs
as billed to the city by the public utility, plus ten percent (10%) for
administrative expense. (Elko 2004 Code § 54.07)
9-4-3: BILLS FOR SERVICE:
   A.   Definition: For purposes of this section, a "billing unit" is:
      1.   A single-family residence;
      2.   An individual dwelling unit in a multiple dwelling, which shall be
considered as three-fourths (3/4) of one billing unit; and
      3.   Each commercial or industrial office, store, plant, warehouse or
institution.
   B.   Determination Of Charge: The service charge to be billed to each
billing unit is determined by dividing the total system cost by the number of
billing units. (Elko 2004 Code § 54.07)
   C.   Rendition Of Bills: The city administrator is to send monthly bills to
each billing unit directed to the same person to whom city sewer and water
billings are sent for that unit. If a billing unit is not connected to the city
water or sewer system, the bill is to be sent to the owner of the billing unit,
annually. Bills are to be sent to all such units, whether occupied or
unoccupied. In the case of vacant property or property upon which construction
is in progress, a bill may not be sent until city water and sewer service
commences, or might have commenced if the property were to connect to city
water and sewer service, and such billing will be prorated for the period of
actual liability for street lighting and tornado siren services. (Elko 2004
Code § 54.07; amd. 2011 Code)
9-4-4: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FOR UNPAID CHARGES:
On or before October 1 of each year, the city administrator must list the total
unpaid charges for street lighting and tornado siren services against each
separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable. The council will then
spread the charges against the property benefited as a special assessment under
Minnesota statutes section 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and
other pertinent statutes for certification to the director of property taxation
of Scott County and collection the following year along with the current taxes.
(Elko 2004 Code § 54.07; amd. 2011 Code)
TITLE 10
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Building Code And Regulations   1
Fire Code   2
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Adoption Of State Building Code
10-1-2: Application, Administration And Enforcement
10-1-3: Permits And Fees
10-1-4: Optional Provisions
10-1-5: Misdemeanor Violation
10-1-1: ADOPTION OF STATE BUILDING CODE:
The Minnesota state building code, as adopted by the commissioner of labor and
industry pursuant to Minnesota statutes sections 326B.101 to 326B.16, including
all the amendments, rules and regulations established, adopted and published
from time to time by the Minnesota commissioner of labor and industry through
the building codes and standards division, is hereby adopted by reference with
the exception of the optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this
chapter. The Minnesota state building code is hereby incorporated in this
chapter as if fully set out herein. (New Market 2004 Code § 7-1-1; amd. 2011
Code)
10-1-2: APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The application, administration, and enforcement of the building code shall be
in accordance with the Minnesota state building code. The code enforcement
agency is the city, and the code shall be enforced by the Minnesota certified
building official designated by the city to administer the code 1 . (New Market
2004 Code § 7-1-2; amd. 2011 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. MSA § 326B.133.
10-1-3: PERMITS AND FEES 1 :
The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in
Minnesota statutes section 326B.121, subdivision 2. Permit fees shall be
assessed for work governed by the building code in accordance with the fee
schedule adopted by ordinance of the city council. In addition, a surcharge fee
shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by the building code
in accordance with Minnesota statutes section 326B.248. (New Market 2004 Code §
7-1-3; amd. 2011 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. See also subsection
  11-3-6H of this code.
10-1-4: OPTIONAL PROVISIONS:
The Minnesota state building code, established pursuant to Minnesota statutes
sections 326B.101 to 326B.16, allows the city to adopt by reference and enforce
certain optional chapters of the most current edition of the Minnesota state
building code. (New Market 2004 Code § 7-1-4; amd. 2011 Code)
10-1-5: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION:
A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. (New Market 2004 Code § 7-1-5;
amd. 2011 Code)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
10-2-1: State Fire Code Adopted
10-2-2: Administration And Enforcement
10-2-3: Appeals
10-2-4: Misdemeanor Violation
10-2-1: STATE FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
The city incorporates by reference the Minnesota state fire code as established
in chapter 7511 of the Minnesota rules, one copy of which is on file in the
office of the city fire chief. Every provision contained in the Minnesota state
fire code, except as modified or amended by this chapter, is hereby adopted and
made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. (2011 Code)
10-2-2: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The fire chief or the chief's representative is authorized to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The fire chief may detail such members of the fire department as may be
necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (New Market
2004 Code § 5-1-3)
10-2-3: APPEALS:
   A.   Whenever the fire chief shall disapprove or refuse to grant a permit,
or issue an order or notice as provided in this chapter, or when it is claimed
that this chapter has been wrongly applied or interpreted, the aggrieved person
may appeal the decision of the fire chief as follows: (New Market 2004 Code §
5-1-3; amd. 2011 Code)
      1.   The aggrieved person must first request the fire chief to reconsider
his decision. The request to reconsider must be made within ten (10) days from
the date of the fire chief's initial decision.
      2.   A person aggrieved by the final decision of the fire chief may
appeal the decision to the city administrator. The appeal to the city
administrator must be made within thirty (30) days from the date of the final
action of the fire chief. Unless acted upon within ten (10) days, the original
order shall stand.
      3.   A person aggrieved by the decision of the city administrator may
appeal to the city council. The appeal to the city council must be made within
thirty (30) days from the date of the decision of the city administrator.
Unless acted upon within ten (10) days, the original order shall stand.
      4.   A person aggrieved by the decision of the city council may appeal to
a board of appeals appointed by the city council, if one is appointed, or to
the state fire marshal in accordance with Minnesota statutes section 299F.011,
subdivisions 5, 5a and 5b.
   B.   All requests and appeals specified in this section shall be made in
writing. An aggrieved party who does not appeal within the time limits
specified shall be deemed to have waived his right to appeal and shall be bound
by the latest decision in the appeal process. (New Market 2004 Code § 5-1-3)
10-2-4: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(New Market 2004 Code § 5-1-3)
TITLE 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
Title, Purpose, Application And Interpretation   1
Rules And Definitions   2
Administration   3
General Performance Standards   4
General Zoning Regulations   5
Accessory Buildings, Structures And Uses   6
Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs And Spas   7
Parking And Storage Of Vehicles On
Residential Property   8
Off Street Parking And Loading;
Access Requirements   9
Landscaping Requirements   10
Environmental Protection   11
Signs   12
Towers And Antennas   13
Alternative Energy Systems   14
Reserved   15
Reserved   16
Reserved   17
Reserved   18
Reserved   19
Reserved   20
Reserved   21
Reserved   22
Reserved   23
Zoning Districts, Map, And Land Use Table   24
Residential Districts   25
R-1 Suburban Single-Family Residential
District   25A
R-2 Urban (Small Lot) Single-Family
Residential District   25B
R-3 Medium Density Residential District   25C
R-4 High Density Residential District   25D
R-5 Downtown Residential District   25E
Business Districts   26
B-1 Neighborhood Business District   26A
B-2 Downtown Business District   26B
B-3 Original Townsite District (Rep. by Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)   26C
B-4 Highway Business District   26D
B-5 General Business District   26E
B-6 Business Warehousing District (Rep. by Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)   26F
B-6 Business Campus District   26G
Industrial Districts   27
I-1 Limited Industrial District   27A
I-2 General Industrial District   27B
Special Districts   28
UR Urban Reserve District   28A
INS Institutional District   28B
PUD Planned Unit Development District   28C
FP Floodplain Overlay District   28D
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, PURPOSE, APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
11-1-1: Title
11-1-2: Purpose And Intent
11-1-3: Statute Authority
11-1-4: Application Of Provisions
11-1-5: Interpretation
11-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known, cited and referred to as the ELKO NEW MARKET ZONING
ORDINANCE except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as "this
title". (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-1-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
This title is adopted for the purpose and intent to:
   A.   Protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and
general welfare.
   B.   Promote orderly development of the residential, commercial, industrial,
recreational and public areas.
   C.   Conserve the natural and scenic beauty and attractiveness of the city.
   D.   Conserve and develop the natural resources in the city.
   E.   Provide for the compatibility of different land uses and the most
appropriate use of land throughout the city.
   F.   Divide the area in the city into zones and districts regulating therein
the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of structures
and land. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-1-3: STATUTE AUTHORITY:
This title is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the municipal
planning act, Minnesota statutes sections 462.351 to 462.363. (Ord. 5, 12-14-
2006)
11-1-4: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this title are either
more or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other law,
ordinance, statute, resolution, or regulation of any kind, the regulations
which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements
prevail.
   B.   No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
altered, and no structure or land shall be used for any purpose which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this title.
   C.   Whenever, in any zoning district, a use is not specifically allowed or
specifically prohibited, the use shall be considered prohibited unless the
zoning administrator determines the proposed use is very similar to an allowed
use. If the use is found to be very similar to an allowed use, the proposed use
shall be allowed.
   D.   The city council or the planning commission, on their own initiative or
upon request, may conduct a study to determine if a use which is neither
allowed nor prohibited is acceptable and, if so, what zoning district would be
most appropriate and the conditions and standards relating to development of
the use. The city council, planning commission or property owner, if
appropriate, shall initiate an amendment to this title to provide for the
particular use under consideration or shall find that the use is not compatible
for development within the city.
   E.   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
   F.   The maintenance of certain standards is essential to ensure compatible
relationships between land uses within a community. All uses allowed, as either
permitted or conditional uses within the city's various zoning districts, shall
conform to the district provisions and regulations within this title. (Ord. 5,
12-14-2006)
11-1-5: INTERPRETATION:
If any provision of this title is determined to be ambiguous, this title shall
be interpreted in conformance with Minnesota law and in conformance with the
expressed legislative purpose and intent. To this end, the following shall be
determined:
   A.   The public purpose of the standard with respect to which an
interpretation is required.
   B.   The actual impact of a proposed interpretation.
   C.   The proposed interpretation will protect the health, safety, and
general welfare of the community. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Rules Of Word Construction
11-2-2: Definitions
11-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
The language set forth in the text of this title shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction:
   A.   The word "building" includes structure and dwelling.
   B.   The word "person" includes an individual, corporation, copartnership,
and association.
   C.   The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.
   D.   All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest
twelfth of a foot.
   E.   In the event of conflicting provisions, the more restrictive provisions
shall apply. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, whenever they occur in this title, are defined
as follows:
ABUTTING: Making contact with or separated only by public thoroughfare,
railroad, public utility right of way or navigable waters.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE: A subordinate structure or use which is located on
the same lot on which the principal structure or use is situated and which is
reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the principal structure
or use.
ADULT RETIREMENT COMMUNITY: An age restricted planned development for
independent living, as defined under the federal fair housing act provisions
for housing for the elderly which may be in any housing form, including
detached and attached dwelling units.
AGRICULTURAL USE: The use of land for the growing and/or production of field
crops, livestock, and livestock products for the production of income
including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   Field crops, including: barley, soybeans, corn, hay, oats, potatoes,
rye, sorghum, and sunflowers.
   B.   Livestock, including: dairy and beef cattle, goats, horses, sheep,
hogs, poultry, game birds and other animals including dogs, bees, ponies, deer,
rabbits, and mink.
   C.   Livestock products, including: milk, butter, cheese, eggs, meat, fur
and honey.
ALLEY: A public right of way which affords a secondary means of access to
abutting property.
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS RELATED DEFINITIONS:
   Alternative Energy System: A ground source heat pump, wind or solar energy
system.
   Building Integrated Solar Energy System: A solar energy system that is an
integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a separate
mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural
component of the building including, but not limited to, photovoltaic or hot
water solar systems contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights and
awnings.
   Closed Loop Ground Source Heat Pump System: A system that circulates a heat
transfer fluid, typically food grade antifreeze, through pipes or coils buried
beneath the land surface or anchored to the bottom in a body of water.
   Flush Mounted Solar Energy System: A roof mounted system mounted directly
abutting the roof. The pitch of the solar collector may exceed the pitch of the
roof up to five percent (5%) but shall not be higher than ten inches (10")
above the roof.
   Ground Source Heat Pump System: A system that uses the relatively constant
temperature of the earth or a body of water to provide heating in the winter
and cooling in the summer. System components include open or closed loops of
pipe, coils or plates; a fluid that absorbs and transfers heat; and a heat pump
unit that processes heat for use or disperses heat for cooling; and an air
distribution system.
   Heat Transfer Fluid: A nontoxic and food grade fluid such as potable water,
aqueous solutions of propylene glycol not to exceed twenty percent (20%) by
weight or aqueous solutions of potassium acetate not to exceed twenty percent
(20%) by weight.
   Horizontal Axis Wind Turbine: A wind turbine design in which the rotor shaft
is parallel to the ground and the blades are perpendicular to the ground.
   Horizontal Ground Source Heat Pump System: A closed loop ground source heat
pump system where the loops or coils are installed horizontally in a trench or
series of trenches no more than twenty feet (20') below the land surface.
   Hub: The center of a wind generator rotor, which holds the blades in place
and is attached to the shaft.
WIND TURBINE CONFIGURATIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c319d9474cf3d6d21aee248db1bb8796c21e98fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1757.gif]
   Hub Height: The distance measured from natural grade to the center of the
turbine hub.
   Monopole Tower: A tower constructed of tapered tubes that fit together
symmetrically and are stacked one section on top of another and bolted to a
concrete foundation without support cables.
   Open Loop Ground Source Heat Pump System: A system that uses groundwater as
a heat transfer fluid by drawing groundwater from a well to a heat pump and
then discharging the water over land, directly in a water body or into an
injection well.
   Passive Solar Energy System: A system that captures solar light or heat
without transforming it to another form of energy or transferring the energy
via a heat exchanger.
   Photovoltaic System: A solar energy system that converts solar energy
directly into electricity.
   Small Wind Turbine: A wind turbine of one hundred (100) kW nameplate
generating capacity or less.
   Solar Energy System: A device or structural design feature, a substantial
purpose of which is to provide daylight for interior lighting or provide for
the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for space heating or
cooling, electricity generation or water heating.
   Total Wind Turbine Height: The highest point above natural grade reached by
a rotor tip or any other part of a wind turbine.
   Tower: A vertical structure that supports a wind turbine.
   Utility Wind Turbine: A wind turbine of more than one hundred (100) kW
nameplate generating capacity.
   Vertical Axis Wind Turbine: A type of wind turbine where the main rotor
shaft runs vertically.
   Vertical Ground Source Heat Pump System: A closed loop ground source heat
pump system where the loops or coils are installed vertically in one or more
borings below the land surface.
   Wind Energy System: An electrical generating facility that consists of a
wind turbine, feeder line(s), associated controls and may include a tower.
   Wind Turbine: Any piece of electrical generating equipment that converts the
kinetic energy of blowing wind into electrical energy through the use of
airfoils or similar devices to capture the wind.
ANIMAL SHELTER: A facility that shelters lost or abandoned animals for the
purpose of reclaiming by the owner, adoption, placement with another agency, or
humane euthanization. The facility may include limited veterinary services such
as routine vaccinations, spaying and neutering.
ANIMALS, DOMESTIC: House pets such as dogs, cats and birds which can be
contained within a principal structure throughout the entire year; provided,
that containment can be accomplished without special modification to the
structure requiring a building permit from the city. In addition, the term
includes birds and rabbits normally sheltered outside the home.
ANIMALS, FARM: Cattle, hogs, bees, sheep, goats, chickens, turkeys, horses and
other animals commonly accepted as farm animals in the state.
ANTENNA: Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or
transmitting electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to, directional
antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, satellite dishes, and
omnidirectional antennas, such as whip antennas.
APPLICANT: Any person or political subdivision that submits an application to
the city for a permit under this title or other provisions of the city.
AUTO OR MOTOR VEHICLE SALVAGE YARD: A lot or yard where one or more unlicensed
motor vehicles, or the remains thereof, are kept for the purpose of
dismantling, wrecking, crushing, repairing, rebuilding, sale of parts, sale as
scrap, storage, or abandonment. (See also definition of Junkyard.)
AUTO REPAIR, MAJOR: General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines,
motor vehicles or trailers, and collision service, including bodywork,
framework, welding and major painting service.
AUTO REPAIR, MINOR: The replacement of any part or repair of any part which
does not require removal of the engine head or pan, engine transmission or
differential. The term also includes incidental body and fender work, minor
painting and upholstering service. This definition is applied to passenger
vehicles and trucks not in excess of eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds' gross
weight, but not including any operation specified under the definition of Auto
Repair, Major.
BWSR: The Minnesota board of water and soil resources.
BACKYARD CHICKEN: A female chicken or hen which serves as a source of eggs.
BASEMENT: A portion of a building located partly underground, but having half
or more of its floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining
ground.
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: A house, or portion thereof, where short term
lodging rooms and meals are provided.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OR BMPs: Techniques proven to be effective in
controlling runoff, erosion and sedimentation including those documented in the
"Minnesota Construction Site Erosion And Sediment Control Planning Handbook"
(BWSR, 1988); "Protecting Water Quality In Urban Areas" (MPCA, 2000); the
"Minnesota Urban Small Sites BMP Manual" (metropolitan council, 2001); the
"State Of Minnesota Stormwater Manual" (MPCA, 2005); and other sources as
approved by the city, as may be amended.
BOARDING HOUSE (ROOMING OR LODGING HOUSE): A building other than a motel or
hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals
or lodgings are provided for three (3) or more persons, but not to exceed
twenty (20) persons.
BREWERY: A facility which manufactures, processes and warehouses malt liquor
for wholesale distribution in off-sale packages to retail liquor establishments
and may retail malt liquor product for on site consumption in a taproom or for
off site consumption as growlers. The annual production of malt liquor shall be
more than twenty thousand (20,000) but less than two hundred fifty thousand
(250,000) barrels.
BREWERY, SMALL: A facility which manufactures, processes and warehouses malt
liquor for wholesale distribution in off-sale packages to retail liquor
establishments and may retail malt liquor product for on site consumption in a
taproom or for off site consumption as growlers. The annual production of malt
liquor shall be no more than twenty thousand (20,000) barrels.
BREWPUB: A restaurant-brewery that manufactures fewer than three thousand five
hundred (3,500) barrels of malt liquor annually. The malt liquor is brewed
primarily for sale in the restaurant and bar, and may be dispensed directly
from the brewery's storage tanks. Brewpubs may also sell up to seven hundred
fifty (750) barrels of malt liquor for off-sale consumption in growler
containers.
BUFFER: The use of land, topography, difference in elevation, space, fences or
landscape plantings to screen or partially screen a use or property from
another use or property or to shield or mitigate noise, lights or other
impacts.
BUFFER, VEGETATIVE: An area of preserved, restored, or created vegetative
ground cover abutting or surrounding a watercourse, public waters wetland, or
wetland that is maintained in an unmowed natural state and maintained for
erosion, noxious weeds, volunteer trees and brush that may create maintenance
problems, and litter only.
BUFFER YARD: A strip of land utilized to screen or partially screen a use or
property from another use or property or to shield or mitigate noise, lights or
other impacts.
BUILDABLE AREA: The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been
provided.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind, and when said structures
are divided by party walls without openings, each portion of such building so
separated shall be deemed a separate "building".
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance to be measured from the grade of a
building line to the top of the cornice of a flat roof, to the deck line of a
mansard roof, to a point on the roof directly above the highest wall of a shed
roof, to the upper most point on a round or other arch type roof, or to the
mean distance of the highest gable on a pitched or hip roof.
BUILDING LINE: The line nearest the front of and across a lot establishing the
minimum open space to be provided between the front line of buildings and
structures and the front lot line.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: An authorized representative of the City Council assigned to
make any or all necessary inspections of the work performed and materials
furnished by a developer.
BUILDING SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between the furthest
protruding part of the building and a lot line.
BUSINESS: Any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is
exhibited or sold, or where services are offered for compensation.
CARPORT: An automobile shelter having one or more sides open.
CEMETERY: A parcel or tract of land used for the burial of the dead.
CHURCH: A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where
persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is maintained and
controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship.
CITY: The City of Elko New Market.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The person hired by the Elko New Market City Council who is
responsible for supervising governmental operations and implementing City
policies.
CITY COUNCIL: The Governing Body for the City of Elko New Market.
CLINIC: Any establishment where human patients are examined, diagnosed or
treated by licensed practitioners, and does not involve overnight stays. For
this purpose, a licensed practitioner includes physicians, dentist, osteopaths,
chiropractors, optometrists, psychologists, therapists, physical therapists,
and other similar practitioners.
COCKTAIL ROOM: A room which provides for the on site sale of distilled liquor
produced by the distiller on the premises of or adjacent to a microdistillery
or distillery location owned by a distiller, subject to compliance with the
conditions set forth in title 4, chapter 2 of this Code.
COMMERCIAL CAR WASH: A building or area that provides facilities for washing
and cleaning motor vehicles for a fee whether by automated cleaning devices or
otherwise.
COMMERCIAL KITCHEN: A facility containing commercially licensed kitchens where
chefs, bakers, caterers, and other culinary professionals can prepare their
goods, but do not contain seating for food service.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle typically used for commercial purposes
including, but not limited to: trailers, motorized wheeled or tracked vehicles
or vehicles displaying company signage, company logos, commercial equipment,
fixtures or tools.
Class I: Commercial vehicles which exceed any of the following:
   A.   A gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of fourteen thousand (14,000)
pounds.
   B.   A height of nine feet six inches (9'6").
   C.   A length of twenty two feet six inches (22'6").
Class II: All commercial vehicles other than Class I commercial vehicles.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: Land, water or combination of land and water within a
planned unit development which is designed and intended for the use and
enjoyment of residents of the development. "Common open space" includes all
land within a development, except for individual building lots and land
accepted for public dedication.
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: Excavated volume of material below the flood elevation
required to offset fill placed below the flood elevation.
COMPOSTING: A substance composed mainly of partly decayed organic material that
is applied to fertilize the soil and to increase its humus content. Compost is
often used in vegetable farming, home gardens, flowerbeds, lawns, and
greenhouses. Compost usually is made from plant materials (e.g., grass
clippings and vegetable tops).
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The comprehensive development plan made and adopted by the
City of Elko New Market indicating the general locations recommended for major
thoroughfares, streets, parks, public buildings, zoning districts and other
public improvements.
COMPREHENSIVE SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN: The City's comprehensive surface
water management plan prepared to meet requirements of the Scott Watershed
Management Organization and the Vermillion River Watershed Joint Powers
Organization adopted and implemented in accordance with Minnesota Statutes
section 103B.231 and Minnesota Rules 8410 for local water plans.
CONDITIONAL USE: A land or development as defined by ordinance that would not
be appropriate generally but may be allowed with appropriate restrictions as
provided by official controls upon a finding that:
   A.   Certain conditions as detailed in this title exist; and
   B.   The use or development conforms to the comprehensive land use plan; and
   C.   Is compatible with the existing neighborhood.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: A permit issued by the City Council in accordance with
procedures specified in this title, as a flexibility device to enable the City
Council to assign dimensions to a proposed use or conditions surrounding it
after consideration of adjacent uses and their functions and the special
problems which the proposed use present.
CONDOMINIUM: A multiple dwelling or development containing individually owned
dwelling units and jointly owned and shared areas and facilities, which
dwelling or development is subject to the provisions of the Minnesota
Condominium Law, Minnesota Statutes sections 515.01 through 515.29, as it may
be amended from time to time.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: A disturbance to the land that results in a change in
the topography, existing soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative), or the
existing soil topography that may result in accelerated stormwater runoff
leading to soil erosion and the movement of sediment into surface waters or
drainage systems.
CONTRACTOR OPERATIONS: An establishment used for the repair, maintenance or
storage of the contractor's vehicles, equipment, or materials which operate
from said establishment and may include offices for the purposes of the
contracting business.
COUNTY: Scott County, Minnesota.
CREMATORIUM: A structure in which the bodies of the dead are cremated.
CUL-DE-SAC (COURT): A short minor street having one end open, or dead end
street, to traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
CULTURAL ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment used for civic, cultural, educational
or humanitarian motives and/or for the benefits of others. Such uses may
include, but are not limited to, museums, art galleries, libraries, art,
photography, or music studios, or cultural or historic centers.
CURB LEVEL: The grade elevation established per the approved utility plans of
the curb in front of the center of the building. Where no curb level has been
established, the engineering staff shall determine a curb level or its
equivalent for the purposes of this title.
DAYCARE FACILITY: Any State licensed facility, public or private, which for
gain or otherwise regularly provides one or more persons with care, training,
supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation, or developmental guidance on a
regular basis, for periods of less than twenty four (24) hours per day, in a
place other than the person's own home. Daycare facilities include, but are not
limited to: family daycare homes, group family daycare homes, daycare centers,
day nurseries, nursery schools, daytime activity center, day treatment
programs, and other "nonresidential programs" as defined by Minnesota Statutes
section 245A.02, subdivision 10.
DEAD STORAGE: The permanent pool volume of a water basin, or the volume below
the outlet elevation of a water basin.
DECK: A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached railings,
seats, trellises or other features, attached or functionally related to a
principal use or site and at any point extending above grade.
DENSITY: The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
DETENTION BASIN: Any natural or manmade depression for the temporary storage of
stormwater runoff.
DEVELOPER: The legal or beneficial owner(s) of a parcel of any land proposed
for inclusion in a development, including the holder of an option or contract
to purchase.
DEVELOPMENT: The construction, installation or alteration of any structure; the
extraction, clearing or other alteration of terrestrial or aquatic vegetation,
land or the course current or cross section of any water body or watercourse;
or the division of land into two (2) or more parcels.
DEWATERING: The removal of water for construction activity.
DISTILLERY: A facility which manufactures, processes and warehouses distilled
liquor for wholesale distribution in off- sale packages to retail liquor
establishments.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL ENCLOSURE: Any accessory building or portion thereof, accessory
structure or area of any kind, including, without limitation, pens, runs,
kennels and domestic animal houses, that is principally used or designed for
use as a place for keeping domestic animals. An electronic pet containment
system is not considered a domestic animal enclosure.
DRAIN OR DRAINAGE: Any method for removing or diverting water from water
bodies, including excavation of an open ditch, installation of subsurface
drainage tile, filling, diking, or pumping.
DRIVE AISLE: A permanently surfaced (concrete, bitumen, or pavers) area
providing vehicular access between and adjacent to parking spaces.
DRIVE-THROUGH BUSINESS: Any use where products and/or services are provided to
the customer under conditions where the customer does not have to leave the car
or where fast service to the automobile occupants is a service offered
regardless of whether service is also provided within a building.
DRIVEWAY: An area providing vehicular access between a street and an off street
parking or loading area.
DWELLING: A residential building or portion thereof intended for occupancy by a
single family with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and eating, but not
including hotels, motels, boarding or rooming houses, tourist homes, mobile
homes or trailers.
   Accessory Dwelling Unit: A habitable dwelling unit created within, attached
to, or detached from, a principal dwelling unit that provides the basic
requirements of shelter, heating, cooking and sanitation, which is accessory
and subordinate to the principal dwelling unit, self- contained, and intended
to be used as a separate unit.
   Apartment: A room or suite of rooms with cooking facilities available which
is occupied as a residence by a single family, or a group of individuals living
together as a single family unit. This includes any unit in a building with
more than two (2) dwelling units.
   Single Family: A freestanding dwelling unit designed exclusively for and
occupied exclusively by one family.
   Townhouse: A residential building containing three (3) or more dwelling
units with at least one common wall, each unit is so oriented to have all exits
open to the outside.
   Two Family: A structure having two (2) dwelling units contiguous to each
other only by the sharing of one or more common wall or floor, and each unit
equipped with separate sleeping, cooking, eating, living, and sanitation
facilities. Each unit having a separate entrance/exit and designed exclusively
for occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or
more sides by a party wall or walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on
the same lot.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building designed with three (3) or more dwelling
units exclusively for occupancy by three (3) or more families living
independently of each other. Multi-family dwellings include apartments,
condominiums and townhouses.
EARTHWORK OR WORK THE EARTH: Excavating, mining, filling or grading.
EASEMENT: A grant by the property owner for temporary or permanent use of a
strip of land by the public, a corporation, or persons for specific purposes.
ENERGY DISSIPATION: Methods employed at pipe outlets or along pipe alignments
to prevent erosion including, but not limited to: concrete aprons, riprap,
collars, splashguards, and gabions.
EROSION: The progressive wearing away of the ground surface as a result of
wind, flowing water, ice movement, or land disturbing activities.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance of
underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or
distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems by
public utilities, Municipal, or other governmental agencies.
EVENT CENTER: A facility that primarily functions to provide a space for any
type of social gathering that is available for use by various groups for such
activities as public assemblies, meetings, retreats, parties, weddings,
receptions and dances.
EXCAVATION: Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and
ground care.
EXTERIOR STORAGE (Includes OPEN STORAGE): The storage of goods, materials,
equipment, manufactured products and similar items not fully enclosed by a
building.
EXTRACTION AREA: Any nonagricultural artificial excavation of earth exceeding
fifty (50) square feet of surface area or two feet (2') in depth, excavated or
made by the removal from the natural surface of the earth of sod, soil, sand,
gravel, stone or other natural matter, or made by turning, breaking or
undermining the surface of the earth.
FACE BRICK: A masonry building block or clay baked in a kiln until hard.
FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related to the other by
blood, marriage, guardianship, adoption, domestic partnership, or foster care,
or a group of not more than four (4) persons not so related maintaining a
common household and using common cooking and kitchen facilities.
FARM: A tract of land of ten (10) or more acres in size usually with a house
and barn, plus other buildings, on which crops and often livestock are raised
for a principal source of livelihood.
FENCE: Any freestanding structure, partition, wall, gate, or enclosure
permanently anchored in/to the ground, designed and erected to permanently
serve as a dividing marker, enclosure, physical barrier, visual barrier, or
sound barrier.
FENCE, TEMPORARY/PORTABLE: Any freestanding structure, partition, wall, gate,
or enclosure that may or may not be permanently anchored in/to the ground,
designed and erected to serve as an easily movable short term enclosure or
barrier.
FILL: Soil or other material placed on the land by artificial means.
FINAL PLAT: See definition of Plat.
FLOOD RELATED DEFINITIONS:
   Accessory Use or Structure: A use or structure on the same lot with, and of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
   Base Flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. "Base flood" is synonymous with the term "regional
flood" used in Minnesota Rules, Part 6120.5000.
   Base Flood Elevation (BFE): The elevation of the base flood or one-percent
annual chance flood. The term "base flood elevation" is used in the flood
insurance study.
   Basement: Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor
or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the
depth of excavation below ground level.
   Conditional Use: A specific type of structure or land use listed in the
official control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth review
procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the
official zoning controls or building codes and upon a finding that:
   A.   Certain conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance exist, and
   B.   The structure and/or land use conform to the comprehensive land use
plan if one exists and are compatible with the existing neighborhood.
   Critical Facilities: Facilities necessary to a community's public health and
safety, those that store or produce highly volatile, toxic or water-reactive
materials, and those that house occupants that may be insufficiently mobile to
avoid loss of life or injury. Examples of critical facilities include
hospitals, correctional facilities, schools, daycare facilities, nursing homes,
fire and police stations, wastewater treatment facilities, public electric
utilities, water plants, fuel storage facilities, and waste handling and
storage facilities.
   Development: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or
materials.
   Equal Degree of Encroachment: A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
   Farm Fence: An open type of fence of posts and horizontally run wire,
further defined by Minnesota Statutes, Section 344.02, Subd. 1(a-d), and is not
considered to be a structure under this ordinance. Fences that have the
potential to obstruct flood flows, such as chain link fences and rigid walls,
are regulated as structures under this title.
   Flood: A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage
of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
   Flood Frequency: The frequency for which it is expected that a specific
flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
   Flood Fringe: The portion of the one - percent annual chance floodplain
located outside of the floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous with the term
"floodway fringe" used in the Flood Insurance Study
   Flood Insurance Rate Map: An official map on which the Federal Insurance
Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available
digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
   Flood Insurance Study: The study referenced in Section 2.2, which is an
examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards, and if appropriate,
corresponding surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation, and
determination of mudslide (i.e. mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
   Flood Prone Area: Any land susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source.
   Floodplain: The beds and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse
which have been or hereafter may be covered by the base flood.
   Floodproofing: A combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages.
   Floodway: The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to
carry or store the base flood discharge.
   Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking
of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area,
is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 60.3.
   Manufactured Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include the term "recreational vehicle."
   New Construction: Structures, including additions and improvements, and
placement of manufactured homes, for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of this ordinance.
   Obstruction: Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting
into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain which may impede,
retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
   Principal Use or Structure: All uses or structures that are not accessory
uses or structures.
   Reach: A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban
area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings
would most typically constitute a reach.
   Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is four
hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck, and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use. For the purposes of this ordinance, the term recreational vehicle is
synonymous with the term "travel trailer/travel vehicle."
   Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE): An elevation not less than one
foot above the elevation of the base flood plus any increases in flood
elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from
designation of a floodway.
   Repetitive Loss: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   Special Flood Hazard Area: A term used for flood insurance purposes, and
synonymous with the term base flood or one percent (1%) annual chance
floodplain.
   Start of Construction: Includes substantial improvement, and means the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement or other improvement that occurred before the permit's expiration
date. The actual start is either the first placement of permanent construction
of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   Structure: Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings,
factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, decks manufactured homes,
recreational vehicles not considered travel ready as detailed in Section 10.22
of this ordinance and other similar items.
   Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   Substantial Improvement: Within any consecutive three hundred sixty five
(365)-day period, any reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal
maintenance and repair), repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of
a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial
damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
   B.   Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure." For the purpose of this ordinance, "historic structure" is as
defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59.1.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the building
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls. The floor area
measurement is exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached
garages, breezeways and enclosed and unenclosed porches. The term "floor area",
for the purpose of calculating the number of off street parking spaces, shall
be the net usable floor area of the various floors, exclusive of hallways,
utility space, restrooms, window showcases, and ornamental space not used for
assembly.
FLOOR PLAN: A graphic representation of the anticipated utilization of the
floor area within a building or structure but not necessarily as detailed as
construction plans.
FRONTAGE: That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public
street.
FUNERAL HOMES OR MORTUARIES: A building that provides facilities for funerals;
a chapel for funeral services; rooms for viewing the remains in caskets
(slumber rooms, reposing rooms, viewing rooms, visitation rooms) before final
services or cremation; rooms for preparation of bodies (embalming, cosmetic
treatment and clothing of the deceased); display rooms and storage for caskets;
garages for hearses and other equipment; administrative offices; and may
include family living quarters for the funeral director/owner. A funeral home
may have a maximum of one crematory located within the same structure as the
funeral home.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory structure if detached from the principal
structure and more than six feet (6') from the principal structure, or an
accessory portion of the principal structure if attached.
GOVERNING BODY: The Elko New Market city council.
GRADING: To change the contour of the land by excavation and/or placement of
fill. Grading activity is differentiated from mining and land reclamation
activities by the following characteristics:
   A.   Grading is typically done for the purpose of shaping land for a project
in accordance with an approved grading plan as opposed to being done for the
purpose of extraction of valuable materials or reclaiming unbuildable land.
   B.   Grading primarily involves moving soils within a site versus primarily
exporting or importing materials, although some export or import may be
involved.
   C.   Grading typically involves disturbance of the landscape for one
calendar year or less versus portions of the landscape being intermittently
disturbed for one or more years.
   D.   Disturbance for grading is a function of the project schedule versus
demand for extracted materials or availability of fill materials.
   E.   Grading is done as part of construction of or modification of a
permanent use. Mining and reclamation is an interim use activity that may not
have an approved plan for a permanent use.
GRADING PERMIT: A permit required and issued by the city for grading or other
land, wetland, or drainage altering activity that is not excepted from this
title.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: A. Any refuse, sludge or other waste materials, or combination
of refuse, sludge or other waste materials, in solid, semisolid, liquid or
contained gaseous form which, because of its quantity, concentration or
chemical, physical or infectious characteristics, may:
      1.   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious or irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or
      2.   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or
the environment when improperly treated, stored or transported or disposed of
or otherwise managed.
   B.   Categories of hazardous waste materials include, but are not limited
to, explosives, flammables, oxidizers, poisons, irritants and corrosives.
Hazardous waste does not include source, special nuclear or byproduct material,
as defined by the atomic energy act of 1954, as may be amended from time to
time.
HEAVY EQUIPMENT SALES: The use of a building or land area for the display and
sale of farm implement, semitractors or semitrailers and/or construction
equipment, that involve outdoor sales and display areas.
HEAVY EQUIPMENT SERVICE: The use of a building for the service and/or washing
of farm implement, semitractors or semitrailers and/or construction equipment.
HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE WETLAND TYPE: A wetland characterized as a sedge meadow;
open or coniferous bog; calcareous fen; low prairie; coniferous or hardwood
swamp; or seasonally flooded wetland.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any activity engaged in by the occupant of a residential
dwelling unit which is carried on for business purposes and which activity is
clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the premises, and
which activity does not change the residential character thereof.
HOSPITAL: An institution providing health services primarily for human
inpatient medical and surgical care and including related facilities such as
laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, cafeterias, and
staff offices that are an integral part of the facilities.
HOTEL: A building which provides a common entrance, lobby, halls and stairway
and in which twenty (20) or more people are, for compensation, lodged with or
without meals.
HYDRIC SOIL: A soil that formed under conditions of saturation, flooding or
ponding long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions
in the upper horizon.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: An artificial or natural surface through which water, air
or roots cannot penetrate.
INDUSTRIAL USE: The use of land or buildings for the production, manufacture,
warehousing, storage, or transfer of goods, products, commodities, or other
wholesale items.
INFILTRATION AREA: A stormwater retention method for the purpose of reducing
the volume of stormwater runoff by transmitting a flow of water into the ground
through the earth's surface.
INFRASTRUCTURE: The system of public works for the county, state, or city,
including, but not limited to, structures, roads, bridges, culverts, and
sidewalks; stormwater management facilities, conveyance systems and pipes; pump
stations, sanitary sewers and interceptors, hydraulic structures, permanent
erosion control and stream bank protection measures, water lines, gas lines,
electrical lines and associated facilities, and phone lines and supporting
facilities.
INSTITUTIONAL USE: A nonprofit, religious, or public use such as a church,
library, public or private school, hospital, or government owned or operated
building, structure or land used for a public purpose.
INTERIM USE: A temporary use of property until a particular date, until the
occurrence of a particular event, or until the use is no longer allowed by this
title.
INTERIM USE PERMIT (IUP): A permit issued by the city council in accordance
with procedures specified in this title.
JUNKYARD: An open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought,
sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including,
but not limited to: scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber, tires,
and bottles. A junkyard includes an auto wrecking yard but does not include
uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. This definition does not
include sanitary landfills.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL ANIMAL: An establishment in which animals, as permitted, are
kept, boarded or maintained for the care, training, exercise, or socializing,
by a person other than the owner of the animals for a fee. This term does not
include the breeding or selling of animals or facilities whose primary source
of revenue is veterinarian services.
KENNEL, DOG: See definition of Kennel, Commercial Animal.
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY: Any change of the land surface to include removing
vegetative cover, excavation, fill, grading, stockpiling soil, the construction
of any structure that may cause or contribute to erosion, or the movement of
sediment into water bodies. This includes new development, redevelopment and
road construction. The use of land for new and continuing agricultural
activities shall not constitute a land disturbing activity under this title.
LAND RECLAMATION: The importation of soil materials to a site in an amount
exceeding one thousand (1,000) cubic yards for the primary purpose of making
buildable land that was previously unbuildable due to susceptibility to
flooding, high groundwater, or poor soils, or for the purpose of restoring
mined areas to buildable grades.
LAND SURVEYOR: A registered land surveyor capable of preparing engineering
plans for land subdivision plats.
LANDLOCKED BASIN: A basin that is one acre or more in size and does not have a
natural outlet at or below the existing flood elevation as determined using the
simplified hydrologic yield method.
LANDSCAPE WALL: A structure less than four feet (4') in height and constructed
of wood, masonry block, or natural stone that is used as part of a landscape
design and not requiring special structural properties as does a retaining
wall.
LANDSCAPING RELATED DEFINITIONS:
   Annual: A plant, usually a flowering species, which lives only one growing
season.
   Canopy: The width and/or height of the overall leafy portion of a deciduous
tree.
   Deciduous: Plants which lose foliage and become dormant during winter
months.
   Drip Line: An imaginary line drawn vertically from the outer edge of the
canopy to the ground. This is typically where the most sensitive roots are
located.
   Evergreen Trees: Large evergreens which reach mature heights of fifty feet
(50') or more.
   Evergreens: A plant which retains its green color year round and does not
drop its fronds or needles in the winter.
   Ground Cover: Plants which are used for accents and/or soil stabilization
and are typically twenty four inches (24") or less in height.
   Large Shrubs: Deciduous shrubs with mature natural growth over six feet (6')
in height.
   Medium Shrubs: Deciduous shrubs with mature natural growth between four feet
(4') and six feet (6') in height.
   Ornamental Trees: Often defined as "understory trees", used for color
accents or where a large tree is not practical. A deciduous tree with a mature
height under thirty feet (30').
   Overstory Trees: Large deciduous shade producing trees with a mature height
over thirty feet (30').
   Perennial: A plant, usually a flowering species, having a life span more
than two (2) years. Appears or blooms every year.
   Planting Schedule: A listing of all plants to be installed, identifying
their common name, botanical name, plant size, root type, and quantity to be
installed.
   Small Shrubs: Deciduous shrubs with mature natural growth less than four
feet (4') in height.
   Spreading And Globe Evergreens: An evergreen shrub which maintains a natural
global or spreading shape.
   Understory Trees: Often defined as "ornamental trees". Also could mean the
small trees under the canopy of a wooded area.
   Upright Evergreens: An evergreen shrub which maintains a natural columnar or
upright shape.
LEAST SUSCEPTIBLE WETLAND TYPE: A wetland characterized as a gravel pit,
cultivated hydric soil, dredged material or fill, or material disposal site.
LIMITED INDUSTRIAL USE: A use engaged in the manufacture, predominately from
previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts which do not
generate excessive volumes of traffic on adjacent roadways.
LOADING SPACE: An off street space on the same lot with a building or group of
buildings for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and
unloading merchandise or materials. Required off street loading space is not to
be included as off street parking space in computation of required off street
parking space.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT (LGU): The city, unless otherwise designated by state,
federal or local laws, or by agreement of governmental units authorized
thereunder.
LOCAL WATER PLAN: The city's comprehensive surface water management plan.
LODGING ROOM: A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but without
cooking facilities. In a suite of rooms, without cooking facilities, each room
which provides sleeping accommodations shall be counted as one lodging room.
LOT: A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land, separated
from other parcels or portions by description as on a subdivision or record of
survey map, for the purpose of sale or lease or separate use thereof.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear
lot lines measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT, BUTT: Any lot located immediately between two (2) corner lots.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the junction of, and abutting on two (2) or more
intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a
continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed one hundred
thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT COVERAGE: The area of the lot occupied by the principal buildings and
accessory buildings.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear
lot line of a lot.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE: The property line bordering a lot; except, that where any portion of
a lot extends into the public right of way, the right of way shall be the lot
line for purposes of this title.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated
public street. In the case of a corner lot, the front lot line shall be the
shortest dimension on a public street. If the dimensions of a corner lot are
equal, the front lot line shall be designated by the owner and filed with the
city.
LOT LINE, REAR: That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. If
the rear line is less than ten feet (10') in length, or if the lot forms a
point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten feet (10') in length
within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the front lot
line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear
lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: Any lot which is one unit of a plat heretofore duly approved and
filed, or a registered land survey that has been recorded in the office of the
county recorder of Scott County, Minnesota, prior to the effective date hereof.
LOT, SUBSTANDARD: A lot or parcel of land for which a deed has been recorded in
the office of the county recorder upon or prior to the effective date hereof
which does not meet the minimum lot area structure setbacks or other
dimensional standards of this title.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two (2)
substantially parallel streets and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot,
both street lines shall be front lot lines for applying this title.
LOT WIDTH: The maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot
at the setback line.
LOW FLOOR ELEVATION: The finished surface elevation of the lowest floor of a
structure.
LOW OPENING ELEVATION: The elevation of any door, window, or above grade
foundation penetration in a structure that would be first exposed to rising
water approaching the exterior of the structure.
LUMBERYARD: A facility or yard where lumber and wood-related products used in
construction and/or home improvement projects are processed, stored, and sold.
MALT LIQUOR: Any beer, ale, or other beverage made from malt by fermentation
and containing not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume.
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY: All manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging,
treatment or assembly of products and materials that may emit objectionable and
offensive influences beyond the lot on which the use is located. Such uses
include, but are not limited to the following: sawmill, refineries, cement,
flour, seed and grail milling or storage, meat packing, coal or tar asphalt
distillation, rendering of fat, grease, lard or tallow, poisons, exterminating
agents, glue or size, lime, gypsum, plaster or parts, tanneries, automobile
parts, paper and paper products, glass, chemicals, plastics, crude oil and
petroleum products, including storage, electric power generation facilities,
vinegar works, junkyard, auto reduction yard, foundry, forge, casting of metal
products, rock stone, cement products.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure not affixed to or part of real estate,
transportable in one or more sections, which the traveling mode is eight (8)
body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when
erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems
contained therein, and which complies with the manufactured home building code
established by Minnesota statutes section 327B.01, subdivision 13, as may be
amended from time to time.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: Any size lot, field or tract of land upon which two (2)
or more occupied manufactured homes are located, either free of charge or for
compensation, and includes any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure
used or intended for use as part of the equipment of the manufactured home
park.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT: All uses which include the compounding, processing,
packaging, treatment, fabrication or assembly of products and materials,
utilizing hand labor or quiet machinery or processes, provided such use will
not emit offensive odors, glare, smoke, dust, noise, vibration or other
objectionable influences that extend beyond the lot on which the use is
located. Such uses include, but are not limited to, the following: machine
shops, products assembly, sheet metal shops, plastics, electronics, signs and
displays, printing publishing, fabricated metal parts, appliances, clothing,
textiles, and used auto parts.
METES AND BOUNDS: A method of property description whereby properties are
described by means of their directions and distance from an easily identifiable
location.
MICRODISTILLERY: A facility which manufactures, processes and warehouses Ethyl
Alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin,
or other distilled spirits, including all dilutions and mixtures thereof, for
wholesale distribution in off-sale packages to retail liquor establishments and
may retail distilled liquor produce for on site consumption in a cocktail room
or for off site consumption. The annual production of distilled spirits shall
not exceed forty thousand (40,000) proof gallons.
MINING: The extraction of sand, gravel, rock, soil or other material from the
land in the amount of one thousand (1,000) cubic yards or more and the removing
thereof from the site without processing. The only exclusion from this
definition shall be removal of materials associated with construction of a
building, provided such removal is an approved item in the building permit.
MINISTORAGE/SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY: A building or series of buildings
consisting of individual, small, self-contained units that are leased or owned
for the storage of business and/or household goods.
MINNESOTA POLLUTION CONTROL AGENCY (MPCA): The state organization responsible
for the NPDES/SDS permitting system.
MODEL HOME: A home which is similar to others in a residential development and
which is open to public inspection for the purpose of selling said other homes.
Such homes may include temporary real estate offices and shall be used solely
for selling purposes of residential lots and/or other homes within the
subdivision in which it is located or a nearby associated neighborhood.
MODERATELY SUSCEPTIBLE WETLAND TYPE: A wetland characterized as shrub-carr,
alder thicket; fresh wet meadow not dominated by reed canary grass; or shallow
or deep marsh not dominated by reed canary grass, cattail, giant reed, or
purple loosestrife.
MODULAR HOME: A nonmobile housing unit that is fabricated at a central factory
and transported to a building site where final installations are made,
permanently affixing the module to the site.
MOTEL: A building or group of detached, semidetached, or attached buildings
containing guestrooms or dwellings, with garage or parking space conveniently
located to each unit, and which is designed, used or intended to be used
primarily for the accommodation of automobile transients.
MOTOR FUEL STATION: A retail place of business engaged primarily in the sale of
motor fuels, but also may be engaged in supplying goods generally required in
the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles and/or prepackaged food
products and household items.
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES: The use of a building or land area for the display and
sale of new or used automobiles, motorcycles, recreational vehicles and
equipment, and/or boats and marine sales, that involve outdoor sales and
display areas.
NPDES/SDS: National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES)/state
disposal system (SDS). This permitting system is managed by the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency (MPCA).
NRCS: The Natural Resource Conservation Service.
NURP: The nationwide urban runoff program developed by the Environmental
Protection Agency to treat stormwater runoff from urban development.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR USE: The use of land, buildings or structures
legally existing at the effective date hereof which does not comply with all
the regulations of this title or any amendments hereto governing the zoning
district in which such use is located.
NORMAL WATER LEVEL (NWL): For a reservoir with a fixed overflow, the NWL is
lowest crest level of that overflow. For a reservoir whose outflow is
controlled wholly or partly by movable gates, siphons or other means, it is the
maximum level to which water may rise under normal operating conditions,
exclusive of any provision for flood storage. For a closed depression wetland,
it is the maximum level to which the water may rise under normal precipitation
conditions exclusive of any provision for flood storage.
NURSERY, LANDSCAPE: A business growing and selling trees, flowering and
decorative plants and shrubs, and which may be conducted within a building or
without, for the purpose of landscape construction.
NURSING HOME: A building with facilities for the care of children, the aged,
infirm, or place of rest for those suffering bodily disorder. A nursing home
shall be licensed by the State Board of Health as provided in Minnesota
Statutes section 144.50.
OFFICE: A building or portion of a building wherein services are performed
involving predominantly administrative, professional, or clerical operations
including attorneys, financial advisors, consultants, insurance and other uses
of similar character. This includes administrative services provided to persons
both on-site and off-site, and on a walk- in or appointment basis.
OFFICE WAREHOUSE: A mix of office and warehouse uses where at least twenty five
percent (25%) of the floor area of the building is devoted to office uses.
OFF-SALE: The sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for consumption
off the licensed premises only.
OFF STREET PARKING: An area, either a parking lot, driveway, or a garage, that
provides off-street parking for vehicles.
ON-SALE: The sale of alcoholic beverages by the glass for consumption on the
licensed premises only.
OPEN SALES LOT: Land devoted to the display of goods for sale, rent, lease or
trade where such goods are not enclosed within a building.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK: A mark delineating the highest water level which has
been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the
landscape. The ordinary high water mark is commonly that point where the
natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly
terrestrial. In areas where the ordinary high water mark is not evident,
setbacks shall be measured from the stream bank of the following water bodies
that have permanent flow or open water: the main channel, adjoining side
channels, backwaters and sloughs.
OUTDOOR DINING/SEATING: A commercial seating area for business patrons which is
not located in an enclosed building.
OUTDOOR DISPLAY: To store or exhibit outside a commercial building a
representative sample of merchandise, goods or inventory intended for sale,
rent or lease in the normal course of the principal occupant's business. For
purposes of this title, any outdoor display exceeding the restrictions thereof
as regulated in this title shall constitute outdoor storage.
OUTDOOR SALES: Land devoted to the display of goods for sale, rent, lease or
trade where such goods are not enclosed within a building.
OUTDOOR SERVICE: Labor, maintenance, and/or repair services provided outside of
an enclosed building.
OUTDOOR STORAGE: Storage on any property not fully enclosed in a building or
completely screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties or street
rights-of-way.
OUTLOT: A parcel of land on a plat with a future purpose which has not been
designated as a buildable lot due to insufficient size or frontage, peculiar
site characteristics, topographic problems or one which is not ready for
development due to lack of public improvements.
OVERBURDEN: Those materials that lie between the surface of the earth and
mineral deposits to be extracted.
OVERHANG, ROOF: That part of a roof that extends beyond the facade of a lower
wall.
OWNER: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or
any other legal entity having proprietary interest in the land.
PARCEL: Any unit of land platted or described by metes and bounds or
combination thereof subject to the subdivision ordinance and other City
ordinances.
PARKING LOT ISLAND: A physically separated area from the permanently surfaced
parking or driving areas which provides landscape features and helps define
parking spaces.
PARKING SPACE: A suitably surfaced and permanently maintained area on privately
owned property either within or outside of a building of sufficient size to
store one standard automobile.
PATIO: An at grade recreation area that is often paved and is typically
designed especially for outdoor dining.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A public or private right-of-way across or within a block, to be
used by pedestrians.
PERMIT: A permit issued by the City for a construction activity or land
disturbing activity that is not excepted from this title. When the term
"permit" is referred to in this title, it shall mean a grading permit, unless
otherwise identified (i.e., building permit).
PERMITTED USE: A public or private use which of itself conforms to the
purposes, objectives, requirements, regulations and performance standards of a
particular district.
PERMITTEE: The person or political subdivision in whose name a permit is issued
pursuant to this title.
PERSON: Includes individuals, firms, corporations, associations, trusts,
partnerships and any other similar entities.
PERSONAL SERVICES: Establishments which provide the following services: beauty
and hair care, electrolysis, nail care, tanning, physical therapy, therapeutic
massage, tattooing or other uses of similar character.
PERVIOUS SURFACE: Material that allows the natural infiltration of water into
the soil.
PLAIN CONCRETE BLOCK: A masonry building block of cast concrete that has no
additional surface texturing.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): A zoning designation which allows a mixing of
buildings and uses which cannot be otherwise addressed under this title, and/or
whereby internal site design standard deviations from this title may be allowed
to improve site design and operation.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of the City of Elko New Market 1 .
PLAT: The drawing or map of a subdivision prepared for filing of record
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes chapter 505 and containing all elements and
requirements set forth in the subdivision ordinance adopted pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes section 462.358 and chapter 505.
PRECAST PANEL, ARCHITECTURAL: Factory manufactured wall panels utilizing
premium level materials and finish including brick or stone veneers, form liner
patterns, color pigmented concrete and finish techniques such as sandblasting,
acid wash and hi-pressure washed finish surfaces. Panels can be cast with
multiple textures and or patterns into each panel. Use of quoins, bullnose,
lintel, sill or cap features may also be integrated into surface.
PRECAST PANEL, STANDARD CONCRETE: Standard factory manufactured wall panels
which utilize standard grey concrete and a uniform pattern of standard rake or
rib surface treatments.
PREFABRICATED HOME: A nonmobile housing unit, the walls, floors and ceilings of
which are constructed at a central factory and transported to a building site
where final construction is completed, permanently affixing the unit to the
site.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: The building in which is conducted the principal use of the
lot on which it is located. Lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple
principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly
accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings.
PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished
from subordinate or accessory uses. A "principal use" may be either permitted,
conditional, or interim.
PRIVATE CLUBS OR LODGES: Any establishment operated for social, recreational or
educational purposes but open only to members and guests and not to the general
public.
PROOF GALLON: One liquid gallon of distilled spirits that is fifty (50) percent
alcohol at sixty (60) degrees Fahrenheit.
PROPERTY LINE: The legal boundaries of a parcel of property which may also
coincide with a right-of-way line of a road, cartway, and the like.
PROPERTY OWNER: Any person, association or corporation having a freehold estate
interest, leasehold interest extending for a term or having renewal options, a
dominant easement interest, or an option to purchase any of same, but not
including owners of interest held for security purposes only.
PROTECTIVE COVENANT: A contract entered into between private parties which
constitutes a restriction of the use of a particular parcel of property.
PUBLIC HEARING: A public hearing pursuant to a notice published in the official
newspaper of the City, which notice shall specify the general purpose, time and
place of such hearing. Any such hearing, after such publication, may be
continued, recessed or adjourned, from time to time, without any further
publication or notice thereof.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PROJECT: A public project, such as installation or
maintenance of a road or utility, that provides a common benefit to the
community.
PUBLIC LAND: Land owned or operated by municipal, school district, County,
State or other governmental units.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm, corporation, or Municipal department, board
or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under Federal, State or
Municipal regulations to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal,
communication, transportation or water, including buildings used by said
persons, Municipal entities or corporations.
PUBLIC WATERS: Waters as defined in Minnesota Statutes section 103G.005,
subdivision 15.
PUBLIC WATERS WETLAND: Public waters wetlands as defined in Minnesota Statutes
section 103G.005, subdivision 15a.
RECLAMATION LAND: The improvement of land by deposition of material to elevate
the grade. Any parcel upon which four hundred (400) cubic yards or more of fill
are deposited shall be considered as reclaimed land.
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL: A business directed towards the general public that
offers recreational entertainment such as bowling alleys, billiard halls,
ballrooms, roller rinks, movie theaters, theaters, miniature golf, golf
courses, driving ranges, tennis courts, ball fields and the like that are
operated by a private enterprise with the intention of earning a profit by
providing entertainment for the public.
RECREATION EQUIPMENT: Play apparatus such as swing sets and slides, sandboxes,
poles for nets, unoccupied boats and trailers not exceeding twenty feet (20')
in length, picnic tables, lawn chairs, barbecue stands, and similar equipment
or structures but not including tree houses.
RECREATION, PHYSICAL: A business that provides physical exercise, training or
recreation equipment or space for use on site. Health and fitness centers and
clubs, dance studios, karate facilities and gymnastics facilities shall be
considered examples of such use. Training or self-improvement shall be an
important component of the activity, which is differentiated from commercial
recreation uses.
RECREATION, PUBLIC: Includes all uses such as tennis courts, ball fields,
trails, picnic areas, and the like that are commonly provided for the public at
parks, playgrounds, community centers, and other sites owned and operated by a
unit of government for the purpose of providing recreation.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle or trailer primarily used for sport/
leisure activities, travel, camping, hauling, and/or temporary lodging,
including, but not limited to: all-terrain vehicles (ATV), campers, dirt bikes,
dune buggies, go-karts, golf carts, ice or fish houses, motor homes, motorized
watercrafts, snowmobiles, trailers, and utility task vehicles (UTV).
RECYCLING CENTER: A facility that is not a salvage yard and in which
recoverable resources, such as newspapers, glassware, and metal cans, are
collected, stored, flattened, crushed, or bundled, within a completely enclosed
building.
REDEVELOPMENT: The rebuilding, repair or alteration of a structure, land
surface or facility which creates less than one-tenth (0.1) acre of new
impervious surface, and/or involves greater than one acre of land disturbance,
and/or for which over fifty percent (50%) of the parcel involved is disturbed
by a land disturbing activity. Note, for the purposes of this title, if an
activity creates more than one- tenth (0.1) acre of new or additional
impervious surface, the activity is considered new development, and exceptions
in this title for redevelopment do not apply to the increased (new) impervious
surface exceeding one-tenth (0.1) acre.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: A structure or place in which worship, ceremonies,
rituals, and education pertaining to a particular system of beliefs are held.
RELIGIOUS USE: A structure or place in which worship, ceremonies, rituals, and
education pertaining to a particular system of beliefs are held.
RESEARCH FACILITY: A facility where the primary activity is the discovering,
interpreting and the development of methods and systems for the advancement of
human knowledge on a wide variety of scientific matters, but not facilities for
the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose
of the facility. Uses include, but are not limited to, biotechnology,
pharmaceuticals, medical instrumentation or supplies, communication,
information technology, electronics, and instrumentation, and computer hardware
and software.
RESIDENTIAL PROGRAM: Any program, defined by Minnesota Statutes section
245A.02, subdivision 14, and licensed by the State of Minnesota, that provides
twenty four (24) hour a day care, supervision, food, lodging, rehabilitation,
training, education, habilitation, or treatment outside a person's own home,
including: a program in an intermediate care facility for four (4) or more
persons with developmental disabilities; and chemical dependency or chemical
abuse programs that are located in a hospital or nursing home and receive
public funds for providing chemical abuse or chemical dependency treatment
services under Minnesota Statutes chapter 254B. Residential programs include
home and community based services for persons with disabilities or persons age
sixty five (65) and older that are provided in or outside of a person's own
home.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD: An establishment that offers quick food service of items
already prepared, prepackaged or quickly served. Orders are not generally taken
at the customer's table but at an order/pick up counter or at a drive-through
window. Food may be consumed on site or carried out.
RESTAURANT, SIT DOWN: A business establishment whose principal business is the
selling of unpackaged food to the customer in a ready to consume state, in
individual servings, or in nondisposable containers, and where the customers
consume these foods while seated at tables or counters located within the
building.
RESTORATION: To renew land to self-sustaining, long term use which is
compatible with contiguous land uses, present and future, in accordance with
the standards set forth in this title.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT: Establishments displaying and selling products produced
off site intended for sale directly to the consumer within a building or
portion of a building.
RETAINING WALL: A structure constructed of wood, masonry block, or natural
stone that is four feet (4') in height or taller and used to support or prevent
the advancement of earth.
RETENTION: The prevention of direct discharge of stormwater runoff into
receiving water or conveyance networks. Examples include systems which
discharge through percolation, exfiltration, infiltration and evaporation
processes which generally have residence times less than three (3) days.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: Land dedicated and publicly owned for use as a street, alley or
crosswalk.
RUNOFF: Rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the ground
surface.
SWCD: The Scott County Soil and Water Conservation District.
SCHOOL: Any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed, or used
for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge.
SCREENING: A device or materials used to conceal one element of a development
or use from other elements or from adjacent or contiguous development.
Screening may include one or a combination of walls, berms, and plantings.
SECONDARY USE: A use of land or of a building or a portion thereof which is
subordinate to and does not constitute the primary use of the land or building.
SEDIMENT: The solid mineral or organic material that is in suspension, is being
transported, or has been moved from its original location by erosion and has
been deposited at another location.
SEDIMENTATION: The process or action of depositing sediment.
SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment that provides labor, maintenance,
repair services conducted within a building and activities incidental to
business production or distribution where the customer patronizes the location
of the operation, such as shoe repair shop, seamstress or tailor shop,
laundromats, animal grooming, computer repair, appliance repair or other uses
of similar character.
SETBACK: The minimum distance between the building line and related front, side
and rear property lines.
SETBACK LINES: Lines that delineate the required distances for the location of
a structure in relation to the perimeter of the property.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: A sexually oriented arcade; sexually oriented
bookstore; sexually oriented video store; sexually oriented cabaret; sexually
oriented conversation/rap parlor; sexually oriented massage parlor; sexually
oriented motel; sexually oriented motion picture theater; sexually oriented
sauna; sexually oriented theater; escort agency; nude model studio; sexual
encounter center; and other premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses,
or places open to some or all members of the public, at or in which there is an
emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction, or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas which are capable of being seen
by members of the public.
   Specified Anatomical Area: Includes either of the following:
      A.   The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered; or
      B.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
   Specified Sexual Activities: Includes any of the following:
      A.   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
      B.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
      C.   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
      D.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsections A, B and C of this definition.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS, ACCESSORY: The offering of retail goods for sale
which are classified as sexually oriented uses on a limited scale and which are
incidental to the primary activity and goods and/or services offered by the
establishment. Examples of such items include the sale of sexually oriented
books or magazines, or the sale of and/or rental of sexually oriented motion
pictures.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS, PRINCIPAL: The offering of goods and/or services
which are classified as sexually oriented uses as a primary or sole activity of
a business or establishment and include, but are not limited to, the following:
   Escort: A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
   Escort Agency: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
   Establishment: Means and includes any of the following:
      A.   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
      B.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
      C.   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
      D.   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
   Nude Model Studio: Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity
or displays specified anatomical area is provided to be observed, sketched,
drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other
persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
   Nudity Or State Of Nudity:
      A.   The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female
genitals, or female breasts; or
      B.   The state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock,
anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast.
   Seminude: A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of
the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   Sexual Encounter Center: A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of
its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
      A.   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
      B.   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminudity.
   Sexually Oriented Arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin operated or slug operated or electronically, electrically,
or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or
other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   Sexually Oriented Bookstore Or Sexually Oriented Video Store: A commercial
establishment which, as a principal business purpose, offers for sale or rental
for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, compact disks, computer
software, digital recordings, slides, or other visual representations which
depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas,
instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection
with specified sexual activities.
   Sexually Oriented Cabaret: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features:
      A.   Persons who appear seminude or in a state of nudity; or
      B.   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
      C.   Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, compact disks,
computer software, digital recordings or other photographic reproductions which
are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
   Sexually Oriented Conversation/Rap Parlor: A conversation/rap parlor which
excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging in
or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion between an employee of the
establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   Sexually Oriented Massage Parlor: A massage parlor which excludes minors by
reason of age, or which provides, for any form of consideration, the rubbing,
stroking, kneading, tapping, or rolling of the body, if the service provided by
the massage parlor is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   Sexually Oriented Motel: A hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment
which:
      A.   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right of way
which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic
reproductions; or
      B.   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less
than ten (10) hours or an hourly basis; or
      C.   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room
for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours or an hourly basis.
   Sexually Oriented Motion Picture Theater: A commercial establishment where,
for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides,
or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
   Sexually Oriented Sauna: A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or
which provides, for any form of consideration, a steam bath or heated bathing
room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxing, or reducing, utilizing steam or
hot air as a cleaning, relaxing, or reducing agent, if the service provided by
the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
   Sexually Oriented Theater: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear seminude
or in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
SIGN RELATED DEFINITIONS:
   Address Sign: A sign consisting of identification numbers only, either in
written or numerical form.
   Advertising Sign: Any permanent nongovernmental sign advertising products,
services, commodities, entertainment or other activity not offered at the
location of the sign or not exclusively related to the premises on which the
sign is located.
   Animation Sign: A sign that incorporates the rapid display of images used to
create an illusion of movement, a special effect, or scene.
   Area Identification Sign: A freestanding sign identifying the name of an
office or business structure containing two (2) or more independent operations;
a single business consisting of three (3) or more separate structures; or any
integrated combination of the above. The sign shall only identify an area,
complex or development and shall not, unless approved by the city council,
contain the name of individual owners or tenants. The sign may not contain
advertising.
   Awning/Canopy: A nonrigid hood or cover projecting from a building, which
may be folded, collapsed, or retracted against the building.
   Balloon Sign/Inflatable: A temporary sign that is printed, painted or
attached to a balloon and fastened or confined so as to keep it within certain
bounds.
   Banner Sign: Any temporary sign of lightweight fabric or similar material
intended to be hung, either with or without frames, possessing characters,
letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic, or fabric
of any kind. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of
any institution or business shall not be considered banners.
   Beacon: Any light with one or more beams, capable of being revolved
automatically or being directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more
points not on the same lot as the light source.
   Bench Sign: A sign attached to or painted on a bench for seating.
   Building Marker: A sign carrying the name of a building, its date of
erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets and the like when carved
into stone, concrete, or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum, or other
permanent type of construction and made an integral part of the structure.
   Business Sign: A sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on
which it is located or to products, accommodations, services or activities
thereon.
   Changeable Copy Sign: A sign or portion thereof that has a readerboard for
the display of text information in which each alphanumeric character, graphic
or symbol is defined by objects not consisting of an illumination device and
may be changed or rearranged manually or mechanically with characters,
illustrations, letters or numbers that can be changed or rearranged without
altering the face or surface of the sign structure.
   Changeable Copy Sign, Electronic: A sign or portion thereof that displays
electronic, nonpictorial text information in which each alphanumeric character,
graphic, or symbol is defined by a small number of matrix elements using
different combinations of light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light
bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area. Electronic
changeable copy signs include computer programmable, microprocessor controlled
electronic displays and projected images or messages with these characteristics
onto buildings or objects. Electronic changeable copy signs do not include
public signs.
   Construction Sign: A sign giving the project name, names of principal
contractors, architects, and lending institutions responsible for construction
on the site where the sign is placed, together with other information included
thereon.
   Directional Sign, On Premises: A sign erected on private property for the
purpose of directing vehicular and pedestrian traffic to public facilities or
functions which may have a commercial message or logo.
   Directory Sign: A sign on which the names and/or locations of occupants or
the use of a building is given. This shall include office buildings and church
directories.
   Election Sign: A temporary, noncommercial sign promoting the candidacy of a
person running for a governmental office, or promoting an issue to be voted on
at a governmental election.
   Electronic Graphic Display Sign (Dynamic Sign): A sign or portion thereof
that displays movement or that appears to change, caused by any method other
than physically removing and replacing the sign or its components, whether the
apparent movement or change is in the display, the sign structure itself, or
any other component of the sign. This includes a display that incorporates a
technology or method allowing the sign face to change the image without having
to physically or mechanically replace the sign face or its components. This
also includes any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing, blinking, or animated
display or structure element and any display that incorporates rotating panels,
LED lights manipulated through digital input, "digital ink" or any other method
of technology that allows the sign face to present a series of images or
displays.
   Erect: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix and also
includes the painting of wall signs.
   Flashing Sign: A sign which incorporates a sudden and momentary emission of
artificial light or color effect. Prohibited flashing signs shall include signs
which are displayed as continuous solid messages for less time than required by
chapter 12 of this title.
   Frame Effects: Visual transitions from one display or scene to another
rather than a direct frame switch. Frame effects include fading or dissolving
the frame, wiping one frame over another and flipping the frame.
   Ground Monument Sign: A block type sign structure not supported by poles or
braces, but rather placed directly on the ground that does not exceed seven
feet (7') in height. A ground monument sign shall be considered as one sign
though it may have two (2) faces.
   Home Occupation Sign: Advertisement of a business located within a
residential dwelling unit. The sign appearance is aesthetically appealing and
has restricted square footage and height requirements so as to blend in with
the character of the residential development.
   Illuminated Sign: Any sign which has characters, letters, design or outlines
illuminated by artificial light direct to or from the interior of the sign.
   Incidental Sign: A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose
secondary to the business use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no
parking", "entrance", "loading only", "telephone", and other similar
directives. No sign with a commercial message shall be considered incidental.
   Institutional Sign: A sign which identifies the name and other
characteristics of a public or semipublic institution on the site where the
sign is located.
   Legal Nonconforming Sign: Any advertising structure or sign which was
lawfully erected and maintained prior to such time as it came within the
purview of this title, and any amendments hereto, and which fails to conform to
all applicable regulations and restrictions of this title.
   Marquee Sign: Any sign attached to or made a part of a marquee. A "marquee"
is defined as a permanent rooflike structure projecting beyond a building wall
at an entrance to a building or extending along and projecting beyond the
building wall and generally designed and constructed to provide protection
against the weather.
   Menu Board: A sign that indicates selections available at businesses that
serve customers via automobiles, such as a fast food establishment.
   Message Sign (Electronic): A message sign which shows messages and graphics
that are changed by electrical pulsations.
   Multivision Sign: Any sign composed in whole or part of a series of vertical
or horizontal slats or cylinders that are capable of being rotated at intervals
so that partial rotation of the group of slats or cylinders produces a
different image and, when properly functioning, allows, on a single sign
structure, the display at any given time one of two (2) or more images.
   Nameplate Sign: An on premises sign which provides the name or address, or
both, of the owner or occupant of a building or premises.
   Noncommercial Sign: Any sign which does not relate to a product, good or
service that is sold or rendered by a commercial enterprise, or which is not in
the nature of commercial advertising for such an enterprise.
   Off Premises Announcement Sign: Announcements of public concerts, plays,
lectures, and club activities and the like placed in the windows of consenting
businesses.
   Off Premises Commercial Advertising Sign: A billboard, poster panel board,
painted bulletin board, or other communicative device which is used to
advertise products, goods and/or services, any part of which is not sold,
produced, assembled, manufactured or furnished or otherwise related to
activities on the premises on which such is located. Off premises commercial
advertising signs shall not be permitted in any zoning district. For the
purpose of this title, an off premises subdivision identification sign shall
not be considered an off premises commercial advertising sign.
   Painted Wall Sign: A sign which has been painted directly onto a building
wall, using the wall material as a base of the sign.
   Pennant/Streamer: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material,
whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire,
or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
   Portable Sign: Any temporary sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but
not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels and signs
converted to A- or T-frames.
   Projecting Sign: Any sign, other than a wall sign, affixed to any building
or wall whose leading edge extends beyond the building or wall.
   Public Sign: Any sign placed, erected or maintained by a governmental entity
or agency for identification of or directions to a public facility or street or
for traffic control or the general public.
   Pylon Sign/Freestanding: Any sign supported by structures or supports that
are placed on or anchored in the ground and that are independent from any
building or other structure, which exceeds seven feet (7') in height. A
freestanding/pylon sign shall be considered as one though it may have two (2)
faces.
   Real Estate Sign: A temporary sign erected by a realtor or private
individual for purposes of advertising for sale or lease of a particular
building and/or parcel of property.
   Roof Sign: Any sign permanently affixed to the roof of a building.
   Roofline: The lowest plane at which the eternal upper covering begins.
   Rotating Sign: A sign which revolves or rotates on its axis by mechanical
means.
   School Sign: A sign advertising a school name, type of education or
instruction.
   Shimmering Sign: A sign which reflects an oscillating sometimes distorted
visual image.
   Sign: Any written announcement, declaration, demonstration, display,
illustration, insignia or illumination used to advertise or promote the
interest of any person or persons when the same is displayed or placed out of
doors in the view of the general public, or a pylon exterior wall or building
surface, or inside of a building within three feet (3') of a transparent
window. A sign shall be considered as a structure or a part of a structure for
the purpose of applying yard and height regulations except as herein
stipulated.
   Snipe Sign: Sign(s) of any material whatsoever that is painted on or
attached in any way to a utility pole, tree, rock or any object located or
situated on public or private property.
   Street Banner: A banner sign which is stretched across and hung over a
public right-of-way which advertises a public entertainment or event.
   Street Frontage: The proximity of a parcel of land to one (1) or more
streets, public or private. An interior lot has one (1) street frontage, and
corner lots and through lots have two (2) frontages.
   Temporary Sign: A sign erected or displayed for a specified period of time
and is not permanently mounted.
   Traffic Interference Signs: Signs erected that, by reason of position, shape
or color, would interfere in any way with the proper functioning or purpose of
a traffic sign or signal.
   Vehicle Sign: A sign on a vehicle not customarily and regularly used to
transport persons or properties.
   Video Display (Sign): A visual representation that changes its message or
background in a manner or method of display characterized by motion or
pictorial imagery, which may or may not include text, and depicts action or a
special effect to imitate movement, the presentation of pictorials or graphics
displayed in a progression of frames that gives the illusion of motion,
including, but not limited to, the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns
or bands of light, or expanding or contracting shapes, not including electronic
changeable copy signs. Video displays include projected images or messages with
these characteristics onto buildings or other objects.
   Wall Sign: Any sign attached parallel to a wall which projects less than
fifteen inches (15") from the surface at all points of the building or
structure, and which displays only one (1) sign surface.
   Window Sign: Any sign, picture, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to
communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or
service that is placed inside a window or within thirty six inches (36") of a
window, or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of
the building.
   Yard/Garage Sale Sign: A sign used to communicate information about a yard/
garage sale activity.
SLIGHTLY SUSCEPTIBLE WETLAND TYPE: A wetland characterized as a floodplain
forest; fresh wet meadow dominated by reed canary grass; or a shallow or deep
marsh dominated by reed canary grass, cattail, giant reed, or purple
loosestrife.
SPEEDWAY RELATED DEFINITIONS:
   Limited Holidays: Only Labor Day, Memorial Day and Independence Day.
   Motocross Speedway: Any speedway used for cross country motorcycle racing.
   Nonracing Event: Any private or public gathering of individuals held at a
speedway that does not meet the definition of a "racing event" and that
includes or is similar to the following activities:
      Art fairs
      Auctions
      Car/motorcycle shows
      Carnivals
      Circuses
      Community fairs and events
      Community walk/runs
      Corporate events
      Driving schools
      Festivals
      Food and wine tasting
      Fundraisers
      Funerals/weddings/graduations
      "Haunted hayrides/houses"
      Holiday family events
      Marching band competitions
      Police/firefighter training
      Swap meets/flea markets/farmers' markets
   Practice/Time Trial: A single day event involving motor vehicles prepping
for a future race at the speedway that is not a contest or show.
   Quarter Midget Speedway: Any speedway used for racing miniature racecars
which attain speeds no greater than fifty (50) miles per hour, with power
supplied by an engine no greater than 250cc.
   Racing Event: Any single day event, show, race, or other attraction to be
held at a speedway involving a contest of motor vehicles.
   Speedway: Any place or open space designed or used as a speedway, racetrack,
motocross track or other sport which involves vehicles propelled by internal
combustion powered engines.
   Speedway Concourse: The areas outside of the speedway tracks that have been
authorized for non-race events under title or approved PUD.
   3/8 Oval Track: Any 3/8 mile oval speedway track used for racing events,
music events and/or non-racing events as defined under this chapter.
STABILIZED: Exposed ground surface that has been covered by appropriate
materials such as mulch, staked sod, riprap, wood fiber blanket, or other
material that prevents erosion from occurring. Grass seeding is not
stabilization.
STANDARD: A preferred or desired level of quantity, quality, or value.
STORMWATER DETENTION POND: A natural or created ponding area that provides
temporary storage of excess stormwater for the purpose of attenuating the peak
rate of runoff by controlling the rate of pond discharge. Ponding areas that
drain completely between storm events are "dry detention ponds". Ponding areas
that provide temporary storage in combination with a permanent wet pool are
"wet detention ponds".
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN: A plan for the permanent management and control of
stormwater and site construction runoff prepared and implemented in accordance
with the standards set forth in the stormwater management regulations.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): A plan of BMPs designed to
minimize erosion and to retain and control sediment on site during the period
of land disturbing activities in accordance with the standards set forth by
MPCA and in the erosion and sediment control regulations.
STORMWATER QUALITY POND: A created ponding area that provides a permanent pool
for the purpose of sediment and pollutant removal.
STORMWATER RETENTION POND: A natural or created ponding area which provides
permanent storage of excess stormwater for the purpose of attenuating the peak
volume of runoff from which the only release of flow is by infiltration or
evaporation.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor next above. A basement shall be counted as a story.
STREET: A public right of way which affords a primary means of access to
abutting property, and shall also include avenue, highway, road, or way.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change, other than incidental repairs, which could
prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as bearing
walls, columns, beams, girders or foundations.
STRUCTURE: Anything which is built, constructed or erected; an edifice or
building of any kind; or any piece of work artificially built up and/or
composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, whether temporary or
permanent in character.
STRUCTURE, PUBLIC: An edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work
artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite
manner which is owned or rented and operated by a federal, state, or local
government agency.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined in the
Elko New Market subdivision ordinance. The subdivider may be the owner or the
authorized agent of the owner of the land to be subdivided.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land as defined by the
Elko New Market subdivision ordinance.
SURFACE WATER: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, wetlands, reservoirs,
springs, rivers, drainage systems, waterways, watercourses, and irrigation
systems, whether natural or artificial, public or private.
SWIMMING POOL RELATED DEFINITIONS:
   Storable/Portable Swimming Or Wading Pool: A pool with nonmetallic, molded
polymeric walls or inflatable fabric walls, constructed on or above the ground
and is so constructed that it may be readily disassembled for storage and
reassembled to its original integrity.
   Swimming Pool: Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing
that contains water over twenty four inches (24") (610 mm) deep. This includes
inground, aboveground and onground swimming pools, and fixed in place wading
pools.
   Swimming Pool Barrier: A fence, wall, building wall or combination thereof
which completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs access to the
swimming pool.
   Swimming Pool, Hot Tub Or Spa: Any outdoor structures which are intended for
swimming or recreational bathing and contain or are capable of containing water
over twenty four inches (24") deep, except storable/portable swimming or wading
pools. The structure may be constructed, installed or located inground, above
ground or onground and may include permanent swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.
Any regulation applicable or with reference to the term "swimming pool" within
this title shall also include and be applicable to an outdoor hot tub or spa.
TAPROOM: A room that is ancillary to the production of malt liquor at a brewery
where the public can purchase and/or consume only the malt liquor produced on
site.
TEMPORARY SEASONAL OUTDOOR SALES: Onetime sidewalk sales, Christmas tree sales,
seasonal supply sales, special event sales, and similar activities conducted by
the operator(s) of a legitimate established business within the appropriate
zoning district in the city of Elko New Market.
TEMPORARY USE: A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent to
discontinue the use upon the expiration of the specified time period.
TOPSOIL: That portion of the overburden which lies closest to the earth's
surface and supports the growth of vegetation.
TOWER/ANTENNA RELATED DEFINITIONS:
   Antenna: Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or
transmitting electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to, directional
antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, satellite dishes, and
omnidirectional antennas, such as whip antennas.
   Collocation: The location of more than one antenna or set of antennas of
more than one government or commercial wireless communication service provided
on the same tower structure.
   Fall Zone: The area on the ground within a prescribed radius from the base
of a personal wireless facility. The fall zone is the area within which there
is a potential hazard from falling debris. Examples of this could be ice or
collapsing material.
   Personal Wireless Service: A device consisting of a metal, carbon, fiber, or
other electromagnetically conducive rods or elements on a single supporting
pole or other structure, and used for the transmission and reception of
wireless communications including cellular, personal communication services
(PCS), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar
services.
   Public Or Commercial Radio And Television, Broadcast Transmitting: A wire,
set of wires, metal or carbon fiber rod or other electromagnetic element used
to transmit public or commercial broadcast radio, or television programming and
including the support structure thereof.
   Public Utility Microwave: A parabolic dish or cornucopia shaped
electromagnetically reflective or conductive element used for the transmission
and/or reception of point to point UHF or VHF radio waves in wireless telephone
communications, and including the support structure thereof.
   Radio And Television Receiving: A wire, set of wires, metal or carbon fiber
element(s) other than satellite dish antennas, used to receive radio,
television, or electromagnetic waves, and including the support structure
thereof.
   Satellite Dish: A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid,
open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn,
or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit and/or receive radio or
electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This
definition shall include, but not be limited to, what are commonly referred to
as satellite earth stations, TVROs (television receive only) and satellite
microwave antennas and support structure thereof.
   Satellite Dish Height: The height of the antenna or dish measured vertically
from the highest point of the antenna or dish when positioned for operation, to
the top of the foundation which supports the antenna.
   Secondary Use: A use of land or of a building or a portion thereof which is
subordinate to and does not constitute the primary use of the land or building.
   Short Wave Radio Transmitting And Receiving: A wire, set of wires or a
device, consisting of a metal, carbon fiber, or other electromagnetically
conductive element used for the transmission and reception of radio waves used
for short wave and citizen band radio communications, and including the
supporting structure thereof.
   Structure, Public: An edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work
artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite
manner which is owned or rented, and operated by a Federal, State, or local
government agency.
   Tower: Any ground mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof,
including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended
primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna or similar apparatus above
grade.
   Tower, Single User: A tower to which is attached only the antennas of a
single user, although the tower may be designed to accommodate the antennas of
multiple users as required in this title.
   Tower, Temporary Mobile: Any mobile tower, pole, or structure located on a
trailer, vehicle, or temporary platform intended primarily for the purpose of
mounting an antenna or similar apparatus for personal wireless services, which
is commonly referred to as "cellular on wheels (COW)".
TRUCK STOP: Any building, premises or land in which or upon which a business,
service or industry involving the maintenance, cleaning, servicing, storage or
repair of commercial vehicles is conducted including the dispensing of motor
fuel and the sale of accessories or equipment for trucks and similar commercial
vehicles. A truck stop may also include overnight accommodations, restaurant
facilities, a car wash and truck wash or other ancillary uses.
TRUCK TERMINAL: A building or area in which freight brought by truck is
assembled and/or temporarily stored for rerouting or reshipment. The terminal
facility may also include storage and/or parking areas for truck-tractor and/or
trailer units.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
designated, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied, utilized or
maintained.
VARIANCE: A modification or variation of the provisions of this title as
applied to a specific property and granted pursuant to the standards and
procedures of this title, except that a variance shall not be used for
modification of the allowable uses within a district and shall not allow uses
that are prohibited.
VEGETATION: The sum total of plant life in some area or a plant community with
distinguishable characteristics.
VETERINARY CLINIC: A clinic operated by a licensed veterinarian exclusively for
the diagnosis, treatment, correction, relief or prevention of animal disease,
deformity, defect, injury or other physical or mental conditions; the
performance of obstetrical procedures for animals, including determination of
pregnancy and correction of sterility or infertility; and the rendering of
advice or recommendations with regard to any of the above.
WAREHOUSE AND DISTRIBUTION: A use engaged in storage, wholesale, and
distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment, but excluding
bulk storage of materials that are flammable or explosive or that create
hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
WATER BASIN: An enclosed natural depression with definable banks capable of
containing water that may be partly filled with public waters.
WATER BODY: All "surface waters", "water basins", "watercourses", and
"wetlands" as defined in this section.
WATERCOURSE: Any natural or improved stream, river, creek, ditch, channel,
culvert, drain, gully, swale, or wash in which waters flow continuously or
intermittently in a definite direction.
WATERS OF THE STATE: As defined in Minnesota Statutes section 103G.005,
subdivision 17.
WATERSHED: A region draining to a specific watercourse or water basin.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION PLAN (WHP): A document that provides for the protection of
a public water supply, submitted to the Minnesota Department of Health,
implemented by the public water supplier, and complies with: a) the wellhead
protection elements specified in the 1986 amendments to the Federal Safe
Drinking Water Act, United States Code, title 42, chapter 6A, subchapter XII,
part C, section 300h-7 (1986 and as subsequently amended); and b) Minnesota
Rules parts 4720.5200 to 4720.5290.
WETLAND CONSERVATION ACT (WCA): The Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act of 1991,
as may be amended 2 .
WETLANDS: Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the
water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow
water. For purposes of this definition, wetlands shall have the following
attributes:
   A.   A predominance of hydric soils;
   B.   Are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and
   C.   Under normal circumstances, support a prevalence of such vegetation.
WHOLESALE BUSINESS: The selling of goods to merchants, usually in large
quantities for resale to consumers selling or related to selling goods in large
quantities for resale to the customer.
WHOLESALE SHOWROOM: The selling of goods to merchants, usually in large
quantities for resale to consumers selling or related to selling goods in large
quantities for resale to the customer.
YARD: A required open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed by a
structure from its lowest level to the sky except as permitted in this title.
The yard extends along the lot line at right angles to such lot line to a depth
or width specified in the setback regulations for the zoning district in which
such lot is located.
YARD, FRONT: A space extending the full width of the lot between the principal
building and the front lot line and measured perpendicular to the building at
the closest point to the front lot line.
YARD/GARAGE SALE: An infrequent, temporary display and sale, by an occupant, on
his or her premises of personal items, including general household rummage,
used clothing and appliances, provided the exchange or sale of merchandise is
conducted within the residence or accessory structure.
YARD, REAR: A space extending the full width of the lot between the principal
building and the rear lot line and measured perpendicular to the building at
the closest point to the rear lot line. For corner lots, the rear yard shall be
a space extending from the secondary front yard to the interior side lot line
between the principal building and the rear lot line and measured perpendicular
to the building at the closest point to the rear lot line.
YARD, SECONDARY FRONT: A space adjacent to a street which extends along a side
lot line between the front yard and rear lot line to a depth required by the
front or street setback regulations for the zoning district in which such a lot
is located.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c319d9474cf3d6d21aee248db1bb8796c21e98fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1909.png]
YARD, SIDE: A space extend ing from the front yard to the rear yard between the
principal building and the side lot line and measured perpendicular to the
building from the closest point of the building to the side lot line. For
corner lots, the side yard adjacent to the street shall be a space extending
form the front yard to the rear yard between the secondary front yard to the
principal building and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest
point to the rear lot line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c319d9474cf3d6d21aee248db1bb8796c21e98fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1911.png]
ZERO LOT LINE: A type of development that allows one of the sides or front of
the principal structure to be located immediately adjacent to the front or side
lot line.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The duly appointed person charged with enforcement of
this title.
ZONING AMENDMENT: A change authorized by the Governing Body either in the
allowed use within a district or in the boundaries of a district.
ZONING DISTRICT: An area or areas within the limits of the City of Elko New
Market for which the regulations and requirements governing use are uniform.
(Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 9, 6-28-2007; Ord. 30, 10-23-2008; Ord. 53, 5-
13-2010; Ord. 55, 7-22-2010; 2011 Code; Ord. 75, 8-25-2011; Ord. 76, 8-25-2011;
Ord. 81, 12-1-2011; Ord. 85, 12-1-2011; Ord. 97, 6-28-2012; Ord. 111, 7-24-
2014; Ord. 130, 4-28-2016, eff. 6-1-2016; Ord. 134, 5-26-2016; Ord. 143, 10-27-
2016; Ord. 150, 3-23-2017; Ord. 166, 2-22-2018; Ord. 172, 7-26-2018; Ord. 179,
10-25-2018; Ord. 181, 12-20-2018; Ord. 208, 2-13-2020; Ord. 222, 1-14-2021;
Ord. 225, 1-28-2021; Ord. 231, 6-10-2021; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 1 of this Code.
2 1. MSA § 103G.221 et seq.
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
11-3-1: General Requirements
11-3-2: Conditional Use Permits
11-3-3: Interim Use Permits
11-3-4: Administrative Permits
11-3-5: Grading Permits And Wetland Permits
11-3-6: Site And Building Plan Review; Building Permit Requirements
11-3-7: Variances
11-3-8: Amendments
11-3-9: Nonconforming Buildings, Structures And Uses
11-3-10: Administration And Enforcement
11-3-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Development Application Procedures: Certain applications of this title
require study and action by the city council, the planning commission, city
staff, the applicant, and various experts, in varying combinations, dependent
upon the nature of the nonstandard use or proposed use or change. These include
proposed conditional use permits, variances, site plan reviews, zoning
ordinance text or map amendments, and appeals on zoning questions.
   B.   Decision Process: The city council, acting as the board of adjustments
and appeals under Minnesota statutes section 462.357, subdivision 6; section
462.359, subdivision 4; and section 15.99 shall make the decisions within the
legislative and executive framework of the city on applicable development
applications.
   C.   Application Procedure: An application for a zoning ordinance text or
map amendment, conditional use permit, interim use permit, variance, and/or
site plan review shall be processed in accordance with the following procedure:
      1.   Time Line: Pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 15.99, an
application for an amendment shall be approved or denied within sixty (60) days
from the date of its official and complete submission unless extended by the
city pursuant to statute or a time waiver is granted by the applicant. (Ord. 5,
12-14-2006)
      2.   Application: Applications shall be filed with the zoning
administrator on an official application form of the city, accompanied by a fee
as established by city council ordinance. The application shall also be
accompanied by detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the
proposed change, development, or use. The number of copies to be provided and
any additional data shall be determined by the zoning administrator.
Applications shall be complete before they are accepted. A complete application
shall include the following information: (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. 2011 Code)
         a.   A city application form(s) relating to the request signed by all
persons with an interest in the subject property affected by the request. A
copy of an owner's duplicate certificate of title or other approved
documentation of interest shall also be submitted with the signed application
form(s).
         b.   All supporting information required by this title and/or outlined
in subsection
11-3-6F of this chapter and application documents included with the city
application forms.
         c.   Payment of all fees associated with the applicable application
(s). Applicants shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city and/or
employed consultants. Expenses shall be charged against the required escrow
accounts in accordance with subsection G3 of this section.
         d.   A preapplication meeting shall be required by city staff at which
the appropriate application procedures, requirements and applicable provisions
relating to the request will be reviewed and explained.
         e.   An application will be deemed complete unless the applicant
receives written notice within fifteen (15) business days, exclusive of
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, of its submission indicating it is not
complete and indicating what information is missing. This notice shall be
considered given by its deposit in the U.S. mail, first class postage prepaid,
addressed to any listed applicant at the address given on the application form.
In the event the applicant fails to provide an address on the application form,
this notice requirement for incomplete applications shall be deemed waived by
the applicant.
      3.   Additional Data: The city council, planning commission, and city
staff may request additional information from the applicant concerning the
application or may retain expert opinions at the expense of the city, or may
require, as a condition of proceeding with its consideration of any matter,
that the applicant furnish expert opinion and data at the expense of the
applicant.
      4.   Technical Reports: The zoning administrator shall instruct the
appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports where applicable, and
provide general assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action to the
planning commission and city council. The technical reports are to be entered
in and made part of the record of the planning commission and forwarded to the
city council. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
      5.   Notice Of Hearing: For applications involving zoning amendments,
conditional use permits, and variances, the zoning administrator shall set a
date for a public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall consist of time, place
and purpose, a legal property description, a general description of the
property location, and a description of the request to be published in the
official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Written notices
shall be mailed not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days
prior to the hearing to all owners of property, according to the records
available to the city, within three hundred fifty feet (350') of each parcel
included in the request. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. 2011 Code)
      6.   Notice Not Received: Failure of the city to send or a property owner
to receive notice shall not invalidate any proceedings under this title;
provided, that a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with the
requirements of subsection C5 of this section.
      7.   Hearing: After receipt of the report of the zoning administrator,
the planning commission shall conduct the public hearing and consider the
application.
      8.   Presentation Of Application: The applicant or a representative of
the applicant shall appear before the planning commission in order to present
the case for the application and to answer questions concerning the request.
Failure of the proponent to appear at either the planning commission or city
council for consideration of the matter may constitute grounds for rejection of
the application. The planning commission and the city council may each require
sworn testimony and a verified transcription of the proceedings at the expense
of the city. The applicant shall have the same privilege of presenting sworn
testimony and may provide for a transcript of the proceedings at the expense of
the applicant.
      9.   Recommendations Of Planning Commission: The planning commission
shall recommend such actions or conditions relating to the application as
deemed necessary or desirable to carry out the intent and purpose of this title
and the comprehensive plan. Such recommendation shall be either in the minutes
or by written resolution and forwarded to the city council.
      10.   Record Before City Council: The zoning administrator shall place
the report and recommendation of the planning commission and the city staff on
the agenda for the next regular city council meeting after planning commission
action, or the expiration of sixty (60) days after the first consideration by
the commission, whichever is earlier, subject to the limitations of Minnesota
statutes section 15.99. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in
and made part of the permanent written record of the city council meeting.
      11.   City Council Review: Subject to the limitations of Minnesota
statutes section 15.99, the city council shall act upon an application after it
has received the report and recommendation from the planning commission. If,
upon receiving the reports and recommendations of the planning commission and
zoning administrator, the city council desires further consideration, or finds
that inconsistencies exist in the review process, data submitted or recommended
action, the city council may, before taking final action, refer the matter back
to the planning commission with a statement detailing the reasons for referral.
      12.   City Council Action:
         a.   Approval of a proposed amendment shall require a majority vote of
all members of the city council. Amendments which change all or part of the
existing classification of a zoning district from residential to either
commercial or industrial shall require a two-thirds (2/3) (4 out of 5 members
of the city council) majority vote of all members of the city council.
         b.   Approval of an amendment shall be effective upon its date of
publication.
         c.   Approval of a request for conditional use permit, interim use
permit, or variance shall require passage by a three- fifths (3/5) vote of all
members of the city council.
         d.   Approval of a request for site and building plan review shall
require passage by a majority vote of the city council.
         e.   Denial of applications for amendment shall be accompanied by
written findings of fact of the city council, including supporting data setting
forth the reasons for the denial in terms of the ways in which the proposed use
fails to meet the standards and intent of the comprehensive plan and/or this
title and is otherwise injurious to the public health, safety and welfare.
      13.   Notice To Applicant: The zoning administrator shall notify the
applicant of the decision of the city council in writing, including any
relevant resolution and findings which may have been passed by the city
council.
      14.   Filing Of Notice Of Action: A certified copy of any zoning
ordinance amendment, conditional use permit, interim use permit, or variance
authorized shall be filed with the county recorder.
      15.   Reconsideration: Whenever an application has been considered and
denied by the city council, a similar application affecting substantially the
same property shall not be considered again by the planning commission or city
council before the expiration of six (6) months from the date of its denial and
any succeeding denials. However, a decision to reconsider such matter may be
made by a majority vote of all members of the city council at any time.
   D.   Expiration Of Zoning Approvals:
      1.   Unless otherwise specified by the city council at the time it is
authorized, a conditional use permit, interim use permit, variance, or site and
building plan approval shall be null and void and expire if the applicant fails
to implement such approval and fulfill each and every condition attached
thereto within one year from the date of its authorization unless a petition
for an extension of time in which to implement the approved plans has been
granted by the zoning administrator; provided, that:
         a.   The extension is requested in writing and filed with the city at
least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the initial conditional use
permit request.
         b.   The request for extension states facts demonstrating that a good
faith attempt has been made to complete or utilize the use or activity
permitted in the approval.
         c.   A maximum of one administrative extension shall be granted.
         d.   The extension shall not exceed ninety (90) days from the initial
expiration date.
         e.   There shall be no charge for the filing of a petition for an
administrative extension.
      2.   Upon receiving a recommendation from the planning commission and
city staff, the city council may grant an extension of greater than ninety (90)
days; provided, that:
         a.   The conditions described in subsections D1a, D1b and D1c of this
section are satisfied.
         b.   The extension shall not exceed one year from the initial
expiration date. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
         c.   The filing of a petition for extension is subject to fee
requirements established by city council ordinance. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd.
2011 Code)
   E.   Performance Agreement: Upon approval of a conditional use permit,
interim use permit, variance, site plan, administrative permit, grading permit,
and wetland permit, the city may require the applicant to enter into a
performance agreement prior to the issuing of building permits or initiation of
work on the proposed improvement or development. Said agreement shall guarantee
conformance and compliance with the conditions of the approval and the codes of
the city. The performance agreement shall be prepared and approved by the city
attorney and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following items and
conditions: (Ord. 30, 10-23-2008)
      1.   Performance Security: The performance agreement shall require the
applicant to provide financial security to assure compliance with the agreement
and conditions of the approval. The security may be in the form of a surety
bond, cash escrow, certificate of deposit, irrevocable letter of credit,
securities or cash deposit. The security shall be in an amount determined by
the city engineer or building official under the direction of and approved by
the council, to cover estimated costs of labor and materials for the proposed
improvements or development. The project can be handled in stages with prior
approval of the city.
      2.   Security Release: The city shall hold the security until completion
of the proposed improvements or development and a certificate of occupancy
indicating compliance with the application approval and building code of the
city has been issued by the city building official.
      3.   Security Forfeiture: Failure to comply with the conditions of the
application approval and/or the ordinances of the city shall result in
forfeiture of the security.
      4.   Hold Harmless And Indemnification Of City: The applicant shall agree
to indemnify and hold harmless the city and its agents and employees against
any and all claims, demands, losses, damages and expenses (including attorney
fees) arising out of or resulting from the applicant's negligent or intentional
acts, violation of any safety law, and regulation or any code in the
performance of this agreement, without regard to any inspection or review made
or not made by the city, its agents or employees or failure to take any other
prudent precaution. In the event any city employee, agent or representative
shall come under the direct or indirect control of the applicant, or the city,
upon failure of the applicant to comply with any conditions of the approval,
performs said conditions pursuant to the bond, the applicant shall indemnify
and hold harmless the city, its employees, agents and representatives for its
own negligent or intentional acts in the performance of the applicant's
required work under the permit.
      5.   Fees: The applicant shall agree to pay any and all attorney and
consultant fees incurred by the city to enforce the terms and conditions of any
application approval or provisions of any performance agreement relating to
said permits.
   F.   Appeals From Administrative Action: The city council, serving as the
board of appeals and adjustments, shall, after receiving the written report of
the zoning administrator, make findings of fact and make a decision on appeals
where it is alleged by the appellant that error has occurred in any order,
interpretation requirement, decision or determination made by any
administrative office or the zoning administrator in the enforcement of this
title. However, said appeal shall be filed not later than sixty (60) days after
the applicant has received a written order from the city or the appeal shall be
void. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
   G.   Cost Recovery:
      1.   Purpose: The costs of the city for receiving, analyzing, processing,
hearing and final process for requests of changes, modification, or special
consideration under this title, such as requests for rezoning (map or text),
conditional use permits, interim use permits, variances, grading permits, and
wetland permits, are considered to be unique to the applicant requesting such
consideration, and it is the intent of this subsection to provide that all
costs of the city occasioned by such requests shall be borne by the applicant.
The reimbursement to the city shall be limited to actual costs of the city.
Actual costs shall include all engineering, legal, planning, or other
consultant fees or costs paid by the city for other consultants for expert
review of a development application. (Ord. 30, 10-23-2008)
      2.   Base Zoning Fee: Each applicant shall pay a nonrefundable base
zoning fee at the time an application is presented to the city for a zoning
change of any nature, site and building plan review, a conditional use, or a
variance. This fee is intended to reimburse the city for its costs for
administrative processing of a development application. If this fee proves to
be insufficient to cover such costs, such additional costs will be charged as a
part of the zoning deposit, or the supplemental zoning deposit. (Ord. 5, 12-14-
2006)
      3.   Escrow Deposit: In addition to the nonrefundable basic zoning fee,
each applicant shall pay an escrow deposit in an amount established by city
council ordinance at the time of application. All actual costs including, but
not limited to, planning, engineering, legal, or other consultant fees or costs
incurred by the city in the processing of the application shall be paid from or
reimbursed to the city from the escrow deposit. Actual costs not fully paid or
reimbursed from the base zoning fee shall be paid or reimbursed from this
escrow or supplemental deposit. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. 2011 Code)
      4.   Supplemental Deposit: At any time while the application is pending
and before its final conclusion, if the zoning administrator determines that
the amount of the escrow deposit required by subsection G3 of this section is
or is estimated to be insufficient to pay for present or anticipated actual
costs of the application, a supplementary deposit shall be required by the
zoning administrator to be paid by the applicant. The one or more supplemental
deposits shall be in an amount sufficient to pay all actual costs of the city.
      5.   Refunds:
         a.   Administrative Costs: The base zoning fee, intended to cover
administrative costs, is nonrefundable.
         b.   Direct Costs: If the direct costs of the city in processing the
application are less than the amount of the escrow deposit and any supplemental
deposit, any such coverage shall be refunded to the applicant upon the
conclusion of the proceedings, and any such costs in excess of the supplemental
deposits on hand with the city shall be paid by the applicant prior to
completion of the proceedings by the city.
   H.   Certification Of Taxes Paid: Prior to approving an application for
amendment, conditional use permit, interim use permit, variance, or
administrative permit, the applicant shall provide certification to the city
that there are no delinquent property taxes, special assessments, interest, or
city utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the application relates.
(Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 215, 5-14-2020)
11-3-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of a conditional use permit is to provide the city
with a reasonable degree of discretion in determining the suitability of
certain designated uses upon the general welfare, public health and safety. In
making this determination, whether or not the conditional use is to be allowed,
the city may consider the nature of the adjoining land or buildings, the effect
upon traffic into and from the premises, or on any adjoining streets, and all
other or further factors as the city shall deem a prerequisite of consideration
in determining the effect of the use on the general welfare, public health and
safety.
   B.   Procedure: An application for a conditional use permit requires a
public hearing and is to be processed in accordance with the procedures
outlined in subsection
11-3-1C of this chapter.
   C.   Criteria: The planning commission shall consider possible effects of
the proposed conditional use. Its judgment shall be based upon, but not limited
to, the following factors:
      1.   The proposed action has been considered in relation to the specific
policies and provisions of and has been found to be consistent with the
official city comprehensive plan.
      2.   The proposed use is or will be compatible with present and future
land uses of the area.
      3.   The proposed use conforms with all performance standards contained
in this title.
      4.   The proposed use can be accommodated with existing public services
and will not overburden the city's service capacity.
      5.   Traffic generation by the proposed use is within capabilities of
streets serving the property.
   D.   General Performance Standards: As may be applicable, the evaluation of
any proposed conditional use permit request shall be subject to and include,
but not be limited to, the following general performance standards and
criteria:
      1.   The use and the site in question shall be served by a street of
sufficient capacity to accommodate the type and volume of traffic which would
be generated and adequate right of way shall be provided.
      2.   The site design for access and parking shall minimize internal as
well as external traffic conflicts and shall be in compliance with chapter 9 of
this title.
      3.   If applicable, a pedestrian circulation system shall be clearly
defined and appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from encroachment
by parked or moving vehicles.
      4.   Adequate off street parking and off street loading shall be provided
in compliance with chapter 9 of this title.
      5.   Loading areas and drive-up facilities shall be positioned so as to
minimize internal site access problems and maneuvering conflicts, to avoid
visual or noise impacts on any "adjacent" residential use or district, and
provided in compliance with chapter 9 of this title.
      6.   Whenever a nonresidential use is "adjacent" to a residential use or
district, a buffer area with screening and landscaping shall be provided in
compliance with chapter 10 of this title.
      7.   General site screening and landscaping shall be provided in
compliance with chapter 10 of this title.
      8.   All exterior lighting shall be so directed so as not to cast glare
toward or onto the public right of way or neighboring residential uses or
districts, and shall be in compliance with section
11-4-7 of this title.
      9.   Potential exterior noise generated by the use shall be identified,
and mitigation measures, as may be necessary, shall be imposed to ensure
compliance with section
11-4-8 of this title.
      10.   The site drainage system shall be subject to the review and
approval of the city engineer.
      11.   The architectural appearance and functional design of the building
and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing or potential buildings and
area so as to cause a blighting influence. All sides of the principal and
accessory structures are to have essentially the same or coordinated,
harmonious exterior finish materials and treatment.
      12.   All signs and informational or visual communication devices shall
be in compliance with chapter 12 of this title.
      13.   The use and site shall be in compliance with any federal, state or
county law or regulation that is applicable, and any related permits shall be
obtained and documented to the city.
      14.   Any applicable business licenses mandated by this code are approved
and obtained.
      15.   The hours of operation may be restricted when there is judged to be
an incompatibility with a residential use or district.
      16.   The use complies with all applicable performance standards of the
zoning district in which it is located, and where applicable, any
nonconformities shall be eliminated.
      17.   All additional conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject
to change when the council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request,
finds that the general welfare and public betterment can be served as well or
better by modifying or expanding the conditions set forth herein.
   E.   Revocation Of Permit: The planning commission may recommend and the
city council may direct the revocation of any conditional use permit for cause
upon determination that the authorized conditional use is not in conformance
with the conditions of the permit or is in continued violation of this title,
city codes, or other applicable regulations. The city council or planning
commission shall initiate an application and the zoning administrator shall
notify the responsible person that he has an opportunity to show cause why the
permit should not be revoked. The application shall be processed and considered
pursuant to subsection
 11-3-1C of this chapter. The zoning administrator shall provide the
responsible person a copy of the proceedings and findings of the planning
commission and city council.
   F.   Modifications To Permit: Holders of a conditional use permit may
propose modifications to the permit at any time. No changes in the approved
plans or scope of the conditional use shall, however, be undertaken without
prior approval of those changes by the city. Proposed permit modifications
shall be classified as major or minor, as determined by the zoning
administrator. Major permit modifications may include, but shall not be limited
to: hours of operation, number of employees, expansion of structures and/or
premises, operational modifications resulting in increased traffic, and the
like. Permit modifications shall be further subject to and processed as
follows:
      1.   Minor Modifications:
         a.   Additional Qualifications: In addition to other considerations
noted above, minor permit modifications shall meet the following criteria:
            (1)   Sites shall be in nonresidential zoning districts, and shall
not abut any residential zoned property.
            (2)   All sites shall be legal parcels of record at the time of
application.
            (3)   All applications for permit modification shall be complete
and in full accordance with the requirements of subsection
11-3-6F of this chapter.
            (4)   All applicable fees shall be paid.
            (5)   All permit modification proposals shall meet or exceed the
standards of all applicable codes, ordinances, and policies and shall be free
of any variances from those standards.
            (6)   Only applications for preexisting, preapproved uses
explicitly classified as conditional uses within the respective zoning
districts of this title are eligible for administrative approval.
         b.   Procedure: Administrative approval of minor permit modifications
shall be subject to the requirements of section
11-3-4 of this chapter.
      2.   Major Modifications:
         a.   Qualifications: Any permit modification not classified or
qualifying as minor shall be classified as major.
         b.   Procedure: Major permit modifications shall be processed
according to subsection B of this section and shall be subject to all
requirements and standards of this chapter. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-3-3: INTERIM USE PERMITS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose and intent of allowing interim uses is:
      1.   To allow a use for a temporary period of time until a permanent
location is obtained or while the permanent location is under construction.
      2.   To allow a use that is presently judged acceptable by the city
council but, with anticipated development or redevelopment, will not be
acceptable in the future or will be replaced in the future by a permitted or
conditional use allowed within the respective district.
      3.   To allow a use which is reflective of anticipated long range change
to an area and which is in compliance with the comprehensive plan; provided,
that said use maintains harmony and compatibility with surrounding uses and is
in keeping with the architectural character and design standards of existing
uses and development.
   B.   Procedure: An application for an interim use permit requires a public
hearing and is to be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in
subsection
11-3-1C of this chapter.
   C.   Criteria: The planning commission shall consider possible effects of
the proposed interim use. Its judgment shall be based upon, but not limited to,
the factors outlined in subsection
 11-3-2C of this chapter.
   D.   General Performance Standards: As may be applicable, the evaluation of
any proposed interim use permit request shall be subject to and include, but
not be limited to, the general performance standards and criteria outlined in
subsection
 11-3-2D of this chapter, and:
      1.   The date or event that will terminate the use can be identified with
certainty.
      2.   The use will not impose additional unreasonable costs on the public.
      3.   The user agrees to any conditions that the city council deems
appropriate for permission of the use.
      4.   The use is allowed as an interim use in the respective zoning
district.
   E.   Termination: An interim use shall terminate on the happening of any of
the following events, whichever occurs first:
      1.   The date or event stated in the permit.
      2.   Upon violation of conditions under which the permit was issued.
      3.   Upon change in this title which renders the use nonconforming.
      4.   The property is redeveloped to a permitted or conditional use
allowed in the respective zoning district. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-3-4: ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish regulations and
procedures for the processing and consideration of activities allowed by
administrative permit, and of matters requiring the approval of the zoning
administrator with the goal of protecting the health, safety, and welfare of
the citizens of the city.
   B.   Procedure:
      1.   Application for an administrative permit shall be filed by the
property owner or designated agent with the zoning administrator on forms to be
provided by the city. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
      2.   The application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by city
council ordinance. Applications for amending administrative permits shall be
accompanied by a fee as established by city council ordinance. (Ord. 5, 12-14-
2006; amd. 2011 Code)
      3.   The zoning administrator shall review the application and related
materials and shall determine whether the proposal is in compliance with all
applicable evaluation criteria, codes, ordinances, and applicable performance
standards set forth in this title. The zoning administrator shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of an incomplete application within fifteen (15)
business days of the date of submission.
      4.   The zoning administrator's review shall be based upon the following
factors:
         a.   Compliance with and effect upon the comprehensive plan and public
facilities plans.
         b.   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the use, event or
activity will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, or
welfare.
         c.   The establishment of the use, event or activity will not conflict
with existing uses and will not impede the normal and orderly development and
improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in the district.
         d.   Adequate public facilities and services are available or can be
reasonably provided to accommodate the use, event or activity which is
proposed.
         e.   The use, event or activity shall, in all other respects, conform
to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located and to the
performance standards as outlined in subsection
11-3-2D of this chapter and all other applicable provisions of this title.
      5.   The zoning administrator shall make a determination on approval or
denial of the administrative permit within sixty (60) days from the date of
submission of a complete application.
      6.   A written permit shall be issued to the applicant when a
determination of compliance has been made. Specific conditions to assure
compliance with applicable evaluation criteria, codes, ordinances, and the
standards of this title shall be attached to the permit.
      7.   Determination of noncompliance with applicable codes, ordinances,
and the standards in this title shall be communicated to the applicant in
writing, and the application for the permit shall be considered denied.
      8.   Unresolved disputes as to administrative application of the
requirements of this section shall be subject to appeal as defined by
subsection
11-3-1F of this chapter.
   C.   Information Required: The information required for all administrative
permit applications shall include:
      1.   A concise statement describing the proposed use, event or activity,
including the purpose, type of merchandise involved, dates and times of
operation, number of employees involved, provisions for on site security,
provisions for on site parking, and other pertinent information required by the
zoning administrator to fully evaluate the application.
      2.   A copy of the approved site plan for the property or an as built
survey which accurately represents existing conditions on the site, including
entrances and exits and bona fide parking and driving areas, and which
accurately indicates any proposed temporary structures, including tents,
stands, and signs.
      3.   An accurate floor plan when, in the judgment of the zoning
administrator, such a plan is necessary to properly evaluate the location of
the event and the effectiveness of available entrances and exits.
      4.   Certification of current sales tax number as issued by the state, if
applicable.
      5.   Information identified in subsection
11-3-6F of this chapter, as may be applicable.
   D.   Performance Standards: All structures, uses, events or activities
allowed by administrative permit shall conform to the applicable standards
outlined in the zoning district in which such structure, use, event or activity
is proposed, as well as the applicable standards in subsection
11-3-2D of this chapter. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
   E.   Administration And Enforcement:
      1.   Performance Security: The performance agreement shall require the
applicant to provide financial security to assure compliance with the agreement
and conditions of the approval. The security may be in the form of a cash
escrow, irrevocable letter of credit, or other financial instruments which
provide equivalent assurance to the city and which are approved by the city
administrator. The security shall be in an amount determined by the city
engineer or building official, under the direction of and approved by the
council, to cover estimated costs of labor and materials for the proposed
improvements or development. The project can be handled in stages with prior
approval of the city. (Ord. 46, 9-24-2009)
      2.   A copy of all administrative permits issued shall be forwarded to
appropriate staff as determined by the zoning administrator.
      3.   Enforcement of the provisions of this section shall be in accordance
with subsection
11-3-1I of this chapter. Violation of an issued permit or of the provisions of
this section shall also be grounds for denial of future permit applications.
   F.   Certification Of Taxes Paid: Prior to approving an application for an
administrative permit, the applicant shall provide certification to the city
that there are no delinquent property taxes, special assessments, interest, or
city utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the administrative
permit application relates.
   G.   Nonpermit Approvals: In cases where the zoning administrator is given
approval authority without a requirement for an administrative permit,
determinations shall be based upon the criteria outlined in subsection B4 of
this section.
   H.   Site Improvement Performance Agreement And Financial Guarantee:
Following the approval of an administrative permit or nonpermit approval as
required by this section and prior to the issuing of any building permits or
the commencing of any work, the applicant, as may be applicable, shall
guarantee to the city the completion of all private exterior amenities as shown
on the approved site plan and as required by the administrative permit or
nonpermit approval. The guarantee shall be made by means of a site improvement
performance agreement and a financial guarantee as specified in subsection
11-3-1E of this chapter. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-3-5: GRADING PERMITS AND WETLAND PERMITS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to protect the lands, wetlands,
and receiving waters in the city and surrounding areas from degradation due to
development, redevelopment, infrastructure improvements or alterations to the
landscape.
   B.   Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall
be unlawful for anyone to alter the landscape or drainage without having first
obtained a written grading permit from the city authorizing the same in
accordance with this section. Projects impacting wetlands will also require a
wetland permit. A grading permit is also required for site disturbances that
are smaller than the minimum specified in this section to require a permit if
such activities are part of a larger development that would require a permit.
   C.   Exceptions To Permit Requirements:
      1.   Compliance With General Standards: All land disturbing activities
not required by this subsection to obtain a permit or have an approved SWPPP
shall nevertheless be conducted in full compliance with section
11-11-1 of this title.
      2.   Grading Permit Exceptions: The following activities do not require a
grading permit under this section:
         a.   Mining or land reclamation approved under an interim use permit
issued by the city.
         b.   Minor land disturbing activities, such as home gardens, repairs,
and maintenance work, that do not meet the thresholds under this section.
         c.   Maintenance or repair of individual sewage treatment systems.
         d.   Installation of any fence, sign, telephone or electric poles, or
other kinds of posts or poles.
         e.   Emergency activity necessary to protect life or prevent
substantial harm to persons or property.
         f.   All maintenance, repair, resurfacing, and reconditioning
activities of existing roads, bridges, and highway systems which do not involve
land disturbing activities outside of the existing surfaced roadway.
         g.   Construction, installation, and maintenance of public utility
lines or individual service connections unless the activity disturbs more than
one acre.
         h.   Construction of any structure on an individual parcel in a
subdivision approved by the city, so long as any land disturbing activity
complies with a city approved plan.
         i.   Development, redevelopment, or construction of a structure on an
individual parcel where the land disturbing activity does not cause off site
erosion, sedimentation, flooding, or other hazards or damage, and creates less
than one-tenth (0.1) acre of cumulative impervious surface.
         j.   Cemetery graves.
         k.   Grading a lot or excavation for a foundation, cellar, or basement
in conjunction with building construction if a building permit has been issued
for the building.
         l.   Curb cuts, utility hookups, or street openings for which another
permit has been issued by the city.
         m.   Excavation or filling of less than fifty (50) cubic yards in a
calendar year and excavation or filling of less than one hundred (100) square
feet of surface area in a calendar year.
         n.   Plowing or tilling for agricultural purposes.
      3.   Wetland Permit Exceptions: The following activity does not require a
wetland permit or mitigation plan under this title: Minor wetland impacts that
have received a "certificate of exemption" or "no loss determination" by the
city in the capacity of administering the wetland conservation act.
   D.   Information Required:
      1.   Application for a grading permit shall be made on a form furnished
by the city and shall contain the information required by subsection
11-3-6F of this chapter.
      2.   An application for a wetland permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the Minnesota board of water and soil resources.
   E.   Criteria And Performance Standards: All activities to be performed
under grading permits and wetland permits shall conform to the standards of
chapter 11 of this title.
   F.   Processing Permits:
      1.   Earthwork involving more than fifty (50) but less than one thousand
(1,000) cubic yards of material in a twelve (12) month period requires issuance
of an administrative permit pursuant to section
11-3-4 of this chapter. The applicant shall submit the fee and information
required by the city for the issuance of the administrative permit. Upon
receipt of a completed application, the city shall process the administrative
permit in accordance with the process established under section
11-3-4 of this chapter. The issuance of the administrative permit may include
conditions necessary to protect the public interest. Security may be required
in an amount sufficient to ensure site restoration should the applicant
default. Any applicant aggrieved by a decision may appeal the determination to
the city council.
      2.   All other applications shall be processed in accordance with the
procedures outlined in subsection
 11-3-1C of this chapter. Applications may run concurrently and share
submittals with other applications related to the site, if applicable.
   G.   Inspection And Monitoring: After issuance of a permit, the city may
perform such field inspections and monitoring of the approved activity as the
city deems necessary to determine compliance with the conditions of the permit
and this section. Any portion of the activity not in compliance shall be
promptly corrected by the permittee. In applying for a permit, the applicant
consents to entry upon the land for field inspections and monitoring, or for
performing any work necessary to bring the activity into compliance. The cost
to the city for field inspections and monitoring, including services of
consultants, shall be paid by the permittee as provided in subsection
11-3-1G of this chapter.
   H.   Field Inspection Fees: The city may require a permittee to pay a field
inspection fee equal to the actual cost of the field inspection and subsequent
monitoring of the permitted activity, including services of engineering, legal
and other consultants. The city may require a deposit to cover the cost to
inspect and monitor a proposed activity at the time the application is filed.
If continued inspection and monitoring of the activity is required by the city,
additional field inspection fees shall be paid within thirty (30) days after
issuance of an invoice for the work. A permit may be revoked or a certificate
of completion withheld if the field inspection fee is not fully paid.
   I.   Cash Payments: The city may require a cash payment in lieu of security
for future responsibilities of the applicant such as wetland monitoring and
maintenance if the applicant requests the city take responsibility for these
activities or if required by the city as a condition of granting the permit.
   J.   Certification Of Completion:
      1.   The city shall authorize the release of required securities
following city inspection and receipt of certification from a professional
engineer licensed in the state of Minnesota verifying completion of the
activity in accordance with the approved plans, specifications, and general
conditions of the permit.
      2.   Record plans of final grades, pond and drainageway contours,
building pads, public infrastructure, and copies of documents, with evidence of
recording where appropriate, that establish easements or provide for
maintenance of structures required by the permit shall be filed with the city
before completion can be certified and any security released. All temporary
synthetic and structural erosion prevention and sediment control BMPs (such as
silt fence) shall be removed before any securities shall be released. No
activity may be certified as complete if there are unpaid fees or other
outstanding permit violations.
      3.   Following full build-out of lots and/or stabilization of the site,
the applicant or applicant's assignee shall clean ponds and structures to their
original approved condition. The applicant may make a cash payment to the city
to satisfy this requirement prior to full build-out in an amount sufficient to
meet the requirements hereunder, as determined by the city.
   K.   Other Permits: The applicant shall secure all environmental permits and
approvals required by other governmental entities, and promptly provide the
city with copies of such permits and approvals after issuance. In the event the
applicant fails to secure the appropriate permits, all related site work shall
be suspended. Site work can resume when the permitting agency has reviewed
required applications and written permit approval is forwarded to the city.
(Ord. 30, 10-23-2008)
11-3-6: SITE AND BUILDING PLAN REVIEW; BUILDING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of site and building plan review is to establish a
formal site and building plan review procedure and provide regulations
pertaining to the enforcement of site design standards consistent with the
requirements of this title in advance of building permit issuance.
   B.   Exemptions From Review: Except in those cases specifically cited within
this title, the following shall be exempted from the foregoing requirements of
this section:
      1.   Projects which require variances, subdivision approval, conditional
use permits, other zoning permits or amendments.
      2.   New construction (including modifications, additions and
enlargements) of agricultural related buildings, single-family detached
dwellings and two-family attached dwellings.
      3.   Modifications, additions or enlargements to multiple-family
residential, commercial, industrial and institutional buildings which do not
increase the gross floor area more than twenty five percent (25%).
      4.   Modifications to multiple-family residential, commercial, industrial
and institutional buildings which alter the design or materials of any single
exterior building wall less than twenty five percent (25%).
      5.   Changes in the use of leasable space in single- or multi- tenant
buildings where a change of tenant does not intensify the use of the space nor
require additional off street parking.
      6.   Expansion of off street parking which is not related to
modifications, additions or enlargements to the gross floor area of an existing
building.
      7.   Construction of permitted accessory buildings or structures. (Ord.
19, 3-27-2008)
   C.   Sketch Plan:
      1.   Prior to the formulation of a site plan, applicants may present a
sketch plan to the zoning administrator prior to filing a formal application.
The plan shall be conceptual but shall be drawn to scale with topography of a
contour intervals not greater than two feet (2') and may include the following:
         a.   The proposed site with reference to existing development,
topography, and drainage conditions on adjacent properties, at least to within
two hundred feet (200').
         b.   Natural features.
         c.   General location of existing and proposed structures including
signs.
         d.   Tentative access, circulation and street arrangements, both
public and private.
         e.   Amenities to be provided such as recreational areas, open space,
walkways, landscaping, etc.
         f.   General location of parking areas.
         g.   Proposed public sanitary sewer, water and storm drainage.
         h.   A statement showing the proposed density of the project with the
method of calculating said density also shown.
         i.   Other items as may be deemed necessary by the zoning
administrator.
      2.   The zoning administrator shall have the authority to refer the
sketch plan to the planning commission and/or city council for discussion,
review, and informal comment. Any opinions or comments provided to the
applicant by the zoning administrator, planning commission, and/or city council
shall be considered advisory only and shall not constitute a binding decision
on the request.
      3.   Sketch plan review shall not activate the sixty (60) day time
requirement pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 15.99, as may be amended.
   D.   Procedure: An application for site and building plan review is to be
processed in accordance with the provisions of subsection
11-3-1C of this chapter. A public hearing is not required to consider an
application for site and building plan review.
   E.   Criteria: The zoning administrator shall evaluate the proposed site
plan based upon compliance with the city comprehensive plan, provisions of this
title, and other applicable provisions of this code.
   F.   Information Required: The information required for all site plan
applications generally consists of the following items, and shall be submitted
unless waived by the zoning administrator:
      1.   Site boundaries, buildings, structures and other improvements shall
be identified on site with a current certificate of survey, prepared and signed
by a Minnesota licensed land surveyor, depicting the following:
         a.   Scale of plan (engineering scale only) at one inch equals fifty
feet (1" = 50') or less.
         b.   North point indication.
         c.   Existing boundaries with lot dimension and area.
         d.   Existing site improvements.
         e.   All encroachments.
         f.   Easements of record.
         g.   Legal description of the property.
         h.   Ponds, lakes, springs, rivers or other waterways bordering on or
running through the subject property.
      2.   A site plan utilizing a copy of the current certificate of survey as
a base for the site in question, depicting the following:
         a.   Name and address of developer/owner.
         b.   Name and address of architect/designer.
         c.   Date of plan preparation.
         d.   Dates and description of all revisions.
         e.   Name of project or development.
         f.   All proposed improvements, including:
            (1)   Required and proposed setbacks.
            (2)   Location, setback and dimensions of all proposed buildings
and structures.
            (3)   Location of all adjacent buildings located within two hundred
feet (200') of the exterior boundaries of the property in question.
            (4)   Location, number, dimensions, and setbacks of proposed
parking spaces and drive aisles.
            (5)   Location, number, and dimensions of proposed loading spaces.
            (6)   Location, width, and setbacks of all curb cuts and driveways.
            (7)   Vehicular circulation.
            (8)   Sidewalks, walkways, and trails.
            (9)   Location and type of all proposed lighting, including details
of all proposed fixtures.
            (10)   Location of recreation and service areas.
            (11)   Location of rooftop equipment and proposed screening.
            (12)   Provisions for storage and disposal of waste, garbage, and
recyclables, including details for screening exterior trash/recycling
enclosures.
            (13)   Location, sizing, and type of water and sewer system mains
and proposed service connections. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
      3.   Grading/stormwater drainage plan, utilizing a copy of the current
certificate of survey as a base for the site in question, prepared and signed
by a Minnesota licensed engineer, depicting the following:
         a.   Existing contours at two foot (2') intervals (may be prepared by
a Minnesota licensed surveyor).
         b.   Proposed grade elevations at two foot (2') maximum intervals.
         c.   A stormwater management report shall be submitted that shows all
of the design elements utilized to comply with these requirements. A written
narrative shall be included that describes the stormwater system. A summary,
calculations, drainage areas, figures, tables and plan sheets shall accompany
the report.
         d.   Storm sewer, catch basins, invert elevations, type of castings,
and type of materials.
         e.   Spot elevations (may be prepared by a Minnesota licensed
surveyor).
         f.   Proposed driveway grades.
         g.   Surface water ponding and treatment areas.
         h.   Soil borings or tests if requested by the city.
         i.   Those areas of the site to be used for storage of topsoil and
overburden.
         j.   Proposed stockpile sites.
         k.   The description and quantity of material to be excavated.
         l.   The depth of water tables throughout the area.
         m.   The location and depth of wells and buried garbage, water, and
fill.
         n.   Delineation of the subwatershed contributing runoff from any/all
off site sources.
         o.   Proposed and existing subwatersheds on site.
         p.   Emergency overflows and watercourses.
         q.   For applications proposing infiltration as volume control:
identification, description, permeability, HSG classification and approximate
delineation of site soils in both existing and proposed postdevelopment
conditions.
         r.   The existing and proposed OHW and 100-year high water elevations
on site.
         s.   Description and sketch of all drainage easements or other
property interest to be determined for stormwater management purposes.
         t.   Identify downstream evaluation areas to the point of ten percent
(10%) and corresponding drainage area(s) on a USGS map.
         u.   Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP).
         v.   Determination by a registered professional engineer of the 100-
year critical flood elevation before and after the proposed activity.
         w.   Computation of the change in flood storage capacity as a result
of the proposed alteration or fill.
         x.   A map or plan indicating existing on site wetland, marsh, buffer,
shoreland, 100-year floodplain areas and other levels, all referenced to the
city datum.
         y.   Delineation of all exceptional value wetlands located in
downstream evaluation in the flow path.
         z.   A wetland alteration permit, if required by this code, which
shall be processed concurrently with the grading permit application. (Ord. 30,
10-23-2008)
      4.   Landscaping plan, utilizing a copy of the current certificate of
survey as a base for the site in question, depicting the following:
         a.   Planting schedule (table) containing:
            (1)   Symbols.
            (2)   Quantities.
            (3)   Common names.
            (4)   Botanical names.
            (5)   Sizes of plant material.
            (6)   Root specification (bare root, balled and burlapped, potted,
etc.).
            (7)   Special planting instructions.
         b.   Location, type and size of all existing significant trees to be
removed or preserved.
         c.   Planting detail (show all species to scale at normal mature crown
diameter or spread for local hardiness zone).
         d.   Typical sections with details of fences, tie walls, planter
boxes, tot lots, picnic areas, berms and the like.
         e.   Typical sections with details of landscape islands, planter beds,
and foundation plantings with identification of materials used.
         f.   Note indicating how disturbed soil areas will be restored through
the use of sodding, seeding, or other techniques.
         g.   Delineation of both sodded and seeded areas with respective areas
in square feet.
         h.   Coverage plan for underground irrigation system, if any.
         i.   Where landscape or manmade materials are used to provide
screening from adjacent and neighboring properties, a cross through section
shall be provided showing the perspective of the site from the neighboring
property at the property line elevation.
         j.   Other existing or proposed conditions which could be expected to
affect landscaping.
      5.   Other plans and information as required by the zoning administrator
including, but not limited to:
         a.   Architectural elevations of all principal and accessory buildings
(type, color, and materials used in all external surfaces).
         b.   "Typical" floor plan and "typical" room plan drawn to scale with
a summary of square footage for each use or activity.
         c.   Fire protection plan.
         d.   Type, location and size (area and height) of all signs to be
erected upon the property in question.
         e.   Vicinity map showing the subject property in reference to nearby
highways or major street intersections.
         f.   Sound source control plan.
         g.   Lighting plan.
   G.   Plan Modifications: An amended site plan involving major changes shall
be applied for and administered in a manner similar to that required for a new
site plan.
   H.   Building Regulations:
      1.   Review And Approval Regarding Building And Fire Codes: The review
and approval of site improvements pursuant to the requirements of city adopted
building and fire codes shall be in addition to the site plan review process
established under this section. The site plan approval process does not imply
compliance with the requirements of these building and fire codes.
      2.   Building Permit Requirements 1 :
         a.   Permit Required: Except as hereinafter provided, no person, firm,
or corporation shall construct, erect, alter, wreck or move any building or
structure or parts thereof within the corporate limits of the city without
first securing a building permit from the city. Application for a building
permit shall be made on a blank form to be furnished by the city.
         b.   Information And Other Requirements:
            (1)   All building permit applications shall be accompanied by the
following documents, unless exempted by the building official:
               (A)   Two (2) sets of building plans and specifications showing
all easements and elevations (in relation to street grade).
               (B)   Two (2) copies of a certified land survey.
               (C)   Two (2) copies of a plot plan indicating property lines,
building setbacks (from right of way) and location of all utility lines.
            (2)   City utility information is available for review by the
public during regular office hours at city hall. If further information is
required, the city engineer shall be contacted at the inquirer's expense. The
city accepts no liability for:
               (A)   Locations of any service lines.
               (B)   Locations of main lines not shown on city utility lines.
            (3)   The processing of building permits takes up to ten (10) days.
            (4)   Applicants are responsible for pick up and payment of
building permits.
            (5)   No building permit will be issued until payment is made in
full, including all deposit(s) (if any).
            (6)   Inspections during construction may be made by contacting the
building department to request an appointment a minimum of twenty four (24)
hours in advance. Applicants are advised that the site address, inspection
record, and approved plans shall be posted on site or no inspection will be
performed and a reinspection fee may be charged.
            (7)   Any work which begins prior to issuance of a building permit
shall be subject to a civil penalty determined by the city council.
            (8)   Prior to occupancy of any building, a final inspection must
be performed. When a final inspection is completed, the building official will
issue a certificate of occupancy.
         c.   Issuance Of Permit: The building official shall issue the
building permit only after determining that the building plans, together with
the application, comply with the terms of this section and the state building
code.
      3.   Schedule Of Fees, Charges And Expenses: The city council shall
establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure
for building permits, appeals, and other matters pertaining to this title. The
schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the city clerk and may be
altered or amended only by the city council.
      4.   Certificate Of Occupancy Required: The purpose of a certificate of
occupancy inspection is to ensure that there is compliance with all aspects of
the plans which were approved for a building permit by verifying such with an
on site visual inspection of the project. At the completion of a building
project, a request for a certificate of occupancy inspection shall be made for
the following types of projects:
         a.   New residences and residential buildings.
         b.   New commercial, industrial, and institutional buildings.
         c.   Additions to existing commercial, industrial, and institutional
buildings.
         d.   Change of commercial, industrial, and institutional use.
         e.   Changes of occupancy load of a commercial, industrial, and
institutional use.
         f.   Changes of tenancy of a commercial, industrial, and institutional
use.
   I.   Plan Agreements: All site and construction plans officially submitted
to the city shall be treated as a formal agreement between the applicant and
the city. Once approved, no changes, modifications or alterations shall be made
to any plan detail, standard, or specification without prior submission of a
plan modification request to the zoning administrator for review and approval.
(Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  10-1-3 of this code.
11-3-7: VARIANCES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of a variance is to provide for deviations from
the literal provisions of this title in instances where their strict
enforcement would cause practical difficulties because of circumstances unique
to the individual property under consideration, and to grant such variances
only when it is demonstrated that such actions will be in keeping with the
spirit and intent of this title.
   B.   Procedure: An application for variance from the provisions of this
title requires a public hearing and is to be processed in accordance with the
procedures set forth in subsection
11-3-1C of this chapter.
   C.   Board Of Adjustments And Appeals: The city council shall act as the
board of adjustments and appeals.
   D.   Criteria: The board of adjustments and appeals shall not approve any
variance request unless they find that failure to grant the variance will
result in practical difficulties. The following criteria must also be met:
      1.   That the variance would be consistent with the comprehensive plan.
      2.   That the variance would be in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this title.
      3.   That the purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon
economic considerations.
      4.   That the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to
the property not created by the landowner.
      5.   That the granting of the variance will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood in which the parcel of land is located.
      6.   That the property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable
manner not permitted by this title.
      7.   That the requested variance is the minimum action required to
eliminate the practical difficulty.
      8.   That the proposed variance does not involve a use that is not
allowed within the respective zoning district.
   E.   Practical Difficulties Defined: "Practical difficulties", as used in
connection with the granting of a variance, means that:
      1.   The property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable
manner not permitted by the zoning ordinance; and
      2.   The plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the
property not created by the landowner; and
      3.   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of
the locality.
Economic considerations alone shall not constitute practical difficulties.
Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to, inadequate access to
direct sunlight for solar energy systems. (Ord. 97, 6-28-2012)
11-3-8: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Initiation: The city council or planning commission may, upon their own
motion, initiate a request to amend the text or the district boundaries of this
title. The procedural requirements of this section shall not apply to such
proposed amendments except to the extent required by state statute. Any person
owning real estate within the city may initiate a request to amend the district
boundaries or text of this title so as to affect the said real estate.
   B.   Procedure: Application for an amendment of this title (text or map)
requires a public hearing and is to be processed in accordance with the
procedures set forth in subsection
11-3-1C of this chapter.
   C.   Criteria: The planning commission shall consider possible effects of
the proposed amendment. Its judgment shall be based upon, but not limited to,
the following factors:
      1.   The proposed action has been considered in relation to the specific
policies and provisions of, and has been found to be consistent with, the
official city comprehensive plan.
      2.   The proposed use is or will be compatible with present and future
land uses of the area.
      3.   The proposed use conforms with all performance standards contained
in this title.
      4.   The proposed use can be accommodated with existing public services
and will not overburden the city's service capacity.
      5.   Traffic generation by the proposed use is within capabilities of
streets serving the property.
   D.   Effective Date: Approval of an amendment of this title (text or map)
shall become effective upon its passage and publication. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-3-9: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: It is the purpose of this section to provide for
the regulation of nonconforming buildings, structures and uses and to specify
those requirements, circumstances and conditions under which nonconforming
buildings, structures and uses will be operated and maintained. This title
establishes separate districts, each of which is an appropriate area for the
location of uses which are permitted in that district. It is necessary and
consistent with the establishment of these districts that nonconforming
buildings, structures and uses not be permitted to continue without
restriction. Furthermore, it is the intent of this section that all
nonconforming uses shall be eventually brought into conformity.
   B.   Existing Nonconforming Uses And Structures: Any structure or use
existing upon the effective date hereof and which does not conform to the
provisions of this title may be continued subject to the following conditions:
      1.   No such use shall be expanded or enlarged except in conformity with
the provisions of this title.
      2.   Nothing in this title shall prevent the placing of a structure in
safe condition when said structure is declared unsafe by the building official.
      3.   When any lawful nonconforming use in any district has been changed
to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to any nonconforming
use.
      4.   In the event a nonconforming use of any building or premises is
discontinued for a period of one year, the use of the same shall thereafter
conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. If a
nonconforming use is interrupted or prevented from operating because of
governmental action, such as road construction, that period shall not be deemed
as discontinuance of the nonconforming use.
      5.   Any lawful, nonconforming building or structure which has been
damaged by fire or other peril to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%)
of its market value, and no building permit has been applied for within one
hundred eighty (180) days of when the property is damaged, shall not be
restored, except in conformity with the regulations of this title.
      6.   Maintenance of a building or other structure containing or used by a
nonconforming use will be allowed when it includes necessary nonstructural
repair and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the
nonconforming building or use.
      7.   Any structure which becomes nonconforming under this title, but for
which a building permit has been lawfully granted prior to its effective date,
may be completed in accordance with the approved plans, provided construction
is started within six (6) months of such effective date, is not abandoned for a
period of more than one hundred twenty (120) days, and continues to completion
within two (2) years. Such structure shall thereafter be a legally existing
nonconforming structure.
      8.   A lawful, nonconforming use of a structure or parcel of land may be
changed to lessen the nonconformity of use. Once a nonconforming structure or
parcel of land has been changed, it shall not thereafter be so altered to
increase the nonconformity.
      9.   A nonconforming use of a structure or land shall not be moved to any
other part of the parcel upon which it was conducted or located at the time of
adoption or amendment to this title unless the movement will reduce the
nonconformity.
      10.   Alterations may be made to a building containing lawful
nonconforming residential units when they will improve the livability thereof,
provided they will not increase the number of dwelling units. Alteration and
normal maintenance to a lawful nonconforming building or structure may be made
through the building permit process, provided:
         a.   The alterations do not expand the foundation and/or building size
(including deck additions), unless specifically allowed by this title.
         b.   The alterations do not increase the building occupancy capacity
or parking demand.
         c.   The alterations do not increase the nonconformity of the building
or the use. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
   C.   Expansion Of Nonconforming Buildings Or Structures:
      1.   Administrative Approvals: The expansion of lawful, nonconforming
buildings may be approved through the administrative permit process by the
zoning administrator subject to the provisions of section
11-3-4 of this chapter. The zoning administrator shall make a determination
that the building expansion will comply with the intent and purpose of this
section and this title.
         a.   Expansion of principal buildings found to be nonconforming only
by reason of height and yard setback may be allowed provided the expansion
complies with the performance standards of this title.
         b.   Expansion of nonconforming detached accessory structures shall
not be allowed.
         c.   Modifications to multiple-family residential, commercial,
industrial and institutional buildings which increase the floor area of
buildings, or alter the design of walls by more than twenty five percent (25%),
shall be subject to the site and building plan review requirements of section
11-3-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 74, 8-11-2011)
      2.   Conditional Use Permit: Lawful, nonconforming commercial,
industrial, institutional, and multiple-family residential principal structures
may be expanded on the same lot by conditional use permit, provided:
         a.   The expansion will not increase the nonconformity of the building
or site.
         b.   The new building expansion will conform to all the applicable
performance standards of this title. A conditional use permit shall not be
issued under this section for a deviation from other requirements of this title
unless variances are also approved.
         c.   The request for a conditional use permit shall be evaluated based
on standards and criteria set forth in section
11-3-2 of this chapter.
   D.   Subdivision Of Existing Lots:
      1.   No parcel of land or portion thereof shall be subdivided if such
action results in buildings and/or uses becoming nonconforming.
      2.   A lot or parcel of land in a residential district which was of
record as a separate lot or parcel in the office of the county recorder or
registrar of titles on or before the effective date hereof may be used for
single-family detached dwelling purposes, provided the area and width thereof
are within sixty percent (60%) of the minimum requirements of this title and
shall continue to be maintained, and provided it can be demonstrated that safe
and adequate sewage treatment systems can be installed to serve such permanent
dwelling.
   E.   Relocation Of Nonconforming Buildings And Structures: Subject to
section
11-5-8 of this title, no nonconforming building, structure or use shall be
moved to another lot or to any other part of the parcel of land upon which the
same was constructed unless such movement shall bring the nonconformance into
substantially closer compliance with the requirements of this title. (Ord. 5,
12-14-2006)
11-3-10: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcing Officer: This title shall be administered and enforced by the
zoning administrator in accordance with its terms, who shall not permit any
construction, use, or change of use that does not conform to this title. The
city administrator shall designate the zoning administrator. The zoning
administrator may designate such additional persons as may be necessary or
convenient to assist in administering and enforcing this chapter.
   B.   Duties Of The Zoning Administrator: The zoning administrator's duties
shall include the following:
      1.   Determine that all building permits comply with the terms of this
title;
      2.   Conduct inspections of buildings and uses of land to determine
compliance with the terms of this title;
      3.   Maintain records of all zoning maps, amendments, conditional uses
permits, variances, appeals, and other matters regulated by this title;
      4.   Administer all applications under this title;
      5.   Institute appropriate enforcement proceedings and actions against
violators;
      6.   Serve as staff advisor to the planning commission;
      7.   Prepare reports and information for the planning commission and city
council, and may attend their meetings and participate in their hearings and
discussions, but shall not vote on any item before the planning commission and
city council; and
      8.   Perform such other functions as may be necessary to enforce and
administer this title.
   C.   In case any building, structure or land is, or is proposed to be,
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in
violation of this title, the zoning administrator, in addition to other
remedies, may institute in the name of the city, any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building structure or
land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or
use constituting a violation. (Ord. 215, 5-14-2020)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Use Of Certain Structures As Dwelling Units Prohibited
11-4-2: Standards For Bulk Storage Of Certain Liquids
11-4-3: Garbage And Refuse
11-4-4: Maintenance Requirements
11-4-5: Essential Services
11-4-6: Glare And Heat
11-4-7: Exterior Lighting
11-4-8: Noise
11-4-9: Smoke And Particulate Matter
11-4-10: Toxic Or Noxious Matter
11-4-11: Explosives
11-4-12: Odors And Air Pollution
11-4-13: Vibrations
11-4-14: Nuisances
11-4-15: Radiation And Electrical Emissions
11-4-16: Traffic Control And Visibility
11-4-1: USE OF CERTAIN STRUCTURES AS DWELLING UNITS PROHIBITED:
No tent or recreational vehicle shall at any time be used as a dwelling. No
garage or accessory structure shall at any time be used as a dwelling, except
as permitted under section
11-5-20 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 222, 1-14-2021)
11-4-2: STANDARDS FOR BULK STORAGE OF CERTAIN LIQUIDS:
All uses associated with the bulk storage of all gasoline, liquid fertilizer,
chemical, flammable and similar liquids shall comply with county, state, and
federal agency requirements, and have documents from those respective agencies
stating the use is in compliance. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-4-3: GARBAGE AND REFUSE 1 :
   A.   In all zoning districts, all waste material, debris, refuse, or garbage
shall be kept in an enclosed building or properly contained in a closed
container designed for such purposes.
      1.   For commercial, industrial, or multi-family residential properties,
all dumpsters, garbage containers, or refuse bins that are stored outside shall
be screened from view.
         a.   Acceptable methods of screening include enclosures made of
maintenance free material, brick or a combination thereof. Gates and doors
which allow access to the refuse containers shall have a self-latching
mechanism which keeps it closed/locked when not in use.
      2.   For single-family and two-family properties, all garbage containers
or refuse bins not contained within an enclosed building shall be stored
adjacent to the garage.
      3.   When used for the purposes of construction, all dumpsters, garbage
containers, or refuse bins are exempt from the screening and location
requirements of this section.
   B.   The owner of vacant land shall be responsible for keeping such land
free of refuse. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 208, 2-13-2020)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 5, chapter 1 of this code.
11-4-4: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
All structures, landscaping and fencing shall be maintained in a manner
compatible with adjacent properties and in accordance with this code. All
property owners shall be responsible for keeping their land free of waste
material, noxious weeds and other problems potentially detrimental to the
health, safety and general welfare. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-4-5: ESSENTIAL SERVICES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the installation
of essential services such as telephone lines, pipelines, electric transmission
lines and substations in such a manner that the health, safety and general
welfare of the city will not be adversely affected. Essential services shall
also be installed in recognition of existing and projected demands for such
services.
   B.   Administrative Permit Required:
      1.   All telephone lines, pipelines and structures for local
distribution, underground electric transmission lines, and overhead electric
transmission lines and substations less than thirty five (35) kilovolts, when
installed in any public right of way in any zoning district established by
section
11-24-1 of this title, shall require a right of way permit subject to review
and approval of the city engineer.
      2.   All telephone lines, pipelines and structures for local
distribution, underground electric transmission lines, and overhead electric
transmission lines less than thirty five (35) kilovolts, which are intended to
serve more than one parcel and are proposed to be installed at locations other
than in public rights of way, shall require an administrative permit subject to
approval by the city engineer. Approval by the city engineer shall be based
upon the information furnished in the following procedural requirements:
         a.   Prior to the installation of any of the previous essential
services, the owner of such service shall file with the zoning administrator
all maps and other pertinent information as deemed necessary for the city
engineer to review the proposed project.
         b.   The zoning administrator shall transmit the map and accompanying
information to the city engineer for review and approval regarding the
project's relationship to the comprehensive plan and/or ordinances and parts
thereof.
         c.   The city engineer shall report in writing to the zoning
administrator his/her findings as to the compliance of the proposed project
with the comprehensive plan and ordinances of the city.
         d.   In considering applications for the placement of essential
services, as regulated in this section, the city engineer shall consider the
effect of the proposed project upon the health, safety and general welfare of
the city, as existing and as anticipated, and the effect of the proposed
project upon the comprehensive plan.
         e.   Upon receiving the approval of the city engineer, the zoning
administrator shall issue an administrative permit for the installation and
operation of the applicant's essential services. If the engineer's report
recommends the denial of said permit causing the zoning administrator to deny
its issuance, the applicant may appeal said decision to the board of
adjustments and appeals under the rules and procedures as set forth in
subsection
11-3-1F of this title.
   C.   Conditional Use Permit Required: All transmission pipelines (i.e.,
pipelines not required for local distributing network), and overhead
transmission and substation lines in excess of thirty five (35) and up to one
hundred (100) kilovolts shall be a conditional use in all districts subject to
the procedural requirements and standards stipulated in section
11-3-2 of this title.
   D.   Performance Standards: Essential services shall be subject to the
following:
      1.   All distribution lines shall be underground.
      2.   Outdoor storage of materials or equipment shall be prohibited.
      3.   All poles and similar type structures shall be placed in the public
right of way or utility easement unless approved as an interim use permit
subject to section
11-3-3 of this title.
      4.   All facilities shall be landscaped and screened to the extent
practical and applicable pursuant to section
11-5-4 of this title.
      5.   The size and number of accessory buildings are to be minimized to
the extent possible and are to house only equipment directly related to the
operation of the facility in question.
      6.   The architectural appearance of all structures and buildings shall
be in harmony with the primary uses within the vicinity of the site.
   E.   Exceptions: This section shall not apply to radio and wireless
communication systems and facilities. Regulation of these uses and activities
are governed by chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-4-6: GLARE AND HEAT:
Any use requiring an operation producing an intense heat or light transmission
shall be performed with the necessary shielding to prevent such heat or light
from being detectable at the lot line of the site on which the use is located.
Lighting in all instances shall be diffused or directed away from residential
districts and public streets. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-4-7: EXTERIOR LIGHTING:
   A.   All exterior lighting shall be designed and arranged so as to not
direct any illumination upon or into any contiguous residential districts.
   B.   No exterior lighting shall be arranged and designed so as to create
direct viewing angles of the illumination source by pedestrian or vehicular
traffic in the public right of way.
   C.   Lenses, deflectors, shields, louvers and prismatic control devices
shall be used so as to eliminate nuisance and hazardous lighting. (Ord. 5, 12-
14-2006)
   D.   Any lighting used to illuminate an off street parking area, sign or
other structure shall be arranged as to deflect light away from any adjoining
residential zone and/or use and from public streets. Direct or sky reflected
glare, where from floodlights or from high temperature processes such as
combustion or welding, shall not be directed into any adjoining property. The
source of light shall be hooded or controlled in some manner so as not to light
adjacent property. Bare incandescent light bulbs shall not be permitted in view
of adjacent property or public right of way. Any light or combination of lights
which casts light on a public street shall not exceed one foot-candle (meter
reading) as measured from the centerline of said street. Any light or
combination of lights which casts light on residential property shall not
exceed five-tenths (0.5) foot-candle (meter reading) as measured from said
property. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. 2011 Code)
   E.   Lighting fixtures for new and renovated outdoor sports and recreational
facilities that adjoin residential uses shall be designed to eliminate
reflected glare and spill light from the bottom one-third (1/3) of the
reflector, and to shield the view of the arc tube from the residential
property. (2011 Code)
11-4-8: NOISE 1 :
Noise shall be muffled or otherwise controlled so as not to become a nuisance.
Noise levels shall be regulated by the standards of the Minnesota pollution
control agency. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 5, chapter 5 of this code.
11-4-9: SMOKE AND PARTICULATE MATTER:
The ambient air quality standards of the Minnesota pollution control agency
shall apply to the release of airborne materials within the city. (Ord. 5, 12-
14-2006)
11-4-10: TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER:
The Minnesota pollution control agency standards governing toxic or noxious
matter shall apply. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-4-11: EXPLOSIVES:
No activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or
products such as TNT or dynamite which could decompose by detonation shall be
permitted except as are specifically licensed by the city council. (Ord. 5, 12-
14-2006)
11-4-12: ODORS AND AIR POLLUTION:
All odors and pollution emissions shall comply with Minnesota pollution control
agency standards. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-4-13: VIBRATIONS:
Any use creating periodic earthshaking vibrations, such as may be created from
a drop forge, shall be prohibited if such vibrations are perceptible beyond the
lot line of the site on which the use is located. The standards shall not apply
to vibrations created during the process of construction. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-4-14: NUISANCES:
No land, existing building or proposed structure shall be used or occupied in
any manner creating dangerous, noxious or otherwise objectionable conditions
which could adversely affect the surrounding area. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-4-15: RADIATION AND ELECTRICAL EMISSIONS:
No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous radioactivity beyond
enclosed areas. There shall be no electrical disturbance (except from domestic
household appliances) adversely affecting the operation at any point of any
equipment including, but not limited to, radio and television reception other
than that of the creator of the disturbance. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-4-16: TRAFFIC CONTROL AND VISIBILITY:
The traffic generated by any use shall be channeled and controlled in a manner
that will avoid congestion on the public streets, traffic hazards, and
excessive traffic through residential areas, particularly truck traffic.
Internal traffic shall be so regulated as to ensure its safe and orderly flow.
Traffic into and out of business areas shall in all cases be forward moving
with no backing into streets. On corner lots, nothing shall be placed or
allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between a
height of two and one-half feet (21/2') and ten feet (10') above the centerline
grades of the intersecting streets to a distance such that a clear line of
vision is possible of the intersecting street from a distance of fifty feet
(50') from the intersection of the right of way lines.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c319d9474cf3d6d21aee248db1bb8796c21e98fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1759.gif] 
(Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
CHAPTER 5
GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Building And Site Design Standards
11-5-2: Height Requirements And Exceptions
11-5-3: Residential Decks
11-5-4: Screening
11-5-5: Fences
11-5-6: Exterior Storage
11-5-7: Setback Encroachments
11-5-8: Relocation Of Structures
11-5-9: Demolition Of Structures
11-5-10: Model Homes
11-5-11: Temporary Outdoor Uses
11-5-12: Farming Operations
11-5-13: Land Reclamation And Mining
11-5-14: Daycare Facilities
11-5-15: Yard/Garage Sales
11-5-16: Sexually Oriented Businesses
11-5-17: Home Occupations
11-5-18: Retaining Walls
11-5-19: Temporary Family Healthcare Dwellings; Opt Out
11-5-20: Accessory Dwelling Units
11-5-21: Accessory Drive-Through Facilities
11-5-22: Accessory Outdoor Dining/Seating
11-5-23: Accessory Outdoor Sales And Display
11-5-24: Auto-Repair, Major
11-5-25: Auto-Repair, Minor
11-5-26: Breweries, Small, With Taproom
11-5-27: Commercial Car Washes (Principal And Accessory)
11-5-28: Heavy Equipment Sales
11-5-29: Heavy Equipment Service
11-5-30: Hospitals
11-5-31: Kennel, Commercial Animal
11-5-32: Lumberyards
11-5-33: Manufactured Home Park
11-5-34: Microdistilleries With Cocktail Rooms
11-5-35: Ministorage/Self-Service Storage Facilities
11-5-36: Motor Fuel Stations
11-5-37: Motor Vehicle Sales
11-5-38: Outdoor Service, Sale, And Rental
11-5-39: Outdoor Storage
11-5-40: Truck Stops
11-5-1: BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   General Provisions:
      1.   Nonconforming Buildings: In all residential, business, industrial
and institutional districts, buildings which are nonconforming by type (e.g.,
pole or engineered steel) existing upon the effective date hereof shall be
allowed to expand using materials similar to those of the principal structure;
provided, that:
         a.   The expansion shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the
size of the existing building.
         b.   A maximum of one building expansion shall be allowed after
January 1, 2008.
         c.   Such buildings shall be subject to all other requirements of
subsection
11-3-9C of this title pertaining to the expansion of nonconforming buildings or
structures.
         d.   Other lot and building requirements of this title and the
Building Code are satisfactorily met.
      2.   Architectural And Aesthetic Compatibility: Buildings in all zoning
districts shall maintain a high standard of architectural and aesthetic
compatibility with surrounding properties to ensure that they will not
adversely impact the community's public health, safety and general welfare.
      3.   Steel Or Aluminum Buildings: Except in association with farming
activities, no galvanized, corrugated, unfinished, or sheet steel or aluminum
buildings (walls or roofs) shall be permitted in any zoning district.
      4.   Exterior Building Materials:
         a.   For the purpose of this section, materials shall be divided into
classes as follows:
            (1)   Class I:
               (a)   Brick.
               (b)   Stone (natural or artificial).
               (c)   Integral colored split face (rock face) concrete block.
               (d)   Glass.
            (2)   Class II:
               (a)   Architectural precast panel.
               (b)   Stucco (natural or artificial)/EIFS (exterior insulated
finish system).
               (c)   Curtain wall panels of steel, aluminum and fiberglass,
provided such panels are factory fabricated and finished with a durable,
nonfade surface and secured with corrosion resistant fasteners.
            (3)   Class III:
               (a)   Steel, aluminum or fiber cement siding.
               (b)   Concrete composite board.
               (c)   Standard concrete precast panel.
            (4)   Class IV:
               (a)   Vinyl siding.
               (b)   Wood (natural or composite) provided the surfaces are
finished for exterior use, or wood of proven exterior durability is used, such
as cedar, redwood, or cypress.
         b.   Residential Uses: Except as otherwise specified in subsection B
of this Section, the primary exterior building facade finishes for residential
uses shall consist of Class I, Class II, Class III, and/or Class IV materials.
         c.   Commercial And Institutional Uses: Except as otherwise specified
in subsection B of this Section, the primary exterior building facade finishes
for commercial and institutional uses shall consist of Class I, Class II, and/
or Class III materials.
         d.   Industrial Uses: Except as otherwise specified in subsection B of
this Section, the primary exterior building facade finishes for industrial uses
shall consist of Class I, Class II, and/or Class III materials.
         e.   Building Foundations: Building foundations that extend less than
two feet (2') above grade need not comply with the exterior building material
requirements of this subsection A4 of this Section.
   B.   District Provisions:
      1.   R-3 Medium Density Residential And R-4 High Density Residential
Districts:
         a.   Unit Width: The minimum width of a dwelling unit within the R-
3 District shall be twenty five feet (25').
         b.   Decks Or Porches: Provision shall be made for possible decks,
porches or additions as part of the initial dwelling unit building plans. The
unit lot shall be configured and sized to include decks or porches.
         c.   Minimum Overhang: In case of gable roof, a minimum eighteen inch
(18") roof overhang or soffit shall be required for all residential structures.
         d.   Exterior Building Finish:
            (1)   Townhomes: The exterior of townhome dwelling units shall
include a variation in building materials which are to be distributed
throughout the building facades and coordinated into the architectural design
of the structure facing the public right-of-way to create an architecturally
balanced appearance. A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the area of
front building facades shall be composed of Class I materials.
            (2)   Multi Family: A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the
area of all building facades shall be composed of Class I materials.
         e.   Utilities And Screening: Exterior utility meters and/or fixtures
shall be located in interior side or rear yards when possible and shall be
screened from view of adjacent properties and the public right-of-way.
         f.   Drives: Private drives shall include plans and areas for snow
storage.
         g.   Open Space and Recreational Uses: In addition to the park
dedication requirements stipulated by the City subdivision ordinance, a minimum
of ten percent (10%) of the gross development project area shall be in usable
open space and recreational use for the project residents. Such areas shall be
specifically designed for both the active and passive use by the project
residents and may include swimming pools, trails, nature areas, tot lots,
exercise equipment, saunas, etc. Said areas and facilities shall be private,
except in those cases where the City agrees to assume responsibility for all or
a portion of the recreational space. In those cases where private ownership is
maintained, the land and facilities shall be subject to the requirements set
forth in a development agreement.
      2.   R-5 Downtown Residential and B-2 Downtown Business Districts:
         a.   Window And Door Openings:
            (1)   In the R-5 district, window and door openings shall comprise
not less than thirty percent (30%) of the area of the ground floor of street
facing facades.
            (2)   In the B-2 district, window and door openings shall comprise
not less than forty percent (40%) of the area of the ground floor of street
facing facades and not less than thirty percent (30%) of the area above the
ground floor of street facing facades.
            (3)   Windows shall be designed with openings that recess or extend
forward in order to create a strong rhythm of light and shadow in keeping with
traditional architecture.
            (4)   Mirrored glass or glass block shall not be used on street
facing facades. Glass on windows and doors shall be clear or slightly tinted,
allowing views into and out of the interior.
            (5)   Window shape, size and patterns shall emphasize the intended
organization of the facade and the definition of the building.
         b.   Architectural Detailing: Corners, cornices, windows, and doorways
shall include additional architectural detailing beyond the basic building wall
materials or pattern of traditional style buildings. All facades facing public
areas shall provide architectural detailing.
         c.   Building Entrances: Primary entrances on all buildings shall face
the primary abutting public street or walkway, or linked to that street by a
clearly defined and visible walkway or courtyard. Additional secondary
entrances may be oriented to a secondary street or parking area.
         d.   Intersections: At intersections, buildings shall be placed such
that building facades are at or near the sidewalk on both streets.
         e.   Facade Articulation:
            (1)   The primary facade(s) of buildings forty feet (40') or more
in width shall be articulated into smaller increments through the following
techniques (or something similar):
               (a)   Stepping back or extending forward a portion of the
facade.
               (b)   Use of different textures or contrasting, but compatible,
materials.
               (c)   Division into storefronts with separate display windows
and entrances.
               (d)   Arcades, awnings, window bays, balconies or similar
ornamental features.
               (e)   Variation in rooflines to reinforce the articulation of
the primary facade.
            (2)   Buildings shall have a well defined base, middle and top. The
base or ground floor shall be visually distinct from the upper stories through
a change in building materials, window shape or size, an intermediate cornice
line, an awning, arcade or similar technique.
         f.   Exterior Building Materials:
            (1)   In the R-5 district, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of
street facing facades and forty percent (40%) of nonstreet facing facades shall
be composed of Class I materials. The balance of the facades may be made up of
Class II and/or Class III materials.
            (2)   In the B-2 district, a minimum of seventy percent (70%) of
street facing facades and fifty percent (50%) of nonstreet facing facades shall
be composed of Class I materials. The balance of the facades shall be made up
of Class II materials and not more than twenty percent (20%) of Class III
materials.
            (3)   Materials of similar quality shall be used on front, side,
and rear facades, and detailing of all facades should be compatible.
         g.   Building Color: Building colors shall accent, blend with, or
complement surroundings. Principal building colors shall consist of subtle,
neutral or muted colors with low reflectance (e.g., browns, grays, tans, dark
or muted greens, blues and reds). No more than two (2) principal colors may be
used on a facade or individual storefront. Bright or primary colors shall be
used only as accents, occupying a maximum of twenty percent (20%) of building
facades.
         h.   Off Street Parking:
            (1)   Major Collector or Arterial Street Frontages: Principal
structures along major street frontages such as County Road 2 shall be required
to locate their parking area at the rear of the building. Parking lots along
major street frontages are prohibited within this district.
            (2)   Local Street Frontages: Surface parking lots shall be located
along the side or rear of the principal structure within this district.
         i.   Loading Areas: Loading areas, service entrances, and mechanical
services shall be screened from view of public streets.
      3.   B-4 Highway Business and B-6 Business Campus Districts:
         a.   Facades:
            (1)   Facades greater than one hundred feet (100') in length,
measured horizontally, shall incorporate visual relief, defined as the
incorporation of design features such as large doors, windows, horizontal and
vertical patterns, contrasting materials, and/or varying wall depths.
            (2)   Ground floor facades that face public streets shall have
arcades, display windows, entry areas, awnings, other architectural features,
or pedestrian attractive features such as benches, niches, or plantings along
no less than forty percent (40%) of their horizontal length.
            (3)   Building facades facing public rights-of-way, residential
zoning districts, or public areas, shall include a repeating pattern of at
least two (2) of the elements listed below or of other architectural features.
At least one of these elements shall repeat horizontally. All elements shall
repeat at intervals of no more than thirty feet (30').
               (a)   Color change.
               (b)   Texture change.
               (c)   Material module change.
               (d)   Expression of architectural or structural bay through a
change in plane no less than twelve inches (12") in width, such as an offset or
reveal.
            (4)   Facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, neutral or
earth tone colors. The use of high intensity colors or fluorescent colors is
prohibited.
         b.   Exterior Building Materials: A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of
street facing facades and forty percent (40%) of nonstreet facing facades shall
be composed of Class I materials or architectural precast panels. The balance
of the facades may be made up of Class II and/or Class III materials.
         c.   Shopping Carts: Any retail business that uses shopping carts
outside of the building shall have an approved cart management plan. The
management plan shall specify the retail operation's cart management program to
prevent accumulation of carts in the parking lot. Shopping carts shall not be
stored outside overnight.
         d.   Loading Areas and Screening:
            (1)   Areas for truck parking, loading docks/doors, or other such
uses shall not be visible from abutting streets or adjacent residential zoning
districts.
            (2)   No part of a loading dock shall be located within one hundred
feet (100') of a residential district boundary.
            (3)   Loading docks, truck parking, utility meters, HVAC equipment,
trash collection, trash compaction, and other service functions shall be
incorporated into the overall design of the building and the landscaping so
that the visual and acoustic impacts of these functions are fully contained and
out of view from adjacent properties, public streets, pedestrianways and public
sidewalks, and no attention is attracted to the functions by the use of
screening materials that are different from or inferior to the principal
materials of the building and landscape.
      4.   I-1 Limited Industrial and I-2 General Industrial Districts:
         a.   Exterior Building Materials: A minimum of sixty percent (60%) of
all building facades shall be composed of Class I or Class II materials. The
balance of the facades may be made up of Class III materials.
   C.   Exceptions: Exceptions to the provisions of this section may be granted
through issuance of a conditional use permit by the city council; provided,
that:
      1.   The proposed building maintains the quality intended by this title.
      2.   The proposed building is compatible and in harmony with other
structures within the district.
      3.   The provisions of section
11-3-2 of this title are considered and satisfied. (Ord. 20, 3-27-2008; amd.
Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-5-2: HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   District Requirements: Except as otherwise allowed by subsections B and
C of this section, no structure shall exceed the height restrictions of the
applicable zoning district.
   B.   Additional Height Allowance: Building heights in excess of the
standards noted in subsection A of this section may be permitted through a
conditional use permit; provided, that:
      1.   The site is capable of accommodating the increased intensity of use.
      2.   The increased intensity of use does not cause an increase in traffic
volumes beyond the capacity of the surrounding streets.
      3.   Public utilities and services including fire protection services are
adequate.
      4.   For each additional ten feet (10') above thirty five feet (35'),
front and side yard setback requirements shall be increased by five percent
(5%).
      5.   The provisions of section
11-4-5 of this title are considered and satisfactorily met.
   C.   Exceptions: The building height limits established herein for districts
shall not apply to the following:
Belfries.
Chimneys or flues.
Church spires.
Cooling towers.
Cupolas and domes which do not contain usable space.
Elevator penthouses.
Farm buildings.
Flagpoles.
Monuments.
Necessary mechanical and electrical appurtenances.
Parapet walls extending not more than three feet (3') above the limiting height
of the building.
Poles, towers and other structures for essential services.
   D.   Roof Equipment: No excluded roof equipment or structural element
extending beyond the limited height of a building may occupy more than twenty
five percent (25%) of the area of the roof nor exceed ten feet (10') unless
otherwise noted.
   E.   Towers And Antennas: The height of satellite dishes, television
receiving antennas and radio receiving antennas shall be regulated in
accordance with chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-5-3: RESIDENTIAL DECKS:
   A.   Permit Required: A permit shall be required for all decks attached to a
principal structure or any detached deck more than thirty inches (30") above
grade.
   B.   Application For Permit: Applicants shall submit to the building
official the following:
      1.   A completed building permit application.
      2.   A certificate of survey identifying the proposed deck location and
distances from all property lines.
      3.   Deck dimensions and construction specifications.
   C.   Setbacks: Decks shall meet the following setbacks:
      1.   Front yard: Thirty feet (30').
      2.   Side yard:
         a.   Interior: Ten feet (10').
         b.   Street: Twenty five feet (25').
      3.   Rear yard: Twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-5-4: SCREENING:
   A.   Commercial, Industrial And Institutional Uses: All commercial,
industrial, or institutional uses shall provide screening along the boundary of
any abutting residential district or where the side or rear of the use (as
determined by the zoning administrator) is separated from any residential
district by a public right of way. All screening required by this section shall
be subject to section
11-4-16, "Traffic Control And Visibility", of this title and is to consist of a
twenty foot (20') wide greenbelt strip as follows:
      1.   A greenbelt planting strip shall consist of evergreen trees and/or
deciduous trees and plants and be of a sufficient density to provide a visual
screen and reasonable buffer. This planting strip shall be designed to provide
visual screening to a minimum height of six feet (6'). The grade for
determining height shall be the grade elevation of the building or use for
which the screening is providing protection, unless otherwise established by
the zoning administrator. The planting plan and type of plantings shall require
the approval of the zoning administrator.
      2.   A fence may also be installed, but not in lieu of the greenbelt
planting strip. The fence shall be constructed of masonry, brick, vinyl, or
wood, except as otherwise provided herein, and located within the interior of
the lot such that greenbelt plantings are visible from adjacent property. Such
fence shall provide a solid screening effect and shall be a minimum of six feet
(6') in height but shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height. The grade for
determining height shall be the grade elevation of the building or use for
which the screening is providing protection, unless otherwise established by
the zoning administrator. The design and materials used in constructing a
required screening fence shall be subject to the approval of the zoning
administrator.
   B.   Residential Buffer Yards:
      1.   Lot Depth Requirements: Except for lots of record and preliminary
platted lots having legal standing on the effective date hereof, double
frontage residential lots shall have an additional depth of at least twenty
feet (20'), designated as an additional drainage and utility easement, in order
to allow space for buffering/screen planting along the back lot line.
      2.   Lot Width Requirements: Except for lots of record and preliminary
platted lots having legal standing established on the effective date hereof,
lots which border major collector or arterial streets on a side yard shall have
an additional width of at least ten feet (10'), designated as an additional
drainage and utility easement, in order to allow space for buffering and
screening plantings along the lot line bordering such streets.
      3.   Screening Plan Required: For applicable subdivisions, a
comprehensive screening plan shall be submitted. The plan shall identify all
proposed buffer screening in both plan and sectional view.
      4.   Timing/Responsibility Of Installation: All buffers, bermings and/or
plantings shall be constructed or planted prior to the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy.
      5.   Design Standards:
         a.   Plantings: All designated buffer yards shall be seeded or sodded
except in areas of steep slopes where natural vegetation is acceptable as
approved by the zoning administrator. All plantings within designated buffer
yards shall adhere to the following:
            (1)   Plant material centers shall not be located closer than three
feet (3') from the fence line or property line, and shall not conflict with
public plantings, sidewalks, trails, etc.
            (2)   Landscape screen plant material shall be planted in two (2)
or more rows. Plantings shall be staggered in rows unless otherwise approved by
the zoning administrator.
            (3)   Deciduous shrubs shall not be planted more than four feet
(4') on center, and/or evergreen shrubs shall not be planted more than three
feet (3') on center.
            (4)   Deciduous trees intended for screening shall be planted not
more than forty feet (40') apart. Evergreen trees intended for screening shall
be planted not more than fifteen feet (15') apart.
         b.   Walls And Fences: All walls and fences erected within designated
buffer yards shall adhere to the following:
            (1)   Only walls and fences formally approved as part of the
subdivision and site plan process shall be permitted within the buffer yard.
            (2)   At least fifty percent (50%) of the street side of a
screening fence shall be landscaped with plant materials. Plant materials shall
be at least equal to the fence height.
            (3)   Exposed fences shall run a maximum length of fifty feet (50')
between landscaping areas or clusters.
            (4)   Fences and landscaping shall not be located within the
traffic visibility triangle defined by section
11-4-16 of this title.
         c.   Earth Berms:
            (1)   Except in areas of steep slopes or where other topographic
features will not permit, as determined by the city engineer, an earth berm at
least four feet (4') in height shall be installed in all designated buffer
yards.
            (2)   Shall not exceed a three to one (3:1) slope unless approved
by the city engineer.
            (3)   Shall contain no less than four inches (4") of topsoil.
      6.   Maintenance:
         a.   Maintenance of the buffer strip planting and/or fence shall be
the responsibility of the individual property owners or, if applicable, the
homeowners' association.
         b.   All repairs to the fence or wall shall be consistent with the
original fence design in regard to location and appearance.
         c.   Replacement of landscape materials or plantings in a buffer yard
area shall be consistent with the original screen design.
         d.   All repair or plant replacement shall be done within forty five
(45) days of written notification from the zoning administrator or, if
applicable, the homeowners' association.
   C.   Screening Of Mechanical Equipment: All rooftop and ground mounted
mechanical equipment for residential buildings having five (5) units or more
and for nonresidential buildings shall comply with the following standards:
      1.   All rooftop and ground mounted mechanical equipment shall be
screened so as to mitigate noise in compliance with section
11-4-8 of this title.
      2.   All rooftop and ground mounted mechanical equipment shall be
designed (including exterior color) and located so as to be aesthetically
harmonious and compatible with the building. Screening of and landscaping
around the equipment may be required where the design, color, and location of
the equipment are found to not effectively buffer noise or provide aesthetic
harmony and compatibility. Screening shall be constructed of durable materials
which are aesthetically compatible with the structure and which may be an
integral part of the structure.
      3.   Rooftop mechanical equipment less than three feet (3') in height may
be exempted from screening requirements by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 5,
12-14-2006)
11-5-5: FENCES:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The city of Elko New Market recognizes the privacy,
safety, aesthetic, and economic value of fences.
      1.   The provisions of this section are intended to:
         a.   Allow for areas on site for privacy;
         b.   Provide screening and mitigation of potential conflicts between
different uses;
         c.   Enhance the overall aesthetic conditions within the city;
         d.   Limit sight line obstructions;
         e.   Reduce the potential for criminal and illegal activities; and
         f.   Prevent conflicts with utilities and drainage flow.
      2.   The purpose of this section is not to:
         a.   Regulate naturally growing shrubs, trees, or other foliage; or
         b.   Regulate landscape or retaining walls.
   B.   Permit Required:
      1.   Administrative Zoning Permit: An administrative zoning permit shall
be required for all fences, three feet (3') to six feet (6') in height and
located within ten feet (10') from a property/boundary line.
      2.   Building Permit: A building permit shall be required for all fences
over six feet (6') in height.
      3.   Exceptions: Subject to the other provisions stated within this
section, the following shall not require a permit:
         a.   Any fence less than three feet (3') in height.
         b.   Any maintenance, upkeep, and/or repair of fences.
         c.   Any underground electric pet fencing.
         d.   Any animal enclosure located at least five feet (5') from a
property line with an area of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
However, animal enclosures located less than ten feet (10') from the property
line shall be adequately screened from the closest neighboring property.
         e.   Any patio, trash container, or utility screen located at least
five feet (5') from a property line and with a length of less than thirty two
feet (32').
         f.   Any permanent garden or landscape fencing located at least five
feet (5') from the property line. However, such garden and landscape fencing
must be less than four feet (4') in height and located within the parameters of
the distinct garden and/or landscaping area.
         g.   Any temporary/portable snow fencing.
         h.   Any temporary/portable construction/safety fencing.
         i.   Any temporary/portable soil erosion fencing. However, all erosion
fencing associated with a construction project shall be completely removed upon
issuance of a final certificate of occupancy.
         j.   Any temporary/portable special event fencing located within
nonresidential districts. Special event fencing located within residential
districts may require an interim use permit as determined by the city.
   C.   Application Requirements And Site Inspections:
      1.   All fence permit applications shall include a certificate of survey
and/or site map, drawn to scale, showing/labeling the following:
         a.   Property address and/or legal description (if platted).
         b.   Fronting street(s) and street names.
         c.   Property lines and property line dimensions.
         d.   Proposed fence type.
         e.   Proposed location of the fence and distance from property lines.
         f.   Existing objects and/or structures located near the proposed
fence.
      2.   Before a site inspection is conducted by the designated city
official, the following items shall be located on site and clearly marked with
paint, flags, stakes, and/or laths:
         a.   Property corners. If a certificate of survey is not submitted, a
licensed surveyor shall officially mark/expose the property corner/boundary
lines and provide the city with written verification of that survey. Any
property markers/monuments found missing or substandard shall be reset by a
licensed surveyor.
         b.   Boundary lines.
         c.   Proposed fence location.
   D.   Location:
      1.   Rights Of Way And Easements:
         a.   Private fences shall not extend into any public rights of way,
easements, or onto public property except by means of an encroachment agreement
approved by the city. The approval or denial of such an agreement shall be
solely within the city's discretion. Said encroachment agreement shall also be
recorded with the county recorder's office. Further, the city or any utility
company having authority to use the rights of way or easements, shall not be
liable for repair or replacement of fences in the event that they are moved,
damaged, or destroyed by virtue of the lawful use of the easement.
         b.   Any fence placed in a drainage easement shall not adversely
affect drainage or create debris buildup.
         c.   All fence applicants and/or property owners are responsible for
verifying that no conflict exists with utilities prior to installation.
      2.   Boundary Fences:
         a.   Directly On Or Abutting Property Line: In an effort to physically
visualize property boundary lines, discourage back to back fences, and reduce
small unmaintained gaps between fences, all boundary fences (fences located
within 10 feet of a property line) shall be located directly on or abut up to
the shared neighboring property line.
         b.   One Fence On Property Line: Only one boundary fence shall be
located on or near the common property line between neighboring properties.
         c.   Exceptions:
            (1)   In the case of existing plantings and/or other objects
located on or near the property line, the obstructions must be removed from the
path of the proposed fence. However, if the obstruction is significant, the
city may approve a fence with an appropriate setback distance to allow for the
obstruction.
            (2)   Where an existing neighboring fence is located within ten
feet (10') of the shared property line, the fence applicant and/or property
owner shall work with the neighboring fence owner to tie into or move the
existing fence onto the common property line. However, if a private agreement
cannot be arranged by the neighboring property owners to connect into or
relocate the existing fence, the city shall determine an appropriate setback
location for the proposed fence to allow for future repair and maintenance of
boundary fences.
      3.   Setbacks:
         a.   All private fences shall be set back at least two feet (2') from
the edge of any public sidewalk or trail.
         b.   All private fences shall be set back at least fifteen feet (15')
from the road edge or back of curb along a public street, and all private
fences shall be set back at least five feet (5') from the road edge along a
public alley. All private boundary fences shall be placed according to the
setback requirements provided within this section or on the property line,
whichever is a greater distance away from the public roadway.
         c.   Private fences adjacent to wetlands shall be set back in
accordance with all applicable city, state, and federal wetland buffer
regulations as amended from time to time.
   E.   Height:
      1.   Measurement: Height shall be measured from ground level elevation to
the top of the fence.
      2.   Residential Fences:
         a.   Side And Rear Yards: Fences located within a side or rear yard
shall not exceed six feet (6') in height.
         b.   Front Yard: Fences located within a front yard shall not exceed
four feet (4') in height.
         c.   Corner Lot; Double Frontage: Fences located within the secondary
front yard of a corner lot shall be considered a front yard fence and not
exceed four feet (4') in height. Exception: Any fence located within a
secondary front yard that abuts the secondary front yard of a neighboring
property may be extended up to six feet (6') in height.
         d.   Corner Lot; Multi-Frontage: Fences located within the secondary
front yard of a corner lot having public roadway frontage on more than three
(3) sides may be allowed to extend up to six feet (6') in height.
         e.   Rear Yard; Double Frontage: Rear yard fences fronting along a
public roadway or alleyway may be extended up to six feet (6') in height.
         f.   Irregular Lot: In the case of an irregular shaped lot/parcel, the
city shall determine the most appropriate fence height and type based on the
requirements stated in this section.
      3.   Nonresidential Fences: Except by conditional use permit, all
nonresidential fences shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height.
   F.   Type:
      1.   Residential Fences: Residential fences constructed along a property
boundary line shall be sturdy fencing constructed of low maintenance materials,
such as vinyl coated chainlink, steel, aluminum, wrought iron, vinyl,
composite, or other similar low maintenance materials determined acceptable by
the city. High quality wood fences may be allowed along a property boundary if
resistant to moisture rot, kept in good condition, and regularly maintained.
      2.   Wire Fencing: Wire fencing shall not be used for boundary fencing
where the wire is thinner than 12-gauge.
      3.   Fencing For Agricultural Use: Agriculture type wire boundary fencing
shall only be used in association with permitted agriculture uses.
      4.   Barbed Wire Fences: For security purposes, barbed wire fencing is
permitted only in conjunction with mixed commercial-industrial, industrial,
public, semipublic, and agriculture land uses. All nonagriculture barbed wire
fencing shall be placed at least seven feet (7') above ground level in a manner
that does not endanger the general public.
      5.   Razor Wire And Electric Fences: All razor wire and electric fences
are prohibited.
      6.   Neighborhood Restrictions: The city does not enforce neighborhood
covenants restricting specific types of fences.
      7.   Swimming Pool Fences And Barriers:
         a.   All fences and barriers for swimming pools and hot tubs/spas
shall comply with the regulations stated in the state building code as amended
from time to time. Swimming pools or spas secured with a code compliant safety
cover as determined by the building official are exempt from the following
requirements:
            (1)   All permanent swimming pools, including inground pools and
aboveground pools with rigid walls, shall be completely surrounded by a fence
or wall not less than four feet (4') in height, and with openings, holes, or
gaps no greater than four inches (4") in either vertical or horizontal
direction. The fence shall be of a type not readily climbed by children. A
building or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. An
aboveground pool with a wall greater than four feet (4') in height does not
require a fence if the wall cannot be readily climbed by children and the pool
can be secured while not in actual use.
            (2)   All gates or doors to such enclosure shall be equipped with a
self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door securely
closed at all times when not in actual use and shall be provided with hardware
for permanent locking devices, except that the door of any dwelling which forms
a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. Pool gates shall be locked
when the pool is not in use.
   G.   General Regulations:
      1.   All fencing affecting traffic visibility shall comply with the
regulations stated in section
 11-4-16, traffic visibility, of this title.
      2.   The finished side of all fences shall face away from the fence
owner's property.
      3.   All boundary fences shall be constructed so as to leave adequate
clearance between the ground level and the bottom of the fence in order that
the yard/landscaping lying directly under the fence can be easily trimmed and
maintained.
      4.   No fences shall be located within the front yard of any low density
residential zoning district. Exception: Open decorative type fencing (such as
split rail, ornamental, or picket fencing) that is at least seventy five
percent (75%) open (not greater than 25 percent opaque) and no longer than
thirty two feet (32') in length may be allowed in residential front yards.
Chainlink fences are prohibited in residential front yards.
      5.   All temporary/portable fencing is permitted only for the time period
necessary to fulfill the primary purpose for which the fence was intended.
Except for construction/safety and erosion control fencing, no temporary/
portable fencing shall be used for a period longer than six (6) consecutive
months per year without official city approval.
      6.   The city is not liable for any damage caused to private fencing
while maintaining or clearing nearby public roads, trails, sidewalks, or other
public infrastructure.
      7.   It is the responsibility of all fence owners to keep both sides of
their fence(s) in good repair and appearance and not in a condition of
disrepair, danger, or that constitutes a public or private nuisance. Any fence
shall be considered a public nuisance if it does not comply with the following:
         a.   All fences shall comply with associated regulations relating to
nuisances and blight stated in this code.
         b.   All fences shall be firmly fastened and anchored in order that
the fence is not leaning or otherwise in a stage of collapse.
         c.   All fences shall be maintained in sound and good repair and free
from deterioration, loose or rotting pieces, or holes, breaks, or gaps not
otherwise intended in the original design of the fence. All fences shall be
free from any defects or condition which makes the fence hazardous.
         d.   All exterior wood surfaces of any fence, other than decay
resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements by paint or other
protective surface covering or treatment, which shall be maintained in good
repair to provide the intended protection from the elements.
         e.   No fence section shall have peeling, cracked, chipped or
otherwise deteriorated surface finish.
   H.   Special Purpose Fences: Fences for special purpose and fences differing
in construction, height, or location, may be permitted in any district, only by
issuance of a conditional use permit and upon evidence that the special purpose
fence is necessary to protect, buffer, or improve the premises for which the
fence is intended. (Ord. 76, 8-25-2011)
11-5-6: EXTERIOR STORAGE 1 :
   A.   Residential Districts: In residential districts, all materials and
equipment shall be stored within a building or fully screened so as not to be
visible from adjoining properties, except for the following: laundry drying,
construction and landscaping materials and equipment currently (within a period
of 36 hours) being used on the premises, agricultural equipment and materials
if these are used or intended for use on the premises, and off street parking
of passenger automobiles and pickup trucks. Recreational and commercial
vehicles shall meet requirements under sections
11-8-2 and
11-8-3 of this title.
   B.   Business, Industrial And Institutional Districts: In the business,
industrial and institutional districts, there shall be no outdoor storage of
either materials or products, except through the issuance of a conditional use
permit in accordance with section
11-3-2 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 6-5B-5 of this code.
11-5-7: SETBACK ENCROACHMENTS:
   A.   General Requirements: Except as provided below, no lot, yard or other
open space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such lot, yard
or open space less than the minimum required by this title, and if the existing
yard or other open space is less than the minimum required, it shall not be
further reduced. No required open space provided around any building or
structure shall be included as part of any open space required for another
structure.
   B.   Allowed Encroachments: The following shall not be considered
encroachments on yard setback requirements:
      1.   Cantilevers up to ten feet (10') in width, chimneys, flues, leaders,
sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves, gutters, and
the like, provided they do not project more than two feet (2') into a yard.
      2.   Terraces, steps, decks, uncovered porches, stoops or similar
structures limited to not more than a height of three feet (3') above grade may
extend to within five feet (5') of side yard and ten feet (10') of rear yard
lot lines, but not more than five feet (5') into a required front yard or side
yard adjacent to a public right of way.
      3.   Recreational and laundry drying equipment, arbors and trellises,
gazebos, and air conditioning or heating equipment shall be allowed only in a
rear or side yard, provided they are at a distance of five feet (5') from any
lot line. No encroachment shall be permitted in existing or required drainage
and/or utility easements.
      4.   In residential districts, a one-story entrance for a detached
single-family or two-family dwelling may extend into the front yard setback not
more than five feet (5'), and shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in size.
      5.   No encroachment shall be permitted in existing or required drainage
and utility easements.
   C.   Front And Side Yard Setback Reduction: In the case of lots platted
prior to the effective date hereof, the principal building setback requirements
for front and side yards adjacent to a public right of way, as established by
the respective zoning districts, may be reduced, upon the approval of an
administrative permit, to a distance equaling the average setback of principal
buildings within the block frontage in which the lot is located. In no case
shall this distance be less than fifteen feet (15'), nor shall a principal
structure be placed more than seven feet (7') beyond the setback of any
principal structure on a directly abutting lot.
   D.   Triangular Lots: In the case of triangular lots, where the rear lot
line is a single vertex, the rear yard setback points of reference shall be
determined by measuring the length of the setback distance from the vertex
along the side lot lines. The rear setback line shall be determined by
traversing the lot and connecting these points of reference. (Ord. 5, 12-14-
2006)
11-5-8: RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES:
   A.   Building Permit Required: Every licensed house mover shall, in each and
every instance, before raising, holding up or moving a building, obtain a
building permit.
   B.   Application For Permit: An application for such permit shall indicate
the origin and destination of such building, the route over which it is to be
moved and shall state the time in which the moving of such building shall be
issued. The permit shall also indicate the location of the lot on which the
house is to be located, the dimensions of the lot and the proposed location of
the structure on the lot along with setback distances.
   C.   Conditions Of Permit: No permit to move a building shall be issued
until there is compliance with and approval by the building official of the
following conditions:
      1.   Architectural Compatibility: The building official shall not issue a
permit until finding the structure is architecturally compatible with the
housing in the surrounding area.
      2.   Compliance With Regulations: The building to be moved shall comply
in all respects with the state building code and other pertinent state rules
and the city ordinances.
      3.   Dimensional Requirements: The lot on which the building is to be
located shall meet all the minimum dimensional requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located.
      4.   Yard Requirements: The building shall be placed on the lot so as to
meet all the front, side and rear yard requirements as set forth in this title.
(Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
      5.   Electrical Correction Requirements:
         a.   In cases when the removal or displacement of overhead or other
wires is necessary, it shall be the duty of the person, association, or
corporation owning, operating, or controlling said wires to remove or displace
the same, so far as the same may be necessary to effect the removal thereof.
(Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. 2011 Code)
         b.   The person to whom said permit shall have been issued shall
notify the person, association, or corporation owning, operating, or
controlling said wires sufficiently to allow the passage of said building along
the street over which said wires are suspended.
         c.   Any expenses incurred or to be incurred in the moving, removing
or displacing of such wires shall be paid for by the person who makes the
application for the permit. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-5-9: DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES:
   A.   Building Permit Required: A building permit shall be required for the
demolition of all structures.
   B.   Conditions Of Permit: The building official shall issue a permit upon
finding that:
      1.   The demolition will be done in a safe manner.
      2.   The debris will be disposed of properly.
      3.   All necessary permits from other government agencies have been
obtained, if applicable. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-5-10: MODEL HOMES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the erection of
model homes, which may include temporary real estate offices, in new
subdivisions without adversely affecting the character of surrounding
residential neighborhoods or creating a general nuisance. As model homes
represent a unique temporary commercial use, special consideration shall be
given to the peculiar problems associated with them, and special standards
shall be applied to ensure reasonable compatibility with their environment.
   B.   Qualification For Building Permit: To qualify for a building permit for
a model home, which may include a temporary real estate office, the following
shall be required:
      1.   Upon receipt of final plat approval and recording, two (2) building
permits for model homes per subdivision phase may be granted. No final
certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the infrastructure improvements
including the first lift of asphalt have been completed and approved by the
city.
      2.   Upon completion of infrastructure improvements, including the first
lift of asphalt within the respective final plat subdivision, additional
building permits may be issued for model homes and/or temporary real estate
offices; provided, that the number of model homes and/or temporary real estate
offices shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the number of lots within the
final plat.
   C.   Procedure: The erection of a model home(s) within all residential
districts, which may include a temporary real estate office(s), shall require
an administrative permit, as may be issued by the zoning administrator.
   D.   Special Requirements:
      1.   Model homes and model homes with temporary real estate offices shall
be allowed in all residential zoning districts in which they are permitted and
shall be utilized solely for selling lots and/or homes within the subdivision
in which they are located.
      2.   Temporary parking facilities equal to four (4) paved spaces per
model home dwelling unit or a model home with a temporary real estate office
shall be provided. The overall design, drainage, and surfacing of the temporary
parking facility shall be subject to the approval of the zoning administrator
or city engineer.
      3.   Access from a temporary parking facility shall be directed away from
developed and occupied residential neighborhoods to the greatest extent
possible.
      4.   No model home or model home with a temporary real estate office
shall incorporate outside lighting which creates a nuisance due to glare or
intensity, as provided in section
11-4-7 of this title.
      5.   All signage shall comply with the sign regulations as contained in
chapter 12 of this title for the zoning district in which the model home and/or
temporary real estate office is located.
      6.   The administrative permit shall terminate three (3) years from its
date of issuance or when eighty five percent (85%) of the development is
completed, whichever comes first, unless extended by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
      7.   No residential certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a model
home or model home with a temporary real estate office until such time as the
structure has been fully converted to a residence in compliance with the State
Building Code. Additionally, such conversion shall include, but not be limited
to, parking lot removal, yard restoration, and the removal of signage and
lighting. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. 2011 Code)
      8.   The restoration of all temporary parking areas with appropriate
landscaping shall be completed by the end of the following growing season.
   E.   Restricted Use: Model homes and model homes with temporary real estate
offices shall be used solely for the display and sale of home fixtures and
products and real estate for the subdivision in which they are located unless
approved by the Zoning Administrator through an administrative permit. (Ord. 5,
12-14-2006)
11-5-11: TEMPORARY OUTDOOR USES:
   A.   Purpose: Certain uses that are generally not suitable within a
particular zoning district as a principal or accessory use are potentially
suitable on a temporary basis. Accordingly, it is the intention of this section
to recognize certain temporary outdoor uses as being potentially allowable and
provide conditions associated with such activities.
   B.   General Provisions:
      1.   Administrative Permit Required: All temporary outdoor uses shall be
allowed only through the issuance of an administrative permit as stipulated in
section
11-3-4 of this title.
      2.   Evaluation Criteria: When evaluating a request for a temporary
outdoor use, consideration shall be given to traffic, circulation, parking,
visibility, effects of noise and light, other harmful effects on adjoining
property, if any, and any other relevant impacts or considerations of the
proposed use. The proposed use may be reasonably conditioned to mitigate
identified impacts or to ensure the public health, safety or welfare.
      3.   Information Required: Information required for a temporary outdoor
use shall be in accordance with the informational requirements of subsection
11-3-4C of this title.
      4.   Conditions Of Approval: In approving an application for a temporary
outdoor use, the Zoning Administrator may impose conditions deemed necessary to
ensure that the permit will be in accordance with the evaluation criteria under
subsection B2 of this section and that the temporary outdoor use will not
adversely affect adjacent properties or the public health, safety or welfare.
These conditions may involve any pertinent factors affecting the operation of
such temporary event or use and may include, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
         a.   Operating hours.
         b.   Provision for parking facilities, including vehicular ingress and
egress.
         c.   Regulation of potential nuisance factors such as, but not limited
to, light and glare, noise, vibration, smoke, dust, dirt and odors.
         d.   Regulation of temporary structures and facilities, including
placement, height and size, location of equipment, buffer areas and setbacks.
         e.   Provision for sanitary facilities.
         f.   Provision for waste collection and disposal.
         g.   Provision for security and safety measures.
         h.   Regulation of signs.
         i.   Any other conditions determined by the Zoning Administrator to
ensure the operation of the proposed temporary outdoor use in an orderly,
efficient, safe, compatible, harmonious and nuisance free manner. (Ord. 28, 8-
28-2008)
   C.   Temporary/Seasonal Outdoor Sales:
      1.   Zoning District Allowance: Temporary/seasonal outdoor sales,
including, but not limited to, Christmas tree sales and transient merchant
sales, shall be limited to business, industrial and institutional zoning
districts.
      2.   Duration: Administrative permits for temporary/seasonal outdoor
sales shall be for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days in one (1) calendar
year. No more than two (2) permits shall be issued to the same applicant or
property in any calendar year.
      3.   Performance Standards:
         a.   Off street parking and loading shall be provided as required by
chapter 9 of this title.
         b.   The use of a public address system shall be allowed, provided
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) noise standards are upheld and such
systems do not constitute a nuisance as defined by this Code.
         c.   The site upon which the temporary/seasonal outdoor sale is to be
conducted shall be kept in a neat and orderly fashion, free from litter,
refuse, debris, junk, or other waste which results in offensive odors or
unsightly conditions.
         d.   Display of items shall be arranged in as compact a manner as
reasonably practicable with particular reference to vehicle and pedestrian
safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or
other catastrophe.
         e.   No uses or displays shall be permitted in required parking areas,
required green areas, parking setback areas, or any right-of-way or other
public property.
         f.   Tents, stands, and other similar temporary structures may be
utilized, provided they are clearly identified on a site plan that is submitted
and determined by the Zoning Administrator to not impair the parking capacity,
emergency access, or the safe and efficient movement of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic on or off the site.
         g.   Signage shall be limited to one (1) sign not to exceed thirty two
(32) square feet. The sign may be a banner, shall have a professional
appearance, and shall be mounted or erected in an appropriate location. This
limitation applies to all signs associated with the sale, including those
affixed to vehicles. The sign may be illuminated but shall comply with all
requirements of chapter 12 of this title.
         h.   All lighting shall comply with the lighting standards of section
11-4-7 of this title.
         i.   The sale and associated parking shall not obstruct parking spaces
needed by any permanent business established on the site except when a sale is
held when the business is closed.
         j.   No portion of the use or event shall take place within one
hundred feet (100') of any residential buildings.
         k.   The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to exempt
certain conditions determined to be non-applicable and impose additional
conditions determined necessary to ensure public health, safety and welfare.
      4.   Exemption: A business located in a business or industrial zoning
district shall be exempt from the requirements of subsections B and C of this
section one (1) time per calendar year for a single event not to exceed four
(4) consecutive days in connection with a City-wide garage sale event. (Ord.
157, 6-26-2017)
   D.   Special Outdoor Events:
      1.   Permitted Special Outdoor Events:
         a.   All Districts: The following special outdoor events may be
permitted within all zoning districts subject to the provisions in this
subsection and any applicable licensing requirements of this Code:
            (1)   Parades.
            (2)   Similar temporary uses which, in the opinion of the Zoning
Administrator, are comparable to the preceding activity.
         b.   Nonresidential Districts: The following special outdoor events
may be permitted within nonresidential zoning districts subject to the
provisions in this subsection and any applicable licensing requirements of this
Code:
            (1)   Community events, including, but not limited to, fairs,
festivals, concerts, automobile shows, art exhibits, holiday events and
pyrotechnic displays.
            (2)   Circuses, rodeos and petting zoos.
            (3)   Recycling collection events.
            (4)   Religious meetings.
            (5)   Similar temporary uses which, in the opinion of the Zoning
Administrator, are comparable to the preceding activities.
      2.   Duration And Number Of Permits: Administrative permits for special
outdoor events shall be for a period not to exceed ten (10) days in one
calendar year. No more than two (2) permits shall be issued to the same
applicant or property in any calendar year.
      3.   Performance Standards: All special outdoor events shall conform to
the applicable conditions of the administrative permit as determined by the
Zoning Administrator.
         a.   Off street parking and loading shall be provided as required by
chapter 9 of this title.
         b.   The use of a public address system shall be allowed, provided
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) noise standards are upheld and such
systems do not constitute a nuisance as defined by this Code.
         c.   The site upon which the special outdoor event is to be conducted
shall be kept in a neat and orderly fashion, free from litter, refuse, debris,
junk, or other waste which results in offensive odors or unsightly conditions.
         d.   No events/activities shall be permitted in required parking
areas, parking setback areas, or any right-of-way or other public property.
         e.   Tents, stands, and other similar temporary structures may be
utilized, provided they are clearly identified on a site plan that is submitted
and determined by the Zoning Administrator to not impair the parking capacity,
emergency access, or the safe and efficient movement of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic on or off the site.
         f.   Signage shall be limited to one sign not to exceed thirty two
(32) square feet. The sign may be a banner, shall have a professional
appearance, and shall be mounted or erected in an appropriate location. This
limitation applies to all signs associated with the sale, including those
affixed to vehicles. The sign may be illuminated but shall comply with all
requirements of chapter 12 of this title.
         g.   All lighting shall comply with the lighting standards of section
11-4-7 of this title.
         h.   The event and associated parking shall not obstruct parking
spaces needed by any permanent business established on the site except when an
event is held when the business is closed.
         i.   With the exception of parades, no portion of the use or event
shall take place within one hundred feet (100') of any residential buildings.
         j.   The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to exempt
certain conditions determined to be nonapplicable and impose additional
conditions determined necessary to ensure public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 28, 8-28-2008)
11-5-12: FARMING OPERATIONS:
   A.   Existing Farms: All farms in existence upon the effective date hereof
shall be a permitted use where the operator can conduct a farming operation.
However, all regulations contained herein shall apply to all changes of the
farming operation which will cause all or part of the area to become more
intensively used or more urban in character.
   B.   Setbacks: The same setbacks and other regulations shall apply to
farming operations as are applied to urban development.
   C.   Expansions And Alterations: The City may require any farm operation to
secure a conditional use permit to expand or intensify said operations when
such operations are too intensive as to constitute an industrial type use
(consisting of the compounding, processing, and packaging of products for
wholesale or retail trade), and further, that such operations may tend to
become a permanent industrial type operation that cannot be terminated as can a
normal farming operation. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-5-13: LAND RECLAMATION AND MINING:
   A.   Compliance With Regulations: No person shall, within the City, fill,
excavate, dig or grade the surface of the earth, nor open any pits or excavated
areas in the earth, nor do any other acts where it will raise or lower the
grade of any land, except as provided in and in conformance with the applicable
provisions of this Code.
   B.   Interim Use Permit Required: All applications for land reclamation or
mining shall require an interim use permit under the provisions of section
11-3-3 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
   C.   Environmental Protection Requirements: All applications for land
reclamation or mining shall comply with the applicable environmental protection
provisions of chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 30, 10-23-2008)
11-5-14: DAYCARE FACILITIES:
   A.   Purpose: The regulation of daycare facilities in this section is to
establish standards and procedures by which daycare facilities can be conducted
within the City without jeopardizing the health, safety, and general welfare of
the daycare participants and/or the surrounding neighborhood. This section
establishes the City's minimum requirements for the establishment of daycare
facilities other than in-home daycare facilities as allowed by State Statute.
   B.   Procedure: Daycare facilities, except as otherwise provided, shall be
allowed in accordance with the zoning districts established by chapter 24 of
this title. In addition to the City regulations, all daycare facility
operations shall comply with the minimum requirements of the applicable
Minnesota Department of Human Services regulations.
   C.   Special Requirements: Daycare facilities shall meet the following
requirements as applicable:
      1.   Lot Requirements And Setbacks: The proposed site for a daycare
facility shall have a minimum lot area as determined by the Minnesota
Department of Human Services and the base zoning district in which it is
located. The daycare facility shall meet the minimum setback requirements of
the respective zoning districts.
      2.   Screening: Where the daycare facility is in or abuts any commercial
or industrial use or zoned property, the daycare facility shall provide
screening along the shared boundary of the two (2) uses. All of the required
fencing and screening shall comply with the fencing and screening requirements
in sections
11-5-4 and
11-5-5 of this chapter.
      3.   Parking:
         a.   There shall be adequate off street parking which shall be located
separately from any outdoor play area and shall be in compliance with chapter 9
of this title.
         b.   There shall be adequate short term parking or drop off area
provided within close proximity to the main entrance. Short term or drop off
parking shall accommodate three (3) car spaces and shall be designated as
temporary in nature. The short term parking or drop off area shall not conflict
with off street parking access and shall not conflict with pedestrian movement.
The short term parking or drop off area is in addition to off street parking
and loading spaces required by chapter 9 of this title.
         c.   Except as may be approved as part of a joint parking arrangement,
as regulated by section
11-9-5 of this title, when a daycare facility is an accessory use within a
structure containing another principal use, each use shall be calculated
separately for determining the total off street parking spaces required.
      4.   Signage: All signing and informational or visual communication
devices shall be in compliance with chapter 12 of this title.
      5.   Building Requirements: The building plans for the construction or
alteration of a structure that is to be used as a daycare facility shall be
submitted to the City for review by the City building official to ensure that
the structure is in compliance with the State Building Code. The facility shall
meet the following conditions:
         a.   Architectural Appearance: The architectural appearance and
functional plan of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the
existing buildings or area as to cause incompatibility with neighboring
properties or constitute a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of
the lot.
         b.   Land Use Compatibility: Internal and external site land use
compatibility and sufficient peripheral area protections shall be provided by
the daycare facility.
         c.   Play Space: Play space shall be adequately enclosed where
necessary to prevent children from leaving the premises unattended.
         d.   Outdoor Areas: Outdoor play areas shall not be provided within
the required front yard setbacks.
      6.   Conditions Of Permit: The Planning Commission and City Council may
impose such conditions on the granting of a daycare facility conditional use
permit as may be necessary to carry out the purpose and provisions of this
title.
      7.   State Licenses Required: Proof of approved applicable State licenses
shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator prior to the building official
granting a certificate of occupancy.
      8.   Inspections: The City hereby reserves the right, upon issuing any
daycare facility conditional use permit, to inspect the premises in which the
occupation is being conducted to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
section or any conditions additionally imposed. (Ord. 179, 10-25-2018)
11-5-15: YARD/GARAGE SALES:
Yard/garage or rummage sales conducted in Residential Zoning Districts shall
comply with the following:
   A.   Merchandise offered for sale shall be the personal property of the
occupant unless approved by the Zoning Administrator.
   B.   Sales shall be limited to a maximum of four (4) consecutive days and
occurring no more than two (2) times within one calendar year per property.
   C.   Signs shall be governed by chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-
2006)
11-5-16: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 1 :
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish provisions for the
opportunity as well as control of sexually oriented businesses within the City.
   B.   General Requirements: Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in
section
11-2-2 of this title, shall be subject to the following general provisions:
      1.   Activities classified as obscene, as defined by Minnesota Statutes
section 617.241, are prohibited.
      2.   Sexually oriented businesses, either principal or accessory, shall
be prohibited from locating in any building which is also used for residential
purposes. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
      3.   Sexually oriented businesses, either principal or accessory, shall
be prohibited from locating in any building which is also licensed to sell
intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor or wine. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd.
2011 Code)
      4.   A sexually oriented business which does not qualify as an accessory
sexually oriented business shall be classified as a principal sexually oriented
business.
   C.   Principal Sexually Oriented Businesses:
      1.   Principal sexually oriented businesses shall be located at least two
hundred (200) radial feet, as measured in a straight line from the closest
point of the property line of the building upon which the principal sexually
oriented business is located, to the property line of:
         a.   Another principal sexually oriented business.
         b.   Schools.
         c.   Churches.
         d.   Daycare facilities. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
         e.   Public parks. (Ord. 188, 4-11-2019)
         f.   Residential Zoning Districts.
      2.   Principal sexually oriented business activities, as defined by this
title, shall be classified as one use. No two (2) principal sexually oriented
businesses shall be located in the same building or upon the same property, and
each business shall be subject to the above provisions.
      3.   All building walls and openings, such as entryways and windows,
shall be covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the
interior from any public or semipublic area. In the case of new construction,
and whenever it is considered feasible by the zoning administrator, the
building shall be oriented so as to minimize any possibility of viewing the
interior from public or semipublic areas.
      4.   Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials shall not be
shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from pedestrian sidewalks
or walkways or from other public or semipublic areas.
   D.   Accessory Sexually Oriented Business: Accessory sexually oriented
businesses shall:
      1.   Comprise no more than five percent (5%) of the floor area of the
establishment in which it is located; provided, that the maximum floor area
used for accessory sexually oriented businesses may not exceed one thousand
(1,000) square feet.
      2.   Comprise no more than ten percent (10%) of the gross receipts of the
entire business operation.
      3.   Not involve or include any activity except the sale or rental of
merchandise.
      4.   Be restricted from and prohibit access to minors by the physical
separation of such items from areas of the general public access as follows:
         a.   Movie Rentals: Display areas shall be restricted from general
view and shall be located within a separate room, the access of which is in
clear view and under the control of the persons responsible for the operation
or shall be in catalogs under the direct control and distribution of the
operator.
         b.   Magazines: Publications classified or qualifying as sexually
oriented shall not be physically accessible to minors and shall be covered with
a wrapper or other means to prevent display of any material other than the
publication title.
      5.   Be prohibited at any public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival,
theatrical or other performance or exhibition presented to the general public
where minors are admitted.
   E.   State Statute Superseded: This section hereby supersedes Minnesota
statutes section 617.242 in its entirety. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 4, chapter 7 of this Code.
11-5-17: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to prevent competition with
business districts and to provide a means through the establishment of specific
standards and procedures by which home occupations can be conducted in
residential neighborhoods without jeopardizing the health, safety, and general
welfare of the surrounding neighborhood. In addition, this section is intended
to provide a mechanism enabling the distinction between those home occupations
having minimal or no secondary impact ("permitted home occupations") and those
which have potential for adverse effects upon surrounding areas ("interim home
occupations").
   B.   Interpretation: Subject to the nonconforming use provisions of this
title, all home occupations, as defined in section
11-2-2 of this title, shall be further defined to distinguish permitted home
occupations from interim home occupations. Accordingly, all home occupations
which satisfy the permitted home occupation criteria shall be considered a
permitted accessory use in all residential zoning districts. Home occupations
which are not specifically prohibited and fail to satisfy the permitted home
occupation criteria shall require an interim use permit, as provided in this
section.
   C.   Prohibited Home Occupations: The following uses have a tendency to be
too intense or potentially disruptive for home occupations and thereby
adversely affect residential areas. The following uses are specifically
prohibited as home occupations:
Manufacturing.
Repair services which produce objectionable light, glare, noise or vibration
including, but not limited to, auto repair, appliance repair and small engine
repair.
Teaching or instruction which customarily consists of more than two (2)
nonfamily pupils at a time.
   D.   General Home Occupation Requirements: The following requirements shall
apply to all home occupations (both permitted and interim):
      1.   No home occupation shall produce light, glare, noise, odor or
vibration that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or
nearby property.
      2.   No equipment shall be used in the home occupation which will create
electrical interference to surrounding properties.
      3.   The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the
residential use of the premises, shall not change the residential character
thereof, and shall not result in an incompatibility or disturbance to
surrounding residential uses.
      4.   No home occupation shall require internal or external alterations or
involve construction features not customarily found in dwellings except where
required to comply with local and state fire and police recommendations.
      5.   There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials used in
the home occupation; except, that personal automobiles used in the home
occupation may be parked on the site.
      6.   The home occupation shall meet all applicable building and fire
codes.
      7.   No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. in the evening and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. in the
morning.
      8.   All home occupations shall comply with the provisions of the city
nuisance ordinances.
   E.   Permitted Home Occupation Requirements: In addition to the requirements
of subsection D of this section, the following additional requirements shall
apply to all permitted home occupations:
      1.   There shall be no exterior display or signs which are visible from
outside the building.
      2.   No persons other than those who customarily reside on the premises
shall be employed.
      3.   The operation of any wholesale or retail business shall not be
permitted unless:
         a.   It is conducted entirely by telephone, mail or electronic medium.
         b.   The merchandise is stored elsewhere than on the premises.
         c.   The business operation does not include the sale of equipment or
delivery of merchandise to the premises.
         d.   Customers do not come to the home for any part of the
transaction.
      4.   The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the principal
dwelling and shall not be conducted in attached garages or accessory
structures, unless conducted within an approved accessory dwelling unit. No
more than twenty five percent (25%) of the gross floor area of the principal
dwelling shall be used for the home occupation.
      5.   The home occupation shall not create a parking demand of more than
two (2) vehicles at one time.
      6.   The home occupation shall not create a demand for on street parking.
All parking associated with the home occupation shall be off street and shall
be accommodated within the garage and the existing driveway area.
      7.   In no case shall the home occupation create a need for an additional
driveway access to the property.
   F.   Interim Use Home Occupation Requirements: Home occupations which are
not specifically prohibited by subsection C of this section and fail to satisfy
the permitted home occupation criteria of subsection E of this section shall
require an interim use permit and shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   The conditions of subsection D of this section shall be satisfied.
      2.   No more than one person other than those who customarily reside on
the premises shall be employed.
      3.   Teaching or instruction activities shall not consist of more than
two (2) nonfamily pupils at a time.
      4.   All activity on the premises associated with the home occupation
shall not cause any adverse changes to the residential character of the
neighborhood.
      5.   Any exterior changes necessary to conduct the home occupation are
sufficiently screened, properly designed, or separated by distance so as to be
consistent with the existing adjacent residential uses and compatible with the
residential occupancy.
      6.   Any interior changes necessary to conduct the home occupation shall
comply with all building, electrical, mechanical and fire codes governing the
use in a residential occupancy.
      7.   Traffic generated by the home occupation shall involve vehicle types
and volumes that are typically associated with single-family residences, and
such traffic shall not constitute a nuisance or safety hazard.
      8.   Signs associated with the interim home occupation shall be in
accordance with chapter 12 of this title.
   G.   Nonconforming Uses: Existing home occupations lawfully existing on the
effective date hereof may continue as nonconforming uses. Any existing home
occupation that is discontinued for a period of more than thirty (30) days or
is in violation of the provisions under which it was initially established
shall be brought into conformity with the provisions of this section.
   H.   Inspections: The city hereby reserves the right to inspect the premises
in which the home occupation is being conducted to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this section or any conditions additionally imposed. (Ord. 5, 12-
14-2006; amd. Ord. 222 1-14-2021)
11-5-18: RETAINING WALLS:
   A.   Permit Required:
      1.   Any retaining wall four feet (4') in height or greater shall require
a building permit.
      2.   No building permit is required for landscape walls less than four
feet (4') in height, but such walls are subject to the requirements stated in
this section.
      3.   No building permit is required for terraced retaining walls
consisting of separate walls measuring less than four feet (4') in height and
set apart by at least two feet (2').
   B.   Application Requirements And Site Inspections:
      1.   All retaining wall applications shall include an elevation sketch,
drainage details, and an official letter and/or plans approved by a licensed
engineer.
      2.   All retaining wall permit applications shall include a certificate
of survey and/or site plan, drawn to scale, showing/labeling the following:
         a.   Property address and/or legal description.
         b.   Fronting street(s) and street names.
         c.   Property lines and property line dimensions.
         d.   Proposed retaining wall material/type.
         e.   Proposed location of the retaining wall and distance from
property lines.
         f.   Existing objects and/or structures located near the proposed
retaining wall.
      3.   Before a site inspection is conducted by the designated city
official, the following items shall be located on site and clearly marked with
paint, flags, stakes, and/or laths:
         a.   Property corners. If a certificate of survey is not submitted, a
licensed surveyor shall officially mark/expose the property corners/boundary
lines and provide the city with written verification of that survey. Any
property markers/monuments found missing or substandard shall be reset by a
licensed surveyor.
         b.   Boundary lines.
         c.   Proposed retaining wall location.
   C.   Setbacks:
      1.   All private retaining walls and landscape walls abutting up to or
running parallel with a nearby property line shall be set back at least two
feet (2') from said property line to allow for adequate access and maintenance.
Exception: Any retaining wall extending over or up to a property line shall be
approved by the city and designed to be structurally independent.
      2.   All private retaining walls and landscape walls shall be set back
away from the edge of any public roadway, trail, or sidewalk to allow for
adequate room for access and maintenance.
      3.   Private retaining walls and landscape walls adjacent to wetlands
shall be set back in accordance with all applicable city, state, and federal
wetland buffer regulations as amended from time to time.
   D.   Drainage, Utilities, Wetlands, And Easements:
      1.   Rights Of Way And Easements:
         a.   Private retaining walls shall not extend into any public rights
of way, easements, or onto public property except by means of an encroachment
agreement approved by the city. The approval or denial of such an agreement
shall be solely within the city's discretion. Said encroachment agreement shall
also be recorded with the county recorder's office. Further, the city or any
utility company having authority to use the rights of way or easements, shall
not be liable for repair or replacement of landscape/retaining walls in the
event that they are moved, damaged, or destroyed by virtue of the lawful use of
the easement.
         b.   Any landscape or retaining wall placed in a drainage easement
shall not adversely affect drainage or create debris buildup.
         c.   All landscape or retaining wall applicants and/or property owners
are responsible for verifying that no conflict exists with utilities prior to
installation.
      2.   Drainage: All retaining walls shall be accompanied with an
appropriate drainage system to adequately relieve water pressure behind the
wall and provide for proper drainage.
   E.   General Requirements:
      1.   State Building Code Compliance: All retaining walls shall comply
with the regulations stated in the state building code as amended from time to
time.
      2.   Retaining Wall Barriers: A permanent barrier shall be required at
the top of retaining walls if the height of the drop off is greater than thirty
inches (30") and the top edge of the drop off is located within five feet (5')
of a public sidewalk or trail.
      3.   Maintenance: Landscape and retaining wall owners are responsible for
keeping their walls in a condition of good repair and appearance and not in a
condition of disrepair, danger, or in a state that constitutes a public or
private nuisance. Any landscape or retaining wall shall be considered a public
nuisance, if it does not comply with the following:
         a.   All landscape/retaining walls shall comply with associated
regulations relating to nuisance and blight stated in this code.
         b.   All landscape/retaining walls shall be constructed firmly in
place and not in a stage of bowing or collapse.
         c.   All landscape/retaining walls shall be maintained in sound and
good repair and free from loose boards/blocks/boulders, breaks, or gaps not
otherwise intended in the original design of the wall. The wall shall be free
from any defects or condition which makes the wall hazardous.
         d.   All wooden landscape/retaining walls shall be made of treated or
decay resistant wood.
         e.   No landscape/retaining walls shall have a failing drainage
system. (Ord. 76, 8-25-2011)
11-5-19: TEMPORARY FAMILY HEALTHCARE DWELLINGS; OPT OUT:
Pursuant to authority granted by Minnesota statutes section 462.3593,
subdivision 9, the city of Elko New Market opts out of the requirements of
Minnesota statutes section 462.3593, which defines and regulates temporary
family healthcare dwellings. (Ord. 136, 7-28-2016)
11-5-20: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for construction of
Accessory Dwelling Units in order to accommodate the housing needs of
residents. The specific purposes of this section are to:
      1.   Create new housing units while respecting the appearance and
character of single- family dwellings;
      2.   Provide housing that responds to changing family needs, privacy
standards, and household sizes;
      3.   Make more efficient use of existing housing stock and
infrastructure; and,
      4.   Encourage the creation of additional affordable housing.
   B.   Performance Standards:
      1.   Location: Accessory Dwelling Units may be located on detached
single-family lots in residential zoning districts. Accessory Dwelling Units
are not permitted in conjunction with two-family dwellings, townhomes, or
multiple-family dwellings.
      2.   Type: Accessory Dwelling Units may be attached to or located within
single-family dwellings. Accessory Dwelling Units are also permitted in, or
attached to, detached accessory structures. The location and design standards
of all Accessory Dwelling Units in attached or detached accessory structures
shall be required to meet the standards of section 11-6 of this title.
      3.   Single-Family Dwelling Standards: Accessory Dwelling Units in
combination with their associated single-family dwelling must conform to all
City Code requirements for single-family dwellings, including but not limited
to setback, height, recreational vehicle, commercial vehicle, and accessory
structure standards.
      4.   Number: No more than one Accessory Dwelling Unit is permitted per
residential lot.
      5.   Size: Attached or detached Accessory Dwelling Units must be at least
two-hundred fifty (250) square feet in area and shall conform with the area
limitations contained in section
11-6-6 of this title. In no case shall the Accessory Dwelling Unit exceed the
area of the principal dwelling unit.
      6.   Parking: A minimum of one (1) off-street parking space shall be
provided for the Accessory Dwelling Unit. The required off-street parking space
is in addition to those required for the principal dwelling unit.
      7.   Utilities: Accessory Dwelling Units shall use the same water and
sanitary sewer connections and water meter as the single-family, detached
dwelling. Separate utility metering for the Accessory Dwelling Unit is
prohibited. On lots without municipal water and sewer, an application for an
Accessory Dwelling Unit must be accompanied by a written report from a licensed
Subsurface Sewage Treatment System Inspector that includes the following: 1)
compliance inspection, 2) review of the on-site septic system to ensure that it
is sized correctly for the additional dwelling unit and 3) review stating that
there are no conflicts between the existing septic system and the location of
the proposed Accessory Dwelling Unit. The report must be completed to the
satisfaction of the city or its authorized representative.
      8.   Appearance: Accessory Dwelling Units shall be designed and
maintained as to be consistent with the architectural design, style, appearance
and character of the principal structure as a single-family residence; the
appearance of a two-family dwelling must be avoided. If the Accessory Dwelling
Unit extends beyond the current footprint or existing height of the main
building, such an addition must be consistent with the existing facade, roof
pitch, siding and windows.
      9.   Home Occupations: Home occupations are allowed within an Accessory
Dwelling Unit pursuant to section
11-5-17 of this title.
      10.   Ownership: The owner of the property shall reside in the principal
dwelling unit or in the Accessory Dwelling Unit. Accessory Dwelling Units may
not be subdivided and may not be otherwise separated in ownership from the
associated single-family dwelling.
      11.   Addressing: Accessory Dwelling Units with an exterior entrance
different than the principal dwelling unit shall be identified by "Unit A"
following the primary property address (e.g., 123 Main Street Unit A).
      12.   Building Code Compliance: The Accessory Dwelling Unit and the
associated single-family dwelling must meet current Minnesota State Building
Code provisions as adopted in Title 10 of this Code. (Ord. 222, 1-14-2021)
11-5-21: ACCESSORY DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES:
Accessory drive-through facilities shall comply with the following:
   A.   Not less than one hundred twenty feet (120') of segregated automobile
stacking shall be provided for the single service lane. Where multiple service
lanes are provided, the minimum automobile stacking may be reduced to sixty
feet (60') per lane.
   B.   The stacking lane and its access shall be designed to control traffic
in a manner to protect the buildings and will not interfere with on site
traffic circulation, pedestrian walkways, or access to the required parking
space.
   C.   No part of the public street or boulevard may be used for stacking of
automobiles.
   D.   The stacking lane, order board telecom, and window placement shall not
be located in the front yard and shall be designed and located in such a manner
as to minimize glare to adjacent premises, particularly residential premises,
and to maximize maneuverability of vehicles on the site.
   E.   The drive-through window and its stacking lanes shall be screened from
view of adjoining residential zoning districts and public street rights-of-way.
   F.   A lighting and photometric plan will be required that illustrates the
drive-through service lane lighting and shall comply with section
11-4-7 of this title. (Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-5-22: ACCESSORY OUTDOOR DINING/SEATING:
Accessory outdoor dining/seating shall comply with the following:
   A.   The dining/seating area shall be located on private property.
   B.   The dining/seating area shall not exceed forty five percent (45%) of
the gross floor area of the principal use.
   C.   The outdoor dining/seating area shall be defined with the use of
landscaping, fencing or other means that contains the tables and chairs for the
use as demonstrated on a site plan and approved by the City.
   D.   No food or beverages shall be served to persons outside of the
designated outdoor seating area except in association with other City
approvals.
   E.   Dining/seating areas shall be located so as not to obstruct required
entrances and exits.
   F.   If located on private sidewalks or walkways, the dining/seating area
shall be located so as to leave a minimum of a five foot (5') wide passageway
for pedestrians.
   G.   The consumption of alcoholic beverages within the outdoor dining/
seating area may be allowed subject to applicable liquor licensing provisions
of this Code.
   H.   If outdoor alcohol service is available, signage shall be posted that
restricts consumption of alcohol outside of the designated outdoor dining/
seating area.
   I.   If outdoor alcohol service is available, patrons shall access the
outdoor dining/seating area through the principal building.
   J.   The outdoor dining/seating area shall not abut an R-1, R-2, or R-
3 Zoning District. (Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-5-23: ACCESSORY OUTDOOR SALES AND DISPLAY:
Accessory outdoor sales and display shall comply with the following:
   A.   The sales and display area shall not exceed forty five percent (45%) of
the gross floor area of the principal use.
   B.   The sales and display area shall be screened from view of neighboring
residential uses.
   C.   The sales and display area shall be surfaced with concrete or bitumen
to control dust and erosion.
   D.   The sales and display area shall not take up, or interfere with access
to, any required parking spaces.
   E.   If located on sidewalks or walkways, the sale/display area shall be
located so as to leave a minimum of a five foot (5') wide passageway for
pedestrians.
   F.   The display merchandise shall be maintained in a neat and orderly
fashion. (Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-5-24: AUTO-REPAIR, MAJOR:
Auto-repair, major shall comply with the following:
   A.   All painting must be conducted in an approved paint booth. All paint
booths and all other activities of the operation shall thoroughly control the
emission of fumes, dust or other particulate matter in compliance with
Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota State Fire Code and other
applicable building codes.
   B.   All flammable and hazardous materials, including liquids and rags,
shall conform to the applicable provisions of the Minnesota State Fire Code and
other applicable state and local regulations.
   C.   Outside storage of equipment, parts or materials is prohibited, except
for vehicles to be repaired.
   D.   Vehicles shall not be stored in the required parking areas for a period
exceeding seven (7) days. Vehicles being repaired shall not be parked in the
public right-of-way.
   E.   All repair, assembly, disassembly or maintenance of vehicles shall
occur within an enclosed building. (Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-5-25: AUTO-REPAIR, MINOR:
Auto-repair, minor shall comply with the following:
   A.   All flammable and hazardous materials, including liquids and rags,
shall conform to the applicable provisions of the Minnesota State Fire Code and
other applicable state and local regulations.
   B.   Outside storage of equipment, parts or materials is prohibited, except
for vehicles to be repaired.
   C.   All repair, assembly, disassembly or maintenance of vehicles shall
occur within an enclosed building.
   D.   Vehicles shall not be stored in the required parking areas for a period
exceeding seven (7) days. Vehicles being repaired shall not be parked in the
public right-of-way. (Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-5-26: BREWERIES, SMALL, WITH TAPROOMS:
Breweries, small, with taprooms shall comply with the following:
   A.   The brewery must be licensed by the state of Minnesota.
   B.   Liquor licensing requirements of this Code must be satisfied.
   C.   In the B-2 District, total production of malt liquor may not exceed ten
thousand (10,000) barrels annually. Of the ten thousand (10,000) barrel
production limit, on site taproom room retail sales shall not exceed five
thousand (5,000) barrels annually.
   D.   The brewery shall provide adequate space for off street loading and
unloading of all trucks greater than twenty-two feet (22') in length.
   E.   Loading areas must be located and designed so they are not visible from
adjoining public streets or adjoining residential zoning districts and/or uses.
   F.   No odors from the brewery shall be perceptible beyond the property
line. (Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-5-27: COMMERCIAL CAR WASHES (PRINCIPAL AND ACCESSORY):
Commercial car washes shall comply with the following:
   A.   The architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and
site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or areas as to cause
impairment in property values or constitute a blighting influence.
   B.   Provisions shall be made to control and reduce noise.
   C.   When abutting a residentially zoned property, the entry and exit doors
shall be closed during the wash and dry cycle.
   D.   The location and operation of vacuum machines must not interfere with
stacking areas, on-site circulation or on-site parking and loading areas, and
may not be located in a yard abutting a residentially zoned property. (Ord.
244, 3-10- 2022)
11-5-28: HEAVY EQUIPMENT SALES:
Heavy equipment sales shall comply with the following:
   A.   The area of the site used for outdoor display shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the total lot area.
   B.   All semitractors, semitrailers, or construction or farm implements on
the premises are to be in operational condition and not considered to be refuse
pursuant to section
11-4-3 of this title.
   C.   The display area shall not take up parking space or loading space as
required by chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-5-29: HEAVY EQUIPMENT SERVICE:
Heavy equipment service as a principal or accessory use shall comply with the
following:
   A.   Magazine or stacking space must be constructed to accommodate an
appropriate number of trucks and shall be subject to approval by the city
council.
   B.   Magazine or stacking space shall not interfere with on site circulation
patterns or required on site parking or loading areas.
   C.   Hours of operation shall be limited as necessary to minimize the effect
of nuisance factors such as traffic noise and glare upon any existing
neighboring residential uses. (Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-5-30: HOSPITALS:
Hospitals shall comply with the following:
   A.   All buildings and structures shall be located a minimum of fifty feet
(50') from any property line of a residential zoning district.
   B.   Emergency vehicle access shall not be adjacent to or across the street
from residentially zoned property.
   C.   The lot must have frontage to an improved collector or arterial street
designated by the comprehensive plan.
   D.   Unobstructed visibility shall be provided from the driveway to the
adjacent streets for emergency vehicles.
   E.   An off-street passenger loading area shall be provided in order to
maintain vehicular and pedestrian safety. (Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-5-31: KENNEL, COMMERCIAL ANIMAL:
Commercial animal kennels shall comply with the following:
   A.   The kennel must be located in a freestanding building a minimum of five
hundred feet (500') from any residential property line.
   B.   Outdoor play areas shall be located a minimum of one hundred feet
(100') from any property line in the rear or side yards and shall be enclosed
by eight foot (8') high solid fence designed to retain dogs. The fence shall
provide a complete visual screen from surrounding properties.
   C.   The number of animals boarded shall not exceed one hundred (100).
   D.   An indoor exercise area shall be provided to accommodate the periodic
exercising of animals boarded at the kennel.
   E.   A ventilation system shall be designed so that no odors or organisms
will spread between wards or to the outside air and will be capable of
completely exchanging internal air at a rate of at least twice per hour. Air
temperature shall be maintained between sixty degrees (60°) and seventy-five
degrees Fahrenheit (75°F).
   F.   A room separate from the kennel area shall be provided of sufficient
size to adequately separate animals that are sick or injured from healthy
animals.
   G.   Indoor animal kennel floors and walls shall be made of nonporous
materials or sealed concrete to make it nonporous.
   H.   Animal wastes shall be flushed down an existing sanitary sewer system
or enclosed in a container of sufficient construction to eliminate odors and
organisms and shall be properly disposed of at least once a day.
   I.   All state health department and Minnesota pollution control agency
requirements for such facilities must be met.
   J.   A "commercial animal kennel license" must be secured and all applicable
conditions of the license satisfied in accordance with title 6, chapter 4,
article C of this Code. (Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-5-32: LUMBERYARDS:
Lumberyards shall comply with the following:
   A.   The lumberyard shall be landscaped, fenced, and screened from view of
neighboring uses, abutting residential districts, and the public right-of-way
in compliance with section
11-5-4 of this title.
   B.   The storage areas shall be asphalt or concrete surfaced.
   C.   The display merchandise shall be maintained in a neat and orderly
fashion.
   D.   The storage area shall not take up parking space or loading space as
required for conformity with this title. (Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-5-33: MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS:
Manufactured home parks shall comply with the following:
   A.   The minimum area required for a manufactured home park designation
shall be twenty (20) acres.
   B.   The following minimum lot requirements within the manufactured home
park are:
      1.   Minimum lot area: Ten thousand five hundred (10,500) square feet.
      2.   Minimum lot width: Eighty-five feet (85').
      3.   Maximum impervious surface: Thirty five percent (35%).
   C.   The following principal structure setbacks are satisfactorily met:
      1.   Front yard: Thirty feet (30').
      2.   Side yard: Ten feet (10').
      3.   Side yard street: Thirty feet (30').
      4.   Rear yard: Twenty-five feet (25').
      5.   Rear yard abutting street: Thirty feet (30').
   D.   Accessory buildings, uses and equipment shall comply with the
applicable provisions of chapter 6 of this title.
   E.   The total ground floor area of all residential buildings shall not
exceed a lot coverage of thirty percent (30%).
   F.   All residences are limited to a maximum height of one story or twenty-
five feet (25'). (Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-5-34: MICRODISTILLERIES WITH COCKTAIL ROOMS:
Microdistilleries with cocktail rooms shall comply with the following:
   A.   The microdistillery must be licensed by the State of Minnesota.
   B.   Liquor licensing requirements of this Code must be satisfied.
   C.   In the B-2 District, total production of liquor may not exceed ten
thousand (10,000) bottles annually. Of the ten thousand (10,000) bottle
production limit, on site cocktail room retail sales shall not exceed five
thousand (5,000) bottles annually.
   D.   The microdistillery shall provide adequate space for off street loading
and unloading of all trucks greater than twenty-two feet (22') in length. In
the absence of off-street loading, the City may impose limits on deliveries or
shipments using the public rights-of-way, including regulating the number of
trucks per day and the hours that deliveries are permitted.
   E.   Loading areas shall be located and designed so they are not visible
from adjoining public streets or adjoining residential zoning districts and/or
uses.
   F.   No odors from the distillery shall be perceptible beyond the property
line. (Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-5-35: MINISTORAGE/SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITIES:
Ministorage/self-service storage facilities shall comply with the following:
   A.   Building coverage shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the lot area.
   B.   When an "on premises" caretaker dwelling unit is provided on site,
construction of said dwelling unit shall conform to all design standard
regulations for dwelling units of the Minnesota State Building Code. Off street
parking shall be made available for said dwelling unit in conformance with
chapter 9 of this title.
   C.   No retailing, wholesaling, manufacturing, repair, or other such
activity other than storage is to occur within the facility. (Ord. 244, 3-10-
2022)
11-5-36: MOTOR FUEL STATIONS:
Motor fuel stations shall comply with the following:
   A.   Motor Fuel Facilities: Motor fuel facilities shall be installed in
accordance with State and City standards. Additionally, adequate space shall be
provided to access fuel pumps and allow maneuverability around the pumps.
Underground fuel storage tanks are to be positioned to allow adequate access by
motor fuel transports and unloading operations which do not conflict with
circulation, access and other activities on the site. Fuel pumps shall be
installed on pump islands.
   B.   Architectural Standards:
      1.   As a part of the conditional use permit application, a color
illustration of all building elevations shall be submitted.
      2.   The architectural appearance, scale, and functional plan of the
building(s) and canopy shall be complementary and compatible with each other
and the existing buildings in the neighborhood setting.
      3.   Exterior wall treatments such as brick, stone (natural or
artificial), decorative concrete block and stucco shall be used.
   C.   Canopy: A protective canopy structure may be located over the pump
island(s) as an accessory structure. The canopy shall meet the following
performance standards:
      1.   The edge of the canopy shall be thirty feet (30') or more from the
front and/or side lot line; provided, that adequate visibility both on site and
off site is maintained.
      2.   The canopy shall not exceed eighteen feet (18') in height and shall
provide fourteen feet (14') of clearance to accommodate a semitrailer truck
passing underneath.
      3.   The canopy fascia shall not exceed three feet (3') in vertical
height.
      4.   The architectural design, colors, and character of the canopy shall
be consistent with the principal building on the site.
      5.   Signage may be allowed on a detached canopy; provided, that the
individual canopy sign does not exceed more than twenty percent (20%) of the
canopy facade facing a public right-of-way.
      6.   Canopy posts/signposts shall not obstruct traffic or the safe
operation of the gas pumps.
   D.   Pump Islands: Pump islands shall comply with the following performance
standards:
      1.   Pump islands shall be elevated six inches (6") above the traveled
surface of the site.
      2.   All pump islands shall be set at least thirty feet (30') back from
any property line. Additionally, the setback between the pump islands' curb
face shall be at least twenty-two feet (22').
   E.   Dust Control And Drainage: Drainage from all fueling areas shall be
directed to an oil/grit separator. Minimum design standards for the oil/grit
separator shall include the following:
      1.   A minimum of four hundred (400) cubic feet of permanent pool storage
capacity per acre of drainage area.
      2.   A minimum pool depth of four feet (4').
      3.   A minimum oil containment capacity of eight hundred (800) gallons.
      4.   Minimum maintenance inspection of two (2) times per year and/or
after measurable spill events. A measurable spill shall be defined by the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA). Any measurable spill event shall be
reported to the MPCA.
   F.   Landscaping:
      1.   Minimum required green area shall be in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 10 of this title.
      2.   At the boundaries of the lot, the following landscape area shall be
required:
         a.   From side and rear property lines, an area of not less than ten
feet (10') wide shall be landscaped in compliance with chapter 10 of this
title.
         b.   From all road rights-of-way, an area of not less than fifteen
feet (15') wide shall be landscaped in compliance with chapter 10 of this
title.
         c.   Where lots abut residentially zoned property, a buffer yard of
not less than twenty feet (20') wide shall be landscaped and screened in
accordance with section
11-5-4 and chapter 10 of this title.
         d.   The property owner shall be responsible for maintenance of all
landscaping, including within the boulevard.
   G.   Exterior Lighting: The lighting shall be accomplished in such a way as
to have no direct source of light visible from adjacent residential uses or
from the public right-of-way and shall be in compliance with section
11-4-7 of this title. A comprehensive lighting plan shall be submitted as part
of the conditional use permit application, and shall be subject to the
following performance standards:
      1.   Canopy Lighting: Canopy lighting under the canopy structure shall
consist of canister spotlights recessed into the canopy. No portion of the
light source or fixture may extend below the ceiling of the canopy. Total
canopy illumination below the canopy shall not exceed one hundred fifteen (115)
foot-candles at ground level.
      2.   Illumination: Maximum site illumination shall not exceed limits set
forth in section
11-4-7 of this title.
   H.   Circulation And Loading: The site design shall accommodate adequate
turning radius and vertical clearance for a semitrailer truck. Designated
loading areas shall be exclusive of off-street parking stalls and drive aisles.
A site plan shall be provided to illustrate adequate turning radius, using
appropriate engineering templates.
   I.   Noise: Public address system shall not be audible at any property line.
Playing of music or advertisement from the public address system is prohibited.
Noise control shall be required as regulated by section
11-4-8 of this title.
   J.   Outside Storage, Sales And Service: No outside storage or sales shall
be allowed, except as follows:
      1.   Sale or display of goods shall be allowed on the sidewalk
immediately in front of the principal building, provided that a minimum five-
foot clearance is maintained for pedestrian access and that the display does
not exceed four feet in height and is maintained in an orderly fashion. Display
shall not block the handicap accessible route.
      2.   A compressed air service area may be located on site as long as it
does not interrupt on site traffic circulation.
      3.   Bottled Gas Sales and Filling: Bottled gas sales and filling shall
be allowed as an accessory use, provided:
         a.   All flammable materials, including liquids and rags, shall
conform with the applicable provisions of the fire code adopted in section
10-2-1 of this code.
         b.   Sales activities shall be reviewed and subject to conditions set
forth by the city fire marshal.
         c.   Propane sales of twenty (20) pound capacity tanks may be located
outside, provided the propane tanks are secured in a locker and meet all State
and City Building and Fire Codes.
         d.   Equipment related to the filling of bottled gas shall be secured
inside the principal or an accessory building.
   K.   Litter Control: The operation shall be responsible for litter control
on the subject property, which is to occur on a daily basis. Trash receptacles
shall be provided at convenient locations on site to facilitate litter control.
(Ord. 244, 3- 10-2022)
11-5-37: MOTOR VEHICLE SALES:
Motor vehicle sales shall comply with the following:
   A.   The outside sales areas shall be fenced or screened from view of
neighboring residential uses or an abutting residential district in compliance
with section
11-5-4 of this title.
   B.   The architectural appearance, scale, building materials and functional
plan of the site and building shall not be dissimilar to existing uses and
buildings so as to cause a blighting influence.
   C.   The sales area shall be surfaced with bitumin or concrete.
   D.   The sales area shall not take up parking space as required for
conformity with this title.
   E.   Hours of operation shall be limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M., unless otherwise allowed by the city council.
   F.   Accessory automobile repair shall require the processing of a separate
conditional use permit. (Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-5-38: OUTDOOR SERVICE, SALE, AND RENTAL:
Outdoor service, sale and rental as a principal or accessory use shall comply
with the following:
   A.   Outside service areas shall be fenced and screened from view of the
public right of way, neighboring residential uses, or an abutting residential
district in compliance with section
11-5-4 of this title.
   B.   The use shall not take up parking space as required for conformity with
this title.
   C.   The service, sale, and/or rental areas shall be asphalt or concrete
surfaced. (Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-5-39: OUTDOOR STORAGE:
Outdoor storage as a principal or accessory use shall comply with the
following:
   A.   The storage area shall be landscaped, fenced, and screened from view of
neighboring uses, abutting residential districts, and the public right-of-way
in compliance with section
11-5-4 of this title.
   B.   The storage areas shall be asphalt or concrete surfaced.
   C.   If an accessory use, the storage area shall not be located within the
front yard.
   D.   The storage area shall not take up parking space or loading space as
required for conformity with this title. (Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-5-40: TRUCK STOPS:
Truck stops shall comply with the following:
   A.   Regardless of whether the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of
motor fuels and/or oil is incidental to the conduct of the use or business, the
standards and requirements imposed by this title for motor fuel stations shall
apply. These standards and requirements are, however, in addition to other
requirements which are imposed for other uses of the property. (Ord. 244, 3-10-
2022)
CHAPTER 6
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
SECTION:
11-6-1: Purpose
11-6-2: Time Of Construction; Exemptions
11-6-3: Scope
11-6-4: Building Permit Required; Exceptions
11-6-5: Exterior Materials
11-6-6: Area Limitations
11-6-7: Number Of Structures
11-6-8: Setbacks
11-6-9: Height
11-6-10: Enclosure
11-6-11: Roof Overhangs
11-6-12: Conditional Use Permits
11-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide performance standards for the
erection, siting and use of accessory buildings, structures and uses that may
be allowed within the various zoning districts to ensure compatibility with the
principal use and with surrounding properties, as well as to protect the
health, safety and general welfare of the city. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-6-2: TIME OF CONSTRUCTION; EXEMPTIONS:
No detached accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot
prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is
accessory. Agricultural buildings on farm properties are exempt from the
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-6-3: SCOPE:
Any structure which requires a building permit or which is thirty inches (30")
or more in height shall be subject to setback, floor area and other
requirements of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-6-4: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Detached accessory buildings not exceeding two hundred (200) square
feet in floor area shall be allowed without issuance of a building permit, but
shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Detached accessory buildings greater than two hundred (200) square feet
in floor area shall require a building permit. The building official shall
review the site plan and construction drawings to determine compliance with the
building code and other applicable ordinances, laws, and regulations. (Ord.
129, 3-24-2016)
11-6-5: EXTERIOR MATERIALS:
The color of the accessory building shall be the same or similar as the color
of the principal building. All accessory buildings shall also be compatible
with the principal building on the lot. Under no circumstances shall sheet
metal, corrugated metal, asbestos, iron, plain concrete block (whether painted
or color integrated or not) be deemed acceptable as major exterior wall
materials on buildings within the city. "Compatible" means that the exterior
appearance of the accessory building is not at variance with the principal
building from an aesthetic and architectural standpoint as to cause:
   A.   A difference to a degree to cause incongruity.
   B.   A depreciation of neighborhood values or adjacent property values.
   C.   A nuisance which may have characteristics related to noise, dust,
odors, glare, and unsightly building exterior. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-6-6: AREA LIMITATIONS:
Accessory structures shall comply with the following area limitations:
   A.   Attached Buildings: Buildings/garages attached to the principal
building shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet and shall be subject
to all building and setback requirements of the principal structure.
   B.   Detached Buildings:
      1.   Detached accessory buildings shall comply with the following area
limitations:
 
Lot Area         Maximum Floor Area Allowed     Maximum Floor Area Allowed With
                 Without Conditional Use Permit Conditional Use Permit
                 250 square feet, except as
1 acre and under provided in subsection B2 of   1,000 square feet
                 this section
Over 1 acre      1,000 square feet              1,500 square feet
 
      2.   Within R-2, urban (small lot) single-family residential districts,
detached accessory buildings up to one thousand (1,000) square feet in size
shall be allowed without a conditional use permit provided that:
         a.   The home located upon the subject property does not have an
attached garage.
         b.   The detached accessory building is utilized as a garage by
persons who reside upon the subject property.
         c.   No other detached accessory structures exist upon the subject
property. Existing detached accessory structures located upon the property
shall be removed prior to the issuance of building permit for the new (or
replacement) accessory structure.
         d.   Driveway access is provided to the detached accessory building
via an improved (paved) public right of way or private street approved by the
city.
         e.   Driveway surfacing material and curb cuts widths are consistent
with the requirements of section
11-9-8 of this title. (Ord. 129, 3-24-2016)
   C.   Calculation Of Area: The area of an accessory building shall be
comprised of the floor area lying beneath a roof and within the building
footprint. The building footprint shall be considered the area lying within a
perimeter of pier foundation. Roof overhangs, eaves and cantilevers as allowed
by section
 11-6-11 of this chapter projecting beyond the building footprint shall not be
considered in the calculation of accessory building area. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-6-7: NUMBER OF STRUCTURES:
There shall be no more than one detached accessory building per lot in
residential zones, except by conditional use permit. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-6-8: SETBACKS:
   A.   Attached Buildings/Garages: An attached garage shall be considered an
integral part of the principal building and shall conform to district setback
requirements.
   B.   Detached Buildings: Detached accessory buildings shall comply with the
following minimum setbacks:
      1.   Front Yard: Prohibited in the front yard.
      2.   Side Yard:
         a.   Interior: Ten feet (10').
         b.   Street: Same as front yard setback of the applicable district.
      3.   Rear Yard: Ten feet (10'). (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-6-9: HEIGHT:
Except as expressly permitted by a conditional use permit, accessory buildings
shall comply with the following height limitations:
 
Zoning District                  Maximum Height
R residential                    15 feet
B business and INS institutional 20 feet
I industrial                     26 feet
Other                            15 feet
 
(Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-6-10: ENCLOSURE:
The area within the footprint of accessory buildings shall be completely
enclosed on all sides. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-6-11: ROOF OVERHANGS:
Roof overhangs, eaves, and cantilevers shall not extend more than two feet (2')
beyond the building footprint. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-6-12: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
Application for a conditional use permit under this chapter shall be regulated
by section
11-3-2 of this title. Such a conditional use permit may be granted; provided,
that:
   A.   There is a demonstrated need and potential for continued use of the
structure for the purpose stated.
   B.   No commercial or home occupation activities are conducted on the
property, unless conducted within an approved accessory dwelling unit.
   C.   The building has an evident reuse or function related to a single-
family residential environment in urban service areas or hobby farm environment
in nonurban service areas of the city.
   D.   Accessory buildings shall be maintained in a manner that is compatible
with the adjacent residential uses and does not present a hazard to public
health, safety and general welfare.
   E.   The provisions of subsection
 11-3-2C of this title shall be considered and a determination made that the
proposed activity is in compliance with such criteria. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006;
amd. Ord. 222, 1-14-2021)
CHAPTER 7
SWIMMING POOLS, HOT TUBS AND SPAS
SECTION:
11-7-1: Building Permit Requirements And Exemptions
11-7-2: Location And Setbacks
11-7-3: Minimum Construction Requirements
11-7-1: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Permit Required: Except as otherwise specified in subsection D of this
section, a building permit shall be required before work is commenced on the
construction, alteration, addition to, or remodel of a swimming pool, hot tub
or spa.
   B.   Application For Permit: An application for permit shall be submitted to
the building official on forms provided by the city and shall include the
following:
      1.   Two (2) sets of plans and specifications and pertinent explanatory
data relative to design, operation, and maintenance of a swimming pool, hot tub
or spa.
      2.   The length, depth, and width of the swimming pool, hot tub, spa,
pool decks and appurtenances. (Ord. 26, 8-28-2008)
      3.   A certificate of survey of the subject parcel with the following:
         a.   Location of the swimming pool, hot tub or spa, the pumps, filter,
wiring, protective fencing, back flush and drainage outlets. (Ord. 26, 8-28-
2008; amd. 2011 Code)
         b.   Location of all structures on the building lot including house,
garage, fencing or other improvements.
         c.   Location of existing underground or overhead utilities (electric,
telephone, gas, etc.), utility easements, water systems, buried sewage disposal
systems, trees, and other similar features.
         d.   Grading plans and finished elevations around the swimming pool.
(Ord. 26, 8-28-2008)
   C.   Permit Fees: Building permit fees for a swimming pool, hot tub, or spa
shall be established by ordinance of the city council, as may be amended from
time to time. (Ord. 26, 8-28-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
   D.   Exemptions From Permit: Prefabricated swimming pools, hot tubs and spas
which satisfy all of the following requirements shall not require a building
permit:
      1.   The swimming pool, hot tub or spa is an accessory to an R-
3 occupancy building as defined by the Minnesota state building code.
      2.   The swimming pool, hot tub or spa is less than twenty four inches
(24") deep.
      3.   The swimming pool, hot tub or spa does not exceed five thousand
(5,000) gallons in capacity.
      4.   The swimming pool, hot tub or spa is installed entirely aboveground.
(Ord. 26, 8-28-2008)
11-7-2: LOCATION AND SETBACKS:
   A.   Single-Family Residential Lots:
      1.   Swimming pools, hot tubs or spas constructed on single- family
residential lots shall not be located within ten feet (10') of any lot line and
within six feet (6') of any principal structure or frost footing.
      2.   Swimming pools, hot tubs or spas shall not be located within any
required front yard. On a corner lot, swimming pools, hot tubs or spas shall be
set back a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the side yard street property
line. The filter unit, pump, heating unit, and any other noisemaking mechanical
equipment shall be located at least twenty five feet (25') from any residential
structure on adjacent property and not closer than five feet (5') to any lot
line. In no case shall swimming pools, hot tubs or spas and associated
equipment be located within an easement.
   B.   Multi-Family Residential Lots:
      1.   Public swimming pools, hot tubs, or spas and those constructed for
use for more than one family shall be subject to rules and regulations of the
state health department. For swimming pools, hot tubs or spas constructed on
multi-family lots intended for and used by occupants and guests of occupants of
multi-family dwellings, no part of the water surface of the swimming pool, hot
tub, or spa shall be closer than fifty feet (50') to any lot line and no pumps,
filter or other apparatus used in connection with the pool, hot tub or spa
shall be located closer than fifty feet (50') to any lot line.
      2.   Swimming pools, hot tubs, or spas shall be adequately fenced to
prevent uncontrolled access from the street or adjacent property, and contain
the same features for access. Adequate screening including, but not limited to,
landscaping, shall be placed between the pool, hot tub or spa area and any
adjoining single-family district lot lines. All deck areas, adjoining patios,
or other areas used in conjunction with the pool, hot tub or spa shall be
located at least fifteen feet (15') from any lot line in an adjoining single-
family district. (Ord. 26, 8-28-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
   C.   Near Utilities: Swimming pools, hot tubs, or spas shall not be located
within ten feet (10') (measured horizontally) from underground or aboveground
utility lines. Swimming pools, hot tubs, or spas (including perimeter walks and
equipment) shall not be located within any private or public utility, drainage,
walkway or other easement. (Ord. 26, 8-28-2008)
11-7-3: MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
All pools, hot tubs, or spas constructed within the city shall meet the
following construction requirements: (Ord. 26, 8-28-2008)
   A.   Pools, hot tubs and spas shall be constructed so as to avoid hazard,
damage or considerable inconvenience to adjacent property. (Ord. 26, 8-28-2008;
amd. 2011 Code)
   B.   All wiring, installation of heating units, grading, installation of
pipe or other construction shall be subject to inspection.
   C.   Back flush water or water from the swimming pool, hot tub, or spa shall
be directed onto the owner's property or onto approved public drainageways and
shall not drain onto adjacent private land. Drainage onto public streets or
other public drainageways shall require written approval by the city.
   D.   All swimming pool, hot tub, or spa lighting shall be directed toward
the pool and not toward adjacent property in accordance with section
 11-4-7 of this title.
   E.   Barriers for all swimming pools, hot tubs and spas shall comply with
the applicable provisions of the Minnesota state building code.
   F.   Swimming pool, hot tub, or spa heaters shall have approved pressure
relief valves.
   G.   Gas piping shall meet the applicable requirements of the Minnesota
state building code, as may be amended from time to time.
   H.   Overhead wires or service shall meet requirements of article 680 of the
national electrical code, as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 26, 8-28-
2008)
CHAPTER 8
PARKING AND STORAGE OF VEHICLES ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
SECTION:
11-8-1: Permitted Storage
11-8-2: Recreational Vehicle Parking
11-8-3: Commercial Vehicle Parking
11-8-1: PERMITTED STORAGE:
Storage of automobiles and other motor vehicles, except recreational vehicles,
shall be limited to the garage and driveway areas of residential properties.
(Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-8-2: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING:
   A.   Recreational Vehicle Parking: Up to three (3) licensed and operable
recreational vehicles, as defined in this title, may be parked outside of an
enclosed building on a residential property provided that:
      1.   The recreational vehicle is not parked or stored on public property
or public right-of-way, including public sidewalks.
      2.   Only one (1) of the three (3) recreational vehicles allowed may
exceed twenty-four (24) feet in length. The length measurement shall include
the entire length of the recreational vehicle, including the trailer and tongue
of the recreational vehicle.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c319d9474cf3d6d21aee248db1bb8796c21e98fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1873.png]
      3.   The recreational vehicles may be located on an established driveway
during periods of seasonal use, provided that:
         a.   The recreational vehicles comply with the following seasonal
classifications. If a recreational vehicle is not specifically listed, the most
similar recreational vehicle listed, as determined by the zoning administrator,
shall be used to determine seasonal classification.
 
Year-Round                   Warm Weather Season   Cold Weather Season
January - December           April - November      October - May
All-Terrain Vehicles (ATVs)
Dirt Bikes
Dune Buggies                 Campers               Ice or Fish Houses
Go-Karts                     Motor Homes           Snowmobiles
Golf Carts                   Motorized Watercrafts
Trailers
Utility Task Vehicles (UTVs)
 
         b.   No more than two (2) recreational vehicles are parked on the
driveway.
      4.   Except in the UR district and as otherwise provided herein, the
recreational vehicles are parked in the rear or side yard on a surface of
concrete, bitumen, or pavers. If a gravel side parking area was constructed on
the property prior to the effective date hereof, recreational vehicles may be
parked on the existing gravel surface.
      5.   The recreational vehicles are located entirely outside of public
easements or buffer yards and provide a five (5) foot setback from property
lines. Recreational vehicles within a side yard of a corner lot abutting a
public right-of- way must be set back ten (10) feet from the property line
abutting a public right- of-way.
   B.   Enumeration: For the purpose of this section, snowmobiles, ATVs,
motorized watercrafts, and other recreational vehicles parked on a trailer
shall constitute one (1) recreational vehicle.
   C.   Covering Vehicles: In the event a tarp or other material is used to
cover the vehicles, the color of the tarp or material shall be an earthen tone
of black, brown, gray, or green.
   D.   Loading And Unloading: Recreational vehicles used for the sole purpose
of loading and unloading the vehicle are exempt from subsections A2 and A3 for
up to three (3) days. This subsection is not meant to circumvent the intent of
this section. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 208, 2-13-2020)
11-8-3: COMMERCIAL VEHICLE PARKING:
   A.   Definitions: Commercial vehicle references (including Class I and Class
II) included within this section shall have the meanings provided in section
11-2-2 of this title.
   B.   Parking On Residential Property: Commercial vehicles shall not be
parked, stored or otherwise located on residential property or in residential
zoning districts unless the following conditions are satisfied:
      1.   Class I Commercial Vehicles:
         a.   Class I commercial vehicles, as defined by section
11-2-2 of this title, may be parked or stored on a residential lot with a
minimum lot size of two and one-half (21/2) acres. The commercial vehicle shall
be entirely screened from neighboring residential property with a one hundred
percent (100%) opaque screen consisting of wooden fencing, landscaping, berms
or a combination of the foregoing. A Class I commercial vehicle shall not be
parked or stored within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any neighboring
residential dwelling unit.
         b.   Class I commercial vehicles that may not be parked on a
residential lot under subsection B1a of this section may be parked or stored on
a residential lot, provided the commercial vehicle is used as the resident's
primary form of transportation to the resident's job or is associated with a
permitted home business, and the commercial vehicle was parked or stored on the
residential lot on or before December 14, 2006. Class I commercial vehicles may
be replaced with a comparable vehicle if the applicant resides on the same
residential lot.
         c.   The owner of a residential lot that meets the requirements of
subsection B1a or B1b of this section shall be required to apply for and
receive an administrative permit allowing the Class I commercial vehicle to
remain parked or stored on the residential lot. The administrative permit
issued pursuant to this subsection may be revoked for any violation of this
Code. The administrative permit shall be issued pursuant to the terms of
section
11-3-4 of this title. Administrative permit fees shall be determined by the
City Council. Should a Class I commercial vehicle permitted under this section
be replaced with a comparable vehicle, the applicant shall register the new
vehicle with the City.
         d.   Class I commercial vehicles may be parked on a residential lot or
residential zoning district when loading, unloading, rendering a temporary
service benefiting the premises or providing emergency services.
         e.   No more than one Class I commercial vehicle may be parked on a
residential lot and permitted under this section. (Ord. 163A, 4-12-2018)
         f.   One Class I commercial vehicle with a GVWR of eighteen thousand
(18,000) pounds or less and used solely for the purpose of emergency
preparedness, including tow trucks that are under contract with a government
agency for the purpose of emergency response/preparedness, may be parked on a
residential lot but only for the period of time in which the resident operator
is on call. (Ord. 172, 7-26-2018)
      2.   Class II Commercial Vehicles:
         a.   Class II commercial vehicles, as defined by section
 11-2-2 of this title, may be parked on a residential lot if used as the
resident's primary form of transportation to the resident's job or if
associated with a permitted home business.
         b.   No more than two (2) Class II commercial vehicles may be parked
on a residential lot.
   C.   Parking In Commercial Zoning Districts: Class I and Class II commercial
vehicles may be parked in commercial zoning districts subject to requirements
of chapters 9 and 26 of this title.
   D.   Parking In Industrial Zoning Districts: Class I and Class II commercial
vehicles may be parked in industrial zoning districts subject to requirements
of chapters 9 and 27 of this title.
   E.   Contracting And Excavating Equipment: All contracting and excavating
equipment located on residential lots shall be stored inside an accessory
building or garage. (Ord. 163A, 4-12-2018)
CHAPTER 9
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING; ACCESS REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
11-9-1: Purpose
11-9-2: Application Of Provisions
11-9-3: General Parking And Loading Provisions
11-9-4: Dimensional Parking And Access Standards
11-9-5: Joint Parking Requirements
11-9-6: Off Site Parking
11-9-7: Reduction In Parking Requirements
11-9-8: Design, Maintenance And Location Of Parking Areas
11-9-9: Miscellaneous Parking Restrictions And Prohibitions
11-9-10: Number Of Parking Spaces Required
11-9-11: Additional Off Street Loading Requirements
11-9-1: PURPOSE:
The regulation of off street parking spaces, loading areas, and site access is
to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public rights of way and to promote
the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum
requirements for off street parking and loading areas for motor vehicles in
accordance with the intensity of utilization of various parcels of land or
structures. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-9-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The regulations and requirements set forth in this chapter shall apply to the
required and nonrequired off street parking facilities in all use districts.
(Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-9-3: GENERAL PARKING AND LOADING PROVISIONS:
   A.   Site Plan Requirements: All applications for a building permit or a
certificate of occupancy in all zoning districts shall be accompanied by a site
plan, indicating the location and number of off street parking and loading
spaces meeting the requirements set forth in this chapter.
   B.   Garage Requirements:
      1.   New Lots: For lots of record established after the effective date
hereof, all site plans for single-family homes shall provide for the location
of a three (3) stall attached garage, whether or not construction is intended.
      2.   Lots Of Record: For lots of record and preliminary platted lots
having legal standing prior to the effective date hereof, all site plans for
single-family homes shall provide for the location of a two (2) stall garage,
whether or not construction is intended.
   C.   Existing Permits: Structures or uses for which a building permit has
been issued prior to the effective date hereof shall be exempt from the parking
requirements in this chapter if the structure is completed within six (6)
months after the effective date hereof.
   D.   Reduction Of Existing Parking And Loading Spaces: Off street parking
spaces and loading spaces existing upon the effective date hereof shall not be
reduced in number unless the number exceeds the requirements set forth herein
for a similar new use.
   E.   Change Of Use Or Occupancy Of Land: No change of use or occupancy of
land already dedicated to a parking area, parking spaces, or loading spaces
shall be made, nor shall any sale of land, division or subdivision of land be
made, which reduces area necessary for parking, parking stalls, or parking
requirements below the minimum prescribed by this chapter.
   F.   Change Of Use Or Occupancy Of Buildings: Any change of use or occupancy
of any building or buildings including additions thereto requiring more parking
area shall not be permitted until additional parking spaces are provided as
required by this chapter.
   G.   Off Site Parking Facilities: When required accessory off street parking
facilities are provided elsewhere than on the lot in which the principal use
served is located, they shall be in the same ownership or control, either by
deed or long term lease, as the property occupied by such principal use.
   H.   Use Of Parking Areas: All parking lot designs shall be well planned to
minimize conflicts between vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Required off
street parking spaces in any district shall not be utilized for vehicle repair,
open storage, stockpiling of snow, debris, materials or goods, or for the
storage of vehicles which are inoperable or for sale or for lease. Parking
spaces for the disabled shall comply with current state requirements.
   I.   Computation Of Required Spaces: In computing the number of parking or
loading spaces required, the following rules shall govern:
      1.   The term "floor area", for the purpose of calculating the number of
off street parking spaces, shall be the net usable floor area of the various
floors, exclusive of hallways, utility space, restrooms, window showcases, and
ornamental space not used for assembly.
      2.   Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be
construed to be the nearest whole number.
      3.   The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned
herein shall be the same as required for a similar use as determined by the
zoning administrator.
      4.   When computing total number of parking spaces required for a use,
individual activities within the use will be calculated separately and added
together to arrive at the total required parking spaces for each specific use
proposed.
   J.   Disability Accessible Parking: Disability accessible parking spaces
shall be provided as applicable pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 168.021,
as may be amended. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-9-4: DIMENSIONAL PARKING AND ACCESS STANDARDS:
All off street parking facilities shall comply with the following dimensional
standards: (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
   A.   Drive Aisles/Parking Lots/Stall Dimensions:
 
Angle     Minimum Stall Dimensions Minimum Parking Lot
                                   Drive Aisle Width
90 degree 9 x 18                   24 feet (two-way traffic)
60 degree 9 x 18                   18 feet (one-way traffic)
Parallel  8 x 22                   24 feet (two-way traffic)
 
(Ord. 43, 6-11-2009)
   B.   Driveways And Private Roadway Requirements:
      1.   Two-way traffic: Twenty four feet (24').
      2.   One-way traffic: Twenty foot (20') minimum if for fire truck access.
      3.   Drive-up window lanes: Fourteen feet (14') if fire truck access is
required.
      4.   All driveways shall have a minimum width of ten feet (10') with
pavement strength capable of supporting emergency and fire vehicles.
      5.   All lots or parcels shall have direct adequate physical access for
emergency vehicles along the frontage of the lot or parcel from either an
existing dedicated public roadway or an existing private roadway approved by
the city. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-9-5: JOINT PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Required parking facilities serving two (2) or more uses may be located on the
same lot or in the same structure except in residential zoned districts;
provided, that the total number of parking spaces furnished shall be not less
than the sum total of the separate requirements for each use during any peak
hour parking period when the parking facility is used at the same time by two
(2) or more uses. Conditions required for joint uses are:
   A.   The proposed joint parking space is within four hundred feet (400') of
the use it will serve.
   B.   The applicant shall demonstrate that there is not substantial conflict
in the principal operating hours of the two (2) or more buildings or uses for
which joint use of off street parking facilities is proposed.
   C.   A properly drawn legal instrument executed by the parties concerned for
joint use of off street parking facilities shall be filed as a deed restriction
on both properties in the county recorder's office. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-9-6: OFF SITE PARKING:
   A.   Any off site parking which is used to meet the requirements of this
chapter may, as applicable, be allowed by a conditional use permit for long
term off site parking facilities as regulated under the provisions of section
11-3-2 of this title, or an interim use permit for short term temporary off
site parking facilities as regulated under the provisions of section
 11-3-3 of this title, and shall be subject to the conditions of this section.
   B.   Off site parking shall be developed and maintained in compliance with
all requirements and standards of this chapter.
   C.   Reasonable access from off site parking facilities to the use being
served shall be provided. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
   D.   Except as allowed by a lease agreement approved by the city, the site
used for meeting the off street parking requirements shall be under the same
ownership as the principal use being served or under public ownership. (Ord. 5,
12-14-2006; amd. 2011 Code)
   E.   Off site parking for multiple-family dwellings shall not be located
more than two hundred fifty feet (250') from any normally used entrance of the
principal use served.
   F.   Off site parking for nonresidential uses shall not be located more than
five hundred feet (500') from the main public entrance of the principal use
being served. Off site parking located more than five hundred feet (500') from
the main entrance may be allowed with the provision of a private shuttle
service.
   G.   Any use which depends upon off site parking to meet the requirements of
this chapter shall maintain ownership and parking utilization of the off site
location until such time as on site parking is provided or a site in closer
proximity to the principal use is acquired and developed for parking. (Ord. 5,
12-14-2006)
11-9-7: REDUCTION IN PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
The city may allow reductions in the number of required parking spaces to be
installed under one or more of the following circumstances:
   A.   The unique characteristics of the proposed use are such that it will
generate a need for less parking than the standard of this chapter; or
   B.   All requests for reductions in the amount of required parking to be
installed shall be accompanied by a plan showing where the total required
parking spaces can be added on the lot, if necessary, up to the total amount
required by this chapter (meeting green area requirements) without requiring a
variance. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-9-8: DESIGN, MAINTENANCE AND LOCATION OF PARKING AREAS:
   A.   Curb Cuts:
      1.   Width: No driveway curb cut access within the public right of way
shall exceed the following unless approved by the city engineer:
         a.   Single-family dwellings with two (2) stall garages: Twenty four
feet (24').
         b.   Single-family dwellings with three (3) stall garages: Twenty
seven feet (27').
         c.   All other uses: Twenty four feet (24').
      2.   Number Allowed: Each property shall be allowed one curb cut access
for each one hundred twenty five feet (125') of street frontage, except by
conditional use permit. All property shall be entitled to at least one curb
cut. Single-family uses shall be limited to one curb cut access per property
unless a conditional use permit is approved, subject to the following criteria:
         a.   The additional access is necessary to provide adequate on site
circulation.
         b.   The additional access shall create a minimum of conflict with
through traffic movement and shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
      3.   Setbacks: Curb cuts may not be placed closer than five feet (5') to
any side or rear lot line.
      4.   County Roads: Curb cuts onto county roads shall require review by
the county engineer. The county engineer shall determine the appropriate
location, size, and design of such access drives and may limit the number of
access drives in the interest of public safety and efficient traffic flow.
      5.   Sensitive Areas: Curb cuts to principal structures which traverse
wooded, steep, or open field areas shall be constructed and maintained to a
width and base material depth sufficient to support access by emergency
vehicles as determined by the city engineer.
   B.   Signs: Signs shall not be located in a parking area except as necessary
for disability accessibility and for the orderly operation of traffic movement.
Such signs shall not be a part of the permitted advertising space. (Ord. 5, 12-
14-2006)
   C.   Curbing: Except for single-family, two-family and townhouses, all open
off street parking shall have a perimeter concrete curb barrier around the
entire parking lot. Except as may otherwise be allowed in B-2 zoning district,
such curb barrier shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from any
property line and located entirely outside any drainage and utility easements.
(Ord. 43, 6-11-2009)
   D.   Striping: Except for single-family, two-family and townhouses, all
parking stalls shall be marked with white or yellow painted lines not less than
four inches (4") wide.
   E.   Surfacing: Except in the UR district and as otherwise provided under
this subparagraph E, all parking spaces and driveways shall be surfaced with
concrete, bitumen, or pavers. Other materials such as decorative rock, gravel,
sand, or bare soil are prohibited. This requirement also applies to open sales
lots, open rental lots, and outdoor storage or display areas. All parking areas
and driveways shall be maintained in a safe and proper manner. The owner shall
not allow weeds to grow through the surface or surface materials to become
deteriorated. If a gravel side parking area was constructed on the property
prior to the effective date hereof, the surface shall be permitted for parking.
No such surface shall be expanded or enlarged.
   F.   Lighting: Lighting in an off street parking area shall be shaded or
diffused so as to reflect the light away from adjoining property and adjacent
traffic areas as regulated in accordance with section
11-4-7 of this title. All light fixtures shall be a downcast style.
   G.   Maintenance Of Off Street Parking Areas: It shall be the joint
responsibility of the operator and owner of the principal use, uses and/or
building to maintain, in a neat and adequate manner, the parking space,
accessways, landscaping and required fencing. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
   H.   Location: All accessory off street parking facilities required herein
shall be located as follows:
      1.   Spaces accessory to one- and two-family dwellings shall be on the
same lot as the principal use served unless guest parking is provided
elsewhere.
      2.   There shall be no off street parking space within five feet (5') of
any property line except as follows:
         a.   B-2 District: Zero lot line parking area setbacks shall be
allowed within the B-2 district subject to the following conditions:
            (1)   A five-foot (5') parking area setback shall be maintained
along street rights of way (not including alleys). Such setback area shall be
sodded or landscaped with approved ground cover, shrubbery, or trees.
            (2)   If applicable, a maintenance and joint use agreement shall be
executed and recorded against the titles of the affected properties.
            (3)   Parking areas shall be located entirely outside any drainage
and utility easements.
         b.   Shared Access And Joint Parking: Zero lot line setbacks shall be
allowed in cases of shared access and joint parking subject to the following
conditions:
            (1)   The access and/or parking area layout is approved by the city
engineer.
            (2)   A maintenance and joint use agreement shall be executed and
recorded against the titles of the affected properties.
            (3)   If applicable, the conditions of section
11-9-5 of this chapter related to joint parking are satisfied.
      3.   When parking stalls abut a sidewalk, the minimum sidewalk width
shall be six feet (6').
      4.   Parking stalls shall not be located where they obstruct doorways,
driveways, or pedestrian walkways.
      5.   All disability accessible stalls shall be located in close proximity
to entrance areas and shall not be hindered by inappropriately located curb
cuts, catch basins, etc. (Ord. 43, 6-11-2009; amd. Ord. 208, 2-13-2020; Ord.
244, 3-10-2022)
11-9-9: MISCELLANEOUS PARKING RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Parking And Storage Of Unlicensed Vehicles: Automotive vehicles
(operative or inoperative) or trailers that are of any kind or type without
current license plates shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned
property other than in completely enclosed buildings.
   B.   Use Of Parking Area: Required off street parking spaces in all
districts shall not be used for open storage, or sale of goods, or for the
storage of vehicles which are inoperable, for lease, rent or sale, or for the
stockpiling of snow.
   C.   Parking And Storage Of Recreational Vehicles: The parking and storage
of recreational vehicles shall be regulated in accordance with section
11-8-2 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-9-10: NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED:
Uses Required Number Of Parking Spaces
                                                                        Required
Uses                                                                    Number Of
                                                                        Parking
                                                                        Spaces
Commercial:                                                              
                                                                        2, plus 4 for
   Automobile repair (major), heavy equipment service                each service
                                                                        stall
                                                                        1 per 200
   Automobile repair (minor)                                         square feet
                                                                        of floor area
                                                                        1 for each
   Bank                                                              300 square
                                                                        feet of floor
                                                                        area
                                                                        1 per 3
                                                                        patron seats,
   Bar, tavern, nightclub, taproom, cocktail room                    plus 1 per
                                                                        employee on
                                                                        the largest
                                                                        work shift
                                                                        1 for each
                                                                        dwelling unit
                                                                        or lodging
   Bed and breakfast                                                 room, plus 1
                                                                        additional
                                                                        for each 4
                                                                        units
                                                                        5 for each
                                                                        alley, plus
                                                                        additional
                                                                        spaces as may
                                                                        be required
   Bowling alley                                                     herein for
                                                                        related uses
                                                                        contained
                                                                        within the
                                                                        principal
                                                                        structure
                                                                        1 per 500
                                                                        square feet
                                                                        of floor area
                                                                        or 1 for each
   Brewery, distillery                                               employee on
                                                                        the largest
                                                                        work shift,
                                                                        whichever is
                                                                        greater
                                                                        3 per doctor
                                                                        or dentist,
                                                                        plus 1 for
   Clinic                                                            each employee
                                                                        on the
                                                                        largest work
                                                                        shift
                                                                        6 off street
                                                                        stacking
                                                                        spaces per
                                                                        drive-through
                                                                        car wash. The
   Commercial car wash (accessory to motor fuel station)             bay inside
                                                                        the car wash
                                                                        shall not be
                                                                        considered a
                                                                        stacking
                                                                        space
                                                                        6 off street
                                                                        stacking
                                                                        spaces per
                                                                        drive-through
                                                                        car wash plus
                                                                        1 for each
                                                                        employee on
   Commercial car wash (as principal use)                            the largest
                                                                        work shift.
                                                                        The bay
                                                                        inside the
                                                                        car wash
                                                                        shall not be
                                                                        considered a
                                                                        stacking
                                                                        space
                                                                        1 per 300
   Commercial kitchen                                                square feet
                                                                        of floor area
                                                                        1 per 250
                                                                        square feet
                                                                        of floor
                                                                        area, or 1
                                                                        per 4 patrons
                                                                        at the
                                                                        maximum
   Private club, lodge, cultural establishment                       occupancy
                                                                        load,
                                                                        whichever is
                                                                        greater, plus
                                                                        1 per
                                                                        employee on
                                                                        the largest
                                                                        work shift
                                                                        20 per chapel
                                                                        or parlor,
                                                                        plus 1 for
                                                                        each company
                                                                        vehicle
                                                                        maintained on
                                                                        site.
   Funeral home                                                      Adequate
                                                                        stacking
                                                                        space shall
                                                                        also be
                                                                        provided for
                                                                        staging
                                                                        funeral
                                                                        processions
                                                                        1 per 100
                                                                        square feet
                                                                        of floor area
                                                                        of customer
   Grocery or supermarket                                            sales and
                                                                        service, plus
                                                                        1 per 200
                                                                        square feet
                                                                        of floor area
                                                                        of storage
                                                                        1 for each
                                                                        dwelling unit
                                                                        or lodging
   Hotel or motel                                                    room, plus 1
                                                                        additional
                                                                        for each 8
                                                                        units
                                                                        1 per 10
                                                                        kennels, plus
                                                                        1 per
   Kennel, commercial animal, animal shelter                         employee on
                                                                        largest on
                                                                        the largest
                                                                        work shift
   Laundromat                                                        1/2 per
                                                                        machine
                                                                        2 per
                                                                        dwelling unit
                                                                        or employee
   Ministorage/self-service storage facility                         area, plus 1
                                                                        per 6,000
                                                                        square feet
                                                                        of indoor
                                                                        storage area
                                                                        1 per 100
                                                                        square feet
                                                                        of floor
                                                                        area. Parking
   Motor fuel station                                                areas at pump
                                                                        islands may
                                                                        be counted as
                                                                        parking
                                                                        spaces
                                                                        1 per 500
                                                                        square feet
                                                                        of showroom,
   Motor vehicle sales, heavy equipment sales                        plus 1 for
                                                                        each 3,000
                                                                        square feet
                                                                        of outdoor
                                                                        sales lot
                                                                        1 for each
   Office                                                            400 square
                                                                        feet of floor
                                                                        space
                                                                        1 per 2,000
                                                                        square feet
   Outdoor storage, sale, service and/or display                     of outdoor
                                                                        storage or
                                                                        display area
                                                                        2 per chair
                                                                        or bed, plus
   Personal service                                                  1 per
                                                                        employee on
                                                                        the largest
                                                                        work shift
                                                                        1 per 4
                                                                        patrons at
                                                                        the maximum
                                                                        occupancy
                                                                        load of the
                                                                        facility,
                                                                        plus 1 per
                                                                        employee on
   Pool hall and arcade                                              the largest
                                                                        work shift,
                                                                        plus 1 per
                                                                        100 square
                                                                        feet of
                                                                        kitchen,
                                                                        dining, or
                                                                        snack bar
                                                                        area
                                                                        1 per 2
                                                                        customers to
                                                                        maximum
   Recreation, commercial                                            capacity,
                                                                        plus 1 per
                                                                        employee on
                                                                        largest work
                                                                        shift
                                                                        1 per 200
   Recreation, physical                                              square feet
                                                                        of floor area
                                                                        1 per
   Research facility                                                 employee on
                                                                        largest work
                                                                        shift
                                                                        1 per 50
                                                                        square feet
                                                                        of floor
   Restaurant (fast food) including outdoor seating                  area, plus 1
                                                                        per employee
                                                                        on the
                                                                        largest work
                                                                        shift
                                                                        5 per 1,000
   Restaurant (sit down) including outdoor seating                   square feet
                                                                        of floor area
                                                                        1 per 100
   Restaurant, take out (no seating)                                 square feet
                                                                        of floor area
                                                                        1 per 300
   Retail establishment                                              square feet
                                                                        of floor area
                                                                        1 per 300
   Service establishment                                             square feet
                                                                        of floor area
                                                                        1 for each 3
                                                                        seats, based
   Theater, auditorium                                               upon maximum
                                                                        design
                                                                        capacity
                                                                        3 per doctor,
                                                                        plus 1 per
   Veterinary clinic (with or without kennels)                       employee on
                                                                        the largest
                                                                        work shift
Industrial:                                                              
                                                                        1 per 1,000
                                                                        square feet
                                                                        of floor
                                                                        area, plus 1
   Manufacturing                                                     for each
                                                                        company owned
                                                                        truck (if not
                                                                        stored inside
                                                                        the principal
                                                                        structure)
                                                                        1 per 1,000
   Truck terminal                                                    square feet
                                                                        of floor area
                                                                        1 per 1,000
                                                                        square feet
                                                                        of floor
                                                                        area, plus 1
   Warehouse, distribution                                           per company
                                                                        vehicle not
                                                                        stored within
                                                                        the principal
                                                                        structure
                                                                        1 per 400
   Wholesale showroom                                                square feet
                                                                        of floor area
Institutional:                                                           
   Cemetery                                                          1 per
                                                                        employee
                                                                        1 per 250
                                                                        square feet
                                                                        of floor
                                                                        area, or 1
                                                                        per 4 patrons
                                                                        at the
                                                                        maximum
   Community center                                                  occupancy
                                                                        load,
                                                                        whichever is
                                                                        greater, plus
                                                                        1 per
                                                                        employee on
                                                                        the largest
                                                                        work shift
                                                                        2 per 3
                                                                        patient beds,
   Hospital                                                          plus 1 per
                                                                        employee on
                                                                        the largest
                                                                        work shift
                                                                        1 per 250
                                                                        square feet
                                                                        of floor area
                                                                        or 1 per 4
                                                                        seats at the
                                                                        maximum
   Library                                                           occupancy
                                                                        load,
                                                                        whichever is
                                                                        greater, plus
                                                                        1 per
                                                                        employee on
                                                                        the largest
                                                                        work shift
                                                                        1 per 3 seats
   Religious institution                                             of maximum
                                                                        capacity
                                                                        1 per staff
                                                                        member on the
                                                                        largest work
                                                                        shift, plus 1
   School, college or trade                                          per 2
                                                                        students of
                                                                        the largest
                                                                        class
                                                                        attendance
                                                                        period
                                                                        1 per 7
                                                                        students
   School, elementary and junior high                                based upon
                                                                        building
                                                                        design
                                                                        1 per 3
                                                                        students
                                                                        based upon
   School, high school and posthigh school facilities                building
                                                                        design
                                                                        capacity,
                                                                        plus 1 per
                                                                        classroom
Recreational:                                                            
                                                                        1 per 8 seats
   Athletic field (private or private nonprofit)                     of design
                                                                        capacity
   Athletic stadium/auditorium/indoor sports area                    1 per 4 seats
                                                                        4 per hole,
                                                                        plus 50
                                                                        percent of
                                                                        the
                                                                        requirements
                                                                        for any other
                                                                        associated
                                                                        use, except
   Golf course                                                       in planned
                                                                        residential,
                                                                        resort, or
                                                                        commercial
                                                                        developments,
                                                                        which have
                                                                        otherwise
                                                                        adequate
                                                                        provisions
                                                                        for parking
                                                                        10, plus 1
   Golf driving range, miniature golf, archery range                 for each 100
                                                                        square feet
                                                                        of floor area
                                                                        1 per 300
                                                                        square feet
                                                                        of floor
   Skating rink, ice or roller                                       area, plus 1
                                                                        per employee
                                                                        on largest
                                                                        work shift
                                                                        4 per court,
                                                                        plus 1 per
   Tennis, racquet, handball court                                   employee on
                                                                        the largest
                                                                        work shift
Residential:                                                             
                                                                        1 per unit in
                                                                        addition to
   Accessory dwelling unit                                           those
                                                                        required for
                                                                        the principal
                                                                        dwelling unit
   Assisted living facility                                          1/2 per unit
                                                                        1 per
                                                                        teacher/
                                                                        employee on
                                                                        the largest
   Daycare facility                                                  work shift,
                                                                        plus 1 off
                                                                        street
                                                                        loading space
                                                                        per 6
                                                                        students
                                                                        1 per
   Group home (dwelling)                                             sleeping room
                                                                        or 1 for
                                                                        every 4 beds
                                                                        2 per
                                                                        manufactured
   Manufactured home                                                 home (a
                                                                        minimum of 1
                                                                        shall be
                                                                        enclosed)
                                                                        11/2 for each
                                                                        efficiency
                                                                        and 1-bedroom
                                                                        unit and 21/
                                                                        4 for units
                                                                        with 2 or
                                                                        more
   Multiple-family dwelling                                          bedrooms. A
                                                                        minimum of 1
                                                                        of the
                                                                        required
                                                                        parking
                                                                        spaces per
                                                                        unit shall be
                                                                        an enclosed
                                                                        garage space.
                                                                        1 per 6
                                                                        patient beds,
   Nursing home other than assisted living facility                  plus 1 per
                                                                        employee on
                                                                        the largest
                                                                        work shift
                                                                        A 440 square
                                                                        foot attached
                                                                        garage shall
                                                                        be
                                                                        constructed
                                                                        at the same
                                                                        time as the
                                                                        principal
                                                                        structure.
                                                                        For lots of
                                                                        record
                                                                        established
                                                                        after the
   One- and two-family residence                                     effective
                                                                        date hereof,
                                                                        all site
                                                                        plans for
                                                                        single-family
                                                                        homes shall
                                                                        provide for
                                                                        the location
                                                                        of a 3-stall
                                                                        attached
                                                                        garage,
                                                                        whether or
                                                                        not
                                                                        construction
                                                                        is intended
                                                                        1 per unit;
                                                                        1/2 of
                                                                        required
                                                                        stalls may be
                                                                        provided at
                                                                        initial
                                                                        development
                                                                        for projects
                                                                        with
                                                                        occupancy
   Senior housing (uses with occupancy limited to persons age 55 and restricted to
over)                                                                   persons age
                                                                        55 and older.
                                                                        The
                                                                        development
                                                                        shall include
                                                                        a proof of
                                                                        parking area
                                                                        sufficient to
                                                                        meet the
                                                                        parking
                                                                        requirements
                                                                        2 attached
                                                                        garage spaces
                                                                        and 2
                                                                        driveway
                                                                        spaces per
                                                                        unit plus 1/
   Townhome dwelling unit                                            2 per unit in
                                                                        common
                                                                        parking
                                                                        space.
                                                                        Garages shall
                                                                        be a minimum
                                                                        of 20 feet in
                                                                        width
                                                                        The parking
                                                                        requirement
                                                                        for a use not
                                                                        specifically
                                                                        mentioned
                                                                        herein shall
   Uses not listed                                                   be the same
                                                                        as required
                                                                        for a similar
                                                                        use as
                                                                        determined by
                                                                        the Zoning
                                                                        Administrator
 
(Ord. 179, 10-25-2018; amd. Ord. 222, 1-14-2021; Ord. 228, 4-22-2021; Ord. 244,
3-10-2022)
11-9-11: ADDITIONAL OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Any of the following uses with a gross floor area of six thousand
(6,000) square feet or more which requires deliveries or shipments shall
provide off street loading facilities in accordance with the requirements
specified below unless a conditional use permit is granted:
      1.   Every retail establishment, industrial or manufacturing use,
warehouse, or wholesale use having a gross floor area of six thousand (6,000)
square feet or more shall provide off street loading facilities as follows:
 
Gross Floor Area In Square Feet           Number Of Loading Spaces
   6,000 - 24,999                      1
   25,000 - 74,999                     2
   75,000 - 150,000                    3
For each additional 100,000 square feet   1 additional off street loading space
(or fraction thereof) of gross floor area shall be provided
 
      2.   Every public assembly use, such as auditoriums, convention halls,
exhibition halls, stadiums or sports arenas, with a gross floor area of greater
than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet shall be provided a minimum of
one off street loading space.
      3.   Funeral homes, restaurants and hotels with a gross floor area of
greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet and offices with a gross
floor area of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or more shall provide
a minimum of one off street loading space.
   B.   Off street loading spaces shall be at least ten feet by twenty five
feet (10' x 25'), excluding area for maneuvering vehicles.
   C.   At no time shall any part of a truck or van be allowed to extend into
the right-of-way of a public street while the truck or van is being loaded or
unloaded. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
CHAPTER 10
LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
11-10-1: Intent And Purpose
11-10-2: General Requirements And Restrictions
11-10-3: Residential District Requirements
11-10-4: Business District Requirements
11-10-5: Industrial District Requirements
11-10-6: INS Institutional District Requirements
11-10-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for the
installation of landscaping as may be required by other provisions of this
title and to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the city.
   B.   The quality and specifications identified in this chapter are intended
to guide landscaping within residential, business, industrial and institutional
zoning districts.
   C.   All landscaping shall be designed to add visual beauty to the property.
The quantity and quality of the design shall be compatible with each zoning
district and the intended use of the property. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-10-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Deposit Of Materials On Public Ways Prohibited: Landscaping rocks,
black dirt, soil, other landscaping material, etc., shall not be dumped on city
streets or drainage easements on a temporary or permanent basis.
   B.   Planting In City Right Of Way Prohibited: Trees, shrubs, and any other
obstructions that are deemed inappropriate by the city are not permitted within
the street right of way. If trees, shrubs, or other obstructions are installed
within the street right of way, the city shall enter the lot, remove the
obstruction, and assess the cost to the property taxes.
   C.   Erosion Control: Erosion control shall be required within all zoning
districts and shall comply with chapter 11 of this title.
   D.   Tree And Woodland Preservation: For all new developments, tree and
woodland preservation shall comply with section
 11-11-9 of this title.
   E.   Utilities To Be Located: Prior to the commencement of any digging,
grading or planting, all underground utilities shall be located. The contractor
is responsible for all damage, repairs and delay of service as a result of
damage to aboveground or belowground utilities.
   F.   Minimum Nursery Stock Sizes: For all new developments, remodeling or
construction of new expansions within multi- family, commercial, industrial or
institutional zoning districts, the following minimum nursery stock sizes shall
be required at the time of planting and apply to all zoning districts. All
measurements shall conform to the standards set forth in the current edition of
the "USA Standards Of Nursery Stock". Larger plants may be used or specified at
any time. Tree trunk diameter shall be measured six inches (6") to eight inches
(8") above the ground level.
Evergreen shrubs         24 inches in diameter
Evergreen trees          6 feet tall
Large shrubs             36 inches tall
Medium shrubs            24 inches tall
Ornamental trees         11/2 inches in diameter
Overstory trees          21/2 inches in diameter
Small shrubs             12 inches tall
Upright evergreen shrubs 3 feet tall
 
   G.   Planting Schedules: All plants to be installed shall be identified and
approved by the city prior to installation. Plants shall be identified by a
planting schedule which includes:
      1.   Quality to be installed.
      2.   Common name.
      3.   Botanical name.
      4.   Plant size.
      5.   Root type (B&B, container, bare root).
   H.   Plant Location: No plants except flowers, ground covers, or vines shall
be placed within two feet (2') of any building, driveway or parking area unless
specifically noted on the landscape plan.
   I.   Staking Of Trees: The property owner is responsible for keeping trees
in a vertical position. When staking or guying is required, it shall occur so
as not to create any hazards or unsightly obstacles. All wires shall be encased
in hose to prevent tree damage.
   J.   Plant Hardiness: All plants specified and installed shall be nursery
grown and identified as hardy plants which are appropriate for all seasonal
conditions. Plants shall be sound, healthy, vigorous, and free of disease,
insect eggs and larvae. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-10-3: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   R-1 Suburban Single-Family, R-2 Urban Residential (Small Lot) And R-
3 Medium Density (Single-Family) Districts:
      1.   Security: Before a building permit is issued for a new single-family
home, a cash escrow or irrevocable letter of credit shall be furnished to the
city to guarantee compliance with the landscaping and erosion control
requirements of the lot in an amount set by the city council under its fee
schedule. All front yards, boulevards and side yards shall have sod properly
installed within sixty (60) days after the home is constructed upon the lot
unless it is after September 1 and before May 15. The letter of credit shall be
in a form and from a bank acceptable to the city administrator.
      2.   Failure To Install Required Landscaping: If the items mentioned in
subsection A1 of this section are not completed in a timely manner, the city
shall enter the lot, perform the work and apply the cash escrow or draw on the
letter of credit toward any cost or expense incurred by the city for completion
of the work. Upon satisfactory completion of the sodding or landscaping, the
cash escrow, without interest, less any draw made by the city, shall be
returned to the person who deposited the funds with the city or, in the case of
a letter of credit, the remaining amounts on the letter of credit shall be
released. (Ord. 123, 10-8-2015)
      3.   Topsoil And Sodding/Hydroseeding In New Subdivisions:
         a.   The property owner shall spread a minimum of four inches (4") of
topsoil over the boulevard, front, back and side yards. All boulevard, front
and side yard areas shall be sodded except those areas that are landscaped.
Rear yards shall be seeded (established), hydroseeded (established) or sodded.
         b.   Homes that receive a temporary certificate of occupancy between
May 15 and September 1 shall have all landscaping in place sixty (60) days from
the date the temporary certificate of occupancy is received. Homes that receive
a temporary certificate of occupancy after September 1 and before May 15 shall
have sixty (60) days from May 15 to complete the landscaping.
         c.   The distance from building siding, untreated wood, to the top of
the sod shall be a minimum of six inches (6") to satisfy building code
requirements.
      4.   Trees Required For New Subdivisions And Existing Lots: In new
subdivisions or existing lots, trees shall be planted. Permitted tree species
and placement shall be in accordance with details on file with the building
official. All required trees shall be planted by the property owner in
accordance with the requirements in this chapter. The following tree
specifications shall apply to each lot:
         a.   Number And Location: Two (2) trees shall be required per lot.
Required trees shall be planted in the front yard, outside of any easement
dedication and a distance of at least ten feet (10') from the front property
line, and five feet (5') from any side property line. If not possible to fit
two (2) trees in the front yard, one (1) may be placed in the back yard. For
corner lots, one (1) tree must be placed on each front yard.
         b.   Caliper: A minimum of two and one-half inches (21/2") in trunk
diameter, measured six inches (6") to eight inches (8") above the ground level.
(Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
         c.   Planting In Easements; Clear View Triangle: No required tree
shall be planted inside of any drainage or utility easement or within a fifty
foot (50') clear view triangle on corner lots. The clear view triangle is as
set out in section
11-4-16 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. 2011 Code)
         d.   Type: Trees shall consist of nursery stock and be no less than
the following sizes and species:
         (1)   Deciduous trees: No less than two and one-half inches (21/2") in
diameter.
         (2)   Coniferous trees: No less than six feet (6') high.
         (3)   Trees shall include those species shown on the following table:
Deciduous trees:
Deciduous trees:
 Sugar maple                          Acer saccharum
 Birch species                        Betula spp.
 Common hackberry                     Celtis occidentalis
 Gingko (male only)                   Gingko biloba
 Thornless common honeylocust         Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis
 Skyline honeylocust                  Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis
                                       ‘Skycole’
 Espresso Kentucky coffeetree         Gymnocladus dioica
 Oak species (all)                    Quercus spp.
 Princeton American elm               Ulmus americana ‘Princeton’
 American linden, basswood            Tilia americana
Coniferous trees:                       
 Fir species (all)                    Abies spp.
 European larch                       Larix decidua
 Tamarack*                            Larix laricina
 Black Hills spruce                   Picea glauca densata
 Spruce Species (Black Hills, Norway, Picea spp.
  White)
 Austrian pine                        Pinus nigra
 Eastern white pine                   Pinus strobus
 Cedar species (all)                  Thuja spp.
Ornamental trees:
 Japanese tree lilac                  Syringa reticulata
 Serviceberry                         Amelanchier x grandiflora
 Amur cherry                          Prunus maackii
 Crabapple varieties                  Malus spp.
 Pagoda dogwood (Tree form)           Cornus alternifolia
 Thornless hawthorn                   Crataegus crus-galli var. inermis
 Viburnum varieties                   Viburnum spp.
 
      5.   Other Tree Species; Prohibited Trees: Other species of trees may be
approved by the building official or Zoning Administrator. Ornamental trees or
trees which can cause a public nuisance, such as cotton producing trees, or can
be a public hazard, such as bug infestation or weak bark, are prohibited. Trees
which shall not be planted to comply with the subdivision requirements are as
follows:
Prohibited trees:
Prohibited trees:
 Amur maple                  Acer ginnala
 Box elder                   Acer negundo
 Norway maple                Acer platanoides
 Silver maple                Acer saccharinum
 Northern or western catalpa Catalpa speciosa
 Russian olive               Elaeagnus angustifolia
 Ash species (all)           Fraxinus
 Ginkgo (female only)        Ginkgo biloba
 Common or white mulberry    Morus alba
 Colorado blue spruce        Picea pungens glauca
 Poplar species (all)        Populus spp.
 Black locust                Robinia pseudoacacia
 Babylon weeping willow      Salix babylonica
 Siberian elm                Ulmus pumila
 
(Ord. 45, 9-24-2009)
   B.   R-3 Medium Density (Attached) Residential And R-4 High Density
Residential Districts:
      1.   At least thirty percent (30%) of the total site area shall be
landscaped. For purposes of this subsection, landscaping shall also include
prairies, wetlands, woodlands, ponds, pervious play areas, outdoor tennis
courts, and outdoor swimming pools. (Ord. 196, 8-8-2019)
      2.   All areas disturbed by grading which are not built upon, paved or
retained as a natural area shall be sodded and/or landscaped unless
specifically approved as part of the overall landscape plan.
      3.   A landscape plan identifying all areas to be sodded and landscaped
shall be clearly shown. Foundation planting plans are also required to be at a
readable scale. Detailed enlargements may be required if necessary. A planting
schedule shall be required. The landscape plan shall describe or diagram the
type of edging and mulch cover to be used. The landscape plan shall identify
any unique features or special areas of the site which would require special
attention, i.e., steep slopes, erosion control matting, retaining walls,
natural areas, or wildflower seeding.
      4.   All properties shall provide inground irrigation systems to all
landscaped areas. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
   C.   R-5 Downtown Residential Districts:
      1.   At least twenty percent (20%) of the total site area shall be
pervious landscaped area. For purposes of this subsection, landscaping shall
also include wetlands, ponds, and pervious play areas.
      2.   All areas disturbed by grading which are not built upon, paved or
retained as a natural area shall be sodded and/or landscaped unless
specifically approved as part of the overall landscape plan.
      3.   A landscape plan identifying all areas to be sodded and landscaped
shall be clearly shown. Foundation planting plans are also required to be at a
readable scale. Detailed enlargements may be required if necessary. A planting
schedule shall be required. The landscape plan shall describe or diagram the
type of edging and mulch cover to be used. The landscape plan shall identify
any unique features or special areas of the site which would require special
attention, i.e., steep slopes, erosion control matting, retaining walls,
natural areas, or wildflower seeding. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. 2011 Code; Ord.
244, 3-10-2022; Ord. 251, 6-23-2022)
11-10-4: BUSINESS DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   B-1 Neighborhood Business Districts:
      1.   At least twenty percent (20%) of the land area shall be landscaped
with approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees. All boulevard, front and
secondary front yard areas shall be sodded. Side and rear yard areas shall be
sodded, seeded (established) or hydroseeded (established).
      2.   At least three percent (3%) of the total land area within the
parking and driveway areas of a site shall be landscaped. This area is counted
as part of the overall required green area.
      3.   A minimum landscaped buffer area twenty feet (20') in width shall
separate any parking, driveway, or structure from a lot line common with any
residential district.
      4.   All properties shall provide inground irrigation systems within
front and secondary front yard areas and within yards adjacent to residential
districts.
      5.   All areas disturbed by grading which are not built upon, paved or
retained as a natural area shall be sodded and/or landscaped unless
specifically approved as part of the overall landscape plan.
      6.   All new plants shall be guaranteed for twelve (12) months from the
time planting has been completed. All plants shall be alive, of good quality,
and disease free at the end of the warranty period or be replaced. Any
replacements shall be warranted for twelve (12) months from the time of
planting.
   B.   B-2 Downtown Business Districts:
      1.   All properties shall provide inground irrigation systems to all
landscaped areas.
      2.   At least three percent (3%) of the total land area within the
parking and driveway areas of a site shall be landscaped. This area is counted
as part of the overall required green area.
      3.   All areas disturbed by grading which are not built upon, paved or
retained as a natural area shall be sodded and/or landscaped unless
specifically approved as part of the overall landscape plan.
      4.   All new plants shall be guaranteed for twelve (12) months from the
time planting has been completed. All plants shall be alive, of good quality,
and disease free at the end of the warranty period or be replaced. Any
replacements shall be warranted for twelve (12) months from the time of
planting.
   C.   B-4 Highway Business Districts:
      1.   At least twenty percent (20%) of the land area shall be landscaped
with approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees. All boulevard, front and
secondary front yard areas shall be sodded. Side and rear yard areas shall be
sodded, seeded (established) or hydroseeded (established).
      2.   At least three percent (3%) of the total land area within the
parking and driveway areas of a site shall be landscaped. This area is counted
as part of the overall required green area.
      3.   A minimum landscaped buffer area thirty feet (30') in width shall
separate any parking, driveway, or structure from a lot line common with any
residential district.
      4.   All properties shall provide inground irrigation systems within
front and secondary front yard areas and within yards adjacent to residential
districts.
      5.   All areas disturbed by grading which are not built upon, paved or
retained as a natural area shall be sodded and/or landscaped unless
specifically approved as part of the overall landscape plan.
      6.   All new plants shall be guaranteed for twelve (12) months from the
time planting has been completed. All plants shall be alive, of good quality,
and disease free at the end of the warranty period or be replaced. Any
replacements shall be warranted for twelve (12) months from the time of
planting.
   D.   B-5 General Business Districts:
      1.   At least twenty percent (20%) of the land area shall be landscaped
with approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees. All boulevard, front and
secondary front yard areas shall be sodded. Side and rear yard areas shall be
sodded, seeded (established) or hydroseeded (established).
      2.   At least three percent (3%) of the total land area within the
parking and driveway areas of a site shall be landscaped. This area is counted
as part of the overall required green area.
      3.   A minimum landscaped buffer area twenty feet (20') in width shall
separate any parking, driveway, or structure from a lot line common with any
residential district.
      4.   All properties shall provide inground irrigation systems within
front and secondary front yard areas and within yards adjacent to residential
districts.
      5.   All areas disturbed by grading which are not built upon, paved or
retained as a natural area shall be sodded and/or landscaped unless
specifically approved as part of the overall landscape plan.
      6.   All new plants shall be guaranteed for twelve (12) months from the
time planting has been completed. All plants shall be alive, of good quality,
and disease free at the end of the warranty period or be replaced. Any
replacements shall be warranted for twelve (12) months from the time of
planting.
   E.   B-6 Business Campus Districts:
      1.   At least twenty percent (25%) of the land area shall be landscaped
with approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees. All boulevard, front and
secondary front yard areas shall be sodded. Side and rear yard areas shall be
sodded, seeded (established) or hydroseeded (established).
      2.   At least five percent (5%) of the total land area within the parking
and driveway areas of a site shall be landscaped. This area is counted as part
of the overall required green area.
      3.   At least fifty percent (50%) of the total building perimeter shall
be sodded or landscaped with approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees.
      4.   A minimum landscape buffer area thirty feet (30') in width shall
separate any parking, driveway or structure from a lot line common with any
residential district.
      5.   A minimum landscape buffer area ten (10') in width shall separate
any parking, driveway or structure from any public right of way.
      6.   All properties shall provide inground irrigation systems within
front and secondary front yard areas and within yards adjacent to residential
districts.
      7.   All areas disturbed by grading which are not built upon, paved or
retained as a natural area shall be sodded and/or landscaped unless
specifically approved as part of the overall landscape plan.
      8.   All new plants shall be guaranteed for twelve (12) months from the
time planting has been completed. All plants shall be alive, of good quality,
and disease free at the end of the warranty period or be replaced. Any
replacements shall be warranted for twelve (12) months from the time of
planting. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-10-5: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   I-1 Limited Industrial Districts:
      1.   At least twenty percent (20%) of the land area shall be landscaped
with approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees. All boulevard, front and
secondary front yard areas shall be sodded. Side and rear yard areas shall be
sodded, seeded (established) or hydroseeded (established).
      2.   At least five percent (3%) of the total land area within the parking
and driveway areas of a site shall be landscaped. This area is counted as part
of the overall required green area.
      3.   At least fifty percent (50%) of the total building perimeter shall
be sodded or landscaped with approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees.
      4.   A minimum landscape buffer area thirty feet (30') in width shall
separate any parking, driveway or structure from a lot line common with any
residential district.
      5.    A minimum landscape buffer area ten feet (10') in width shall
separate any parking, driveway or structure from any public right of way.
      6.   All properties shall provide inground irrigation systems within
front and secondary front yard areas and within yards adjacent to residential
districts.
      7.   All areas disturbed by grading which are not built upon, paved or
retained as a natural area shall be sodded and/or landscaped unless
specifically approved as part of the overall landscape plan.
      8.   All new plants shall be guaranteed for twelve (12) months from the
time planting has been completed. All plants shall be alive, of good quality,
and disease free at the end of the warranty period or be replaced. Any
replacements shall be warranted for twelve (12) months from the time of
planting.
   B.   I-2 General Industrial Districts:
      1.   At least twenty percent (20%) of the land area shall be landscaped
with approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees. All boulevard, front and
secondary front yard areas shall be sodded. Side and rear yard areas shall be
sodded, seeded (established) or hydroseeded (established).
      2.   At least eight percent (5%) of the total land area within the
parking and driveway areas of a site shall be landscaped. This area is counted
as part of the overall required green area.
      3.   A minimum landscaped buffer area forty feet (40') in width shall
separate any parking, driveway, or structure from a lot line common with any
residential district.
      4.   A minimum landscape buffer area twenty feet (20') in width shall
separate any parking, driveway or structure from any public right of way.
      5.   All properties shall provide inground irrigation systems within
front and secondary front yard areas and within yards adjacent to residential
districts.
      6.   All areas disturbed by grading which are not built upon, paved or
retained as a natural area shall be sodded and/or landscaped unless
specifically approved as part of the overall landscape plan.
      7.   All new plants shall be guaranteed for twelve (12) months from the
time planting has been completed. All plants shall be alive, of good quality,
and disease free at the end of the warranty period or be replaced. Any
replacements shall be warranted for twelve (12) months from the time of
planting. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-10-6: INS INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   At least thirty percent (30%) of the land area shall be sodded and
landscaped with approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees.
   B.   At least eight percent (8%) of the total land area within the parking
and driveway areas of a site shall be landscaped. This area is counted as part
of the overall required green area.
   C.   At least fifty percent (50%) of the total building perimeter shall be
sodded or landscaped with approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees.
   D.   A minimum landscape buffer area twenty feet (20') in width shall
separate any parking, driveway or structure from a lot line common with any
residential district.
   E.   All properties abutting residential districts shall provide inground
irrigation systems to all landscaped areas.
   F.   All areas disturbed by grading which are not built upon, paved or
retained as a natural area shall be sodded and/or landscaped unless
specifically approved as part of the overall landscape plan.
   G.   All new plants shall be guaranteed for twelve (12) months from the time
planting has been completed. All plants shall be alive, of good quality, and
disease free at the end of the warranty period or be replaced. Any replacements
shall be warranted for twelve (12) months from the time of planting. (Ord. 5,
12-14-2006)
CHAPTER 11
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
SECTION:
11-11-1: General Standards
11-11-2: Stormwater Management
11-11-2-1: Alternative Stormwater Management Techniques
11-11-3: Erosion And Sediment Control
11-11-4: Wetlands
11-11-5: Bridge And Culvert Crossings
11-11-6: Drainage Alterations
11-11-7: Groundwater
11-11-8: Grading Operations
11-11-9: Trees And Woodlands
11-11-10: Flood Regulations
11-11-1: GENERAL STANDARDS:
All land disturbing activities, whether requiring a permit under this chapter
or otherwise, shall be undertaken in conformance with the following:
   A.   City approved best management practices (BMPs) and the standards and
criteria set forth in this chapter.
   B.   No person shall conduct land disturbing activities without protecting
adjacent property and water bodies from erosion, sedimentation, flooding or
other damage.
   C.   Land disturbing activities shall be planned and conducted to minimize
the extent of disturbed area, runoff velocities, erosion potential, and to
reduce and delay runoff volumes if possible. Erosion and runoff controls,
consistent with approved BMPs, shall be properly installed before commencing
land disturbing activities, and be sufficient to retain sediment on site.
Erosion and runoff controls shall be regularly inspected and maintained per the
approved SWPPP and NPDES/SDS construction stormwater permit requirements.
Temporary and permanent vegetative cover shall be installed over all disturbed
site areas per the approved SWPPP if the land disturbing activity ceases or is
suspended, and upon completion. Pipe outlets shall be provided with temporary
or permanent energy dissipation if connected to a surface water.
   D.   When possible, existing natural watercourses and vegetated soil
surfaces shall be used to convey, store, filter, and retain runoff before
discharge into public waters or a public or private stormwater conveyance
system.
   E.   Runoff from new impervious areas is required to be pretreated prior to
discharge into wetlands or infiltration BMPs.
   F.   When possible, runoff from roof gutter systems shall discharge onto
lawns or other pervious surfaces to promote infiltration.
   G.   Use of fertilizer and pesticides in any shoreland protection zone shall
be done so as to minimize runoff into public waters by the use of earth
material, vegetation, or both.
   H.   When development density, topographic features, or soil and vegetation
conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle runoff using natural
features and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities such as
diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, watercourses, and ponds
may be used. Preference shall be given to designs using surface drainage,
vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and manmade materials and
facilities.
   I.   Whenever the city determines that a land disturbing activity has become
a hazard to any person, endangers the property of another, adversely affects
water quality or any water body, increases flooding, or otherwise violates this
chapter, the owner of the land upon which the land disturbing activity is
located, or other person, or agent in control of such land, upon receipt of
written notice from the city, shall, within the time period specified therein,
repair or eliminate such conditions. The owner of the land upon which a land
disturbing activity is located shall be responsible for the cleanup and any and
all damages resulting from sediment transported off such land. The city may
require the owner to obtain a permit under this chapter before undertaking any
repairs or restoration.
   J.   No person shall develop, redevelop or commence land disturbing
activities on bluffs without protecting adjacent property and water bodies from
erosion, sedimentation, flooding or other damage. (Ord. 30, 10-23-2008)
11-11-2: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
   A.   Plan And Permit Required:
      1.   Requirements: Unless specifically exempted by this chapter, no
person or political subdivision shall commence a land disturbing activity
without first developing an approved project specific stormwater management
plan and obtaining a grading permit from the city. Land disturbance equal to or
greater than one acre shall also require issuance of an NPDES general
construction permit.
      2.   Application Requirements: Unless otherwise exempted by this section,
an application for stormwater management approval shall include the following
as a condition for its consideration:
         a.   A stormwater management plan;
         b.   A maintenance agreement (if private stormwater management
facilities are proposed).
The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements of
subsection B of this section and the maintenance agreement shall be prepared to
meet the requirements of subsection F of this section.
   B.   Criteria: Project specific stormwater management plans shall comply
with the following criteria:
      1.   Methodology: A hydrograph method based on sound hydrologic theory
and approved by the city will be used to analyze stormwater runoff for the
design and analysis of flows and surface water levels. Green infrastructure
techniques and practices (including, but not limited to, infiltration,
evapotranspiration, reuse/harvesting, conservation design, urban forestry, and
green roofs) shall be given preference as design options consistent with
zoning, subdivision and public utility district requirements.
      2.   Runoff Rates:
         a.   Stormwater runoff rates for the proposed activities, development
or redevelopment shall:
            (1)   Not exceed existing runoff rates for the 1-year, 2-year, 10-
year and 100-year, 24-hour storm events. Precipitation depths using NOAA atlas
14 volume 8 precipitation frequency estimates, published June 2013, or its
successor, shall be used for each project location;
            (2)   Not accelerate on or off site watercourse erosion, create a
downstream nuisance, or cause flooding or damage as determined by the city
according to the downstream assessment provisions of this chapter; and
            (3)   Runoff rates may be restricted to less than existing rates
when necessary for the public health, safety and general welfare of the city.
            (4)   The county soil survey shall be used to determine the
hydrologic soil group for determining the curve number for land use covers.
         b.   Redevelopment projects are exempt from criteria in runoff rate
controls; however, for the purposes of this chapter, if an activity creates
one-tenth (0.1) acre or more of new or additional impervious surface, the
activity is considered new development and the entire site must comply with
this section.
      3.   Downstream Evaluation: The city will provide an assessment of the
potential for adverse impacts downstream of a proposed project to determine if
the project can proceed in advance of downstream regional improvements. To
evaluate the impacts, the city will complete an evaluation downstream to the
point where the proposed activity is ten percent (10%) of the drainage area
(e.g., a 10 acre development must evaluate downstream to the point where the
drainage area is 100 acres). The applicant shall identify the study area(s).
The evaluation will consist of and include an assessment of:
         a.   Landlocked basin evaluations.
            (1)   The city will provide an assessment of water levels in the
landlocked receiving water bodies resulting from the contributing watershed's
full annual runoff yield during a 100-year wet year using the simplified
hydrologic yield method (SHYM), or other methods for back to back 100-year, 24-
hour storm events for existing conditions and fully developed watershed
conditions; and
            (2)   The applicant shall identify all public and private
structures in the landlocked basin including: low floor and entry elevations of
residences; individual sewage treatment systems (ISTS); and infrastructure
(sanitary sewer, stormwater pipes, drain tile and facilities, and roads)
surrounding the receiving water bodies and located within two (2) vertical feet
of the elevation for the back to back 100-year, 24-hour storm event defined by
the city.
            (3)   If there are public or private structures or infrastructure
located within two (2) vertical feet of the back to back 100-year, 24-hour
storm event elevation, the applicant shall provide corrective actions, delay
the project until downstream regional infrastructure is in place, or revise the
application.
         b.   Potential impacts to downstream infrastructure, public and
private structures, and erosion along the drainage path and downstream public
waters.
            (1)   The applicant shall identify:
               (A)   The existing public and private drainage easements;
               (B)   The locations, condition, and dimensions of the existing
drainage infrastructure to the nearest regional stormwater facility, if any;
               (C)   The location and elevation of structures with low floors,
or entries within two (2) vertical feet of the existing 100-year flood level;
               (D)   The location and description of known existing flooding
problems; and
               (E)   A hydrologic and hydraulic assessment of flooding impacts
of the proposed project on downstream public and private structures.
               (F)   An assessment of existing and potential watercourse
erosion, bank stability, bank protection, and watercourse slope.
               (G)   An assessment of the hydrologic and hydraulic capacity of
the downstream public and private infrastructure.
               (H)   An assessment of property damages including health,
safety, and welfare impacts relative to increased flooding of public and
private infrastructure. Minnesota department of transportation guidelines shall
be used to assess safety of flood levels at downstream driveways and road
crossings.
            (2)   If property damage, erosion, and public health, safety, and
welfare impacts are identified, the applicant shall provide approved corrective
action or delay the project until downstream regional infrastructure is in
place or revise the application.
         c.   Potential impacts to wetlands with exceptional vegetative
diversity functional value as defined in section
11-11-4 of this chapter.
            (1)   The applicant shall provide:
               (A)   Delineation and functional assessment of all wetlands on
the subject site.
               (B)   Corrective actions that mitigate in proportion to the
proposed project impacts if the water level bounce and period of inundation
created by the alterations exceeds the limits specified in the following table.
Corrective actions shall consist of runoff rate and volume controls necessary
to keep the water level bounce and period of inundation within the limits
specified in the following table:
 
Hydroperiod     Highly      Moderately       Slightly         Least
Standard        Susceptible Susceptible      Susceptible      Susceptible
                Wetlands    Wetlands         Wetlands         Wetlands
Storm bounce 1-             Existing, plus   No limit, plus
and 2-year      Existing    0.5 foot         1.0 foot         No limit
events
Period of
inundation for  Existing    Existing, plus 1 Existing, plus 2 Existing, plus 7
1- and 2-year               day              days             days
events
Period of                   Existing, plus 7 Existing, plus   Existing, plus 21
inundation for  Existing    days             14 days          days
10-year event
 
            (2)   The city shall provide hydrologic and hydraulic analyses of
the before and after project water level bounce and period of inundation for
wetlands with exceptional vegetative diversity for the 1-year, 2-year and 10-
year, 24-hour storm events.
      4.   Routing Capacity: All storm drainage conveyance systems shall have
capacity for the runoff from a 10-year, 24-hour storm event. Runoff from larger
events shall be routed by pipes or overland means to ponds and related systems.
All storm drainage ponds and related facilities shall be designed to store and/
or pass the runoff from the 100-year, 24-hour storm event or accumulative
antecedent conditions without damage to the system or facility, downstream
areas and/or significant risk to public health, safety, and welfare unless
these stormwater management regulations are waived by the city.
      5.   Regional Detention Basins: Regional detention basins shall be used
to manage peak flow rates and runoff volumes and meet water quality objectives
when required by the city. The city may charge the applicant "cash in lieu of"
fees for regional facilities, depending upon the degree of on site detention
and treatment provided. On site stormwater detention basins, volume control
facilities, and permanent sedimentation and water quality ponds will be used
for land disturbing activities, the development or redevelopment of land that
creates greater than one acre of impervious surface when regional basins are
not in place or feasible, or would not otherwise meet requirements for the
protection of downstream areas that are located between the project and the
regional basin.
      6.   Alternative BMPs: The city may approve alternative BMPs instead of
permanent sedimentation and water quality ponds if it finds that the water
quality performance of the proposed alternative BMPs is equivalent to that of a
permanent sedimentation and water quality pond designed according to the
criteria set forth in this chapter. Total suspended solids removal shall be on
an annual average basis. The estimated performance for the proposed BMPs shall
be based on information from independent laboratory work, studies, published
reference materials, or the Minnesota stormwater manual. The city may require
monitoring of alternative practices and contingency plans based on the
requirements in the NPDES/SDS general construction permit issued by the
Minnesota pollution control agency, as amended.
      7.   Landlocked Outlets: Landlocked water basins may be provided with
outlets if an outcome based analysis and resource oriented management review
regarding downstream impacts is completed that demonstrates:
         a.   A hydrologic regime is maintained that complies with the wetland
and drainage alteration regulations;
         b.   Dead storage is provided to retain the fully developed future
conditions SHYM predicted water volumes, or the back to back 100-year, 24-hour
storm event volume, above the highest anticipated groundwater elevation while
preventing damage to property adjacent to the basin;
         c.   The outlet does not create adverse downstream flooding or water
quality conditions, or materially affect stability of downstream watercourses
according to the criteria in this chapter;
         d.   Proposed development in tributary areas to the landlocked basin
have incorporated runoff volume control practices to the extent practical;
         e.   There is a demonstrated need for an outlet to protect existing
structures and infrastructure; and
         f.   The outlet design is part of an approved project specific
stormwater management plan.
      8.   Treatment: Permanent sedimentation and water quality ponds shall be
designed to the following standards:
         a.   Water quality features consistent with NURP criteria or the
Minnesota stormwater manual and approved BMPs;
         b.   Outlet skimmers are required to prevent migration of floatables
and oils for at least the 1-year storm event;
         c.   Ponds shall be designed to prevent short circuiting of the flow
from the pond inlet to the outlet;
         d.   A normal water elevation above the OHW of adjacent water bodies,
or normal water level (NWL) where an OHW is not established;
         e.   A minimum freeboard of one foot (1') above the pond's HWL and a
minimum dike top width of four feet (4');
         f.   A submerged outlet six inches (6") or more from the NWL to the
crown of the outlet pipe; and
         g.   Unobstructed vehicular access road to the safety shelf and outlet
structure. The access should be ten feet (10') wide or greater with slopes of
fifteen percent (15%) or less in the running direction and five percent (5%) or
less in the cross direction.
      9.   Structure Elevations: Any new residential, commercial, industrial,
and other habitable structures shall be constructed with the following minimum
low floor elevations:
         a.   In the case of a landlocked basin, the lowest floor elevation
must be at least one foot (1'), and the lowest opening elevation must be at
least three feet (3') above the surveyed basin overflow or the high water level
of the basin as determined from an estimate using the SHYM, or 100-year, 24-
hour back to back storm events, under full build out conditions for the
contributing watershed.
         b.   Where the 100-year flood level has been established, the low
floor and low opening elevations shall be at least one foot (1') above the 100-
year flood level. Low openings shall be at least one foot (1') above the
emergency overflow.
         c.   For public waters and public water wetlands (DNR protected water
bodies) where the 100-year flood level has not been established, low floor and
opening elevations shall be at least three feet (3') above the OHW.
         d.   In all other cases, the low opening elevation shall be at least
three feet (3') above the highest known water level.
      10.   Volume Control:
         a.   New development projects shall achieve no net increase from
preproject conditions (on an annual average basis) of:
            (1)   Stormwater discharge volume, unless precluded by the volume
standards below;
            (2)   Discharges of total suspended solids (TSS); and
            (3)   Discharge of total phosphorus (TP).
         b.   Redevelopment projects shall achieve a net reduction from
preproject conditions (on an annual average basis) of:
            (1)   Stormwater discharge volume, unless precluded by the volume
standards below;
            (2)   Discharges of total suspended solids (TSS); and
            (3)   Discharge of total phosphorus (TP).
         c.   Development and redevelopment that create one acre or more of
impervious surfaces and increase runoff volume shall meet the most restrictive
of either of the following two (2) volume standards:
            (1)   Volume standard 1: One inch (1") of runoff from the new
impervious surfaces created by the project shall be retained on site and meet
the requirements of the NPDES/SDS general permit.
            (2)   Volume standard 2: The proposed runoff volume shall be
limited to the existing runoff volume for a 2-year, 24-hour storm.
         d.   For linear projects that lack right of way for the installation
of volume control practices, a reasonable attempt must be made to obtain right
of way during the planning process. Exceptions may be made for lesser volume on
site if any limitations are encountered as allowed per the NPDES/SDS general
permit.
         e.   At a minimum, volume control practices shall comply with the
following:
            (1)   When using infiltration for volume control, infiltration
volumes and facility sizes shall be calculated using the appropriate
hydrological soil group classification and saturated infiltration rate from the
table below, and shall be capable of infiltrating the required volume within
forty eight (48) hours. Site specific infiltration or hydraulic conductivity
measurements completed by a licensed soil scientist or geotechnical engineer
may be used in place of the values in the following table:
 
Hydrologic Infiltration Rate Soil Texture
Soils Type
A          0.30 inch/hour    Sand, loamy sand, or sand loam
B          0.15 inch/hour    Silt loam or loam
C          0.07 inch/hour    Sandy clay loam
 
            (2)   Infiltration areas will be limited to the horizontal areas
subject to prolonged wetting.
            (3)   The bottom area of treatment ponds shall not be accepted as
part of an infiltration practice; however, properly designed slopes and safety
shelves may be accepted.
            (4)   Before infiltrating runoff, pretreatment shall be required
for gravel and paved surface lot runoff that will enter the infiltration
system. The pretreatment shall be designed to protect the infiltration system
from clogging and to protect groundwater quality. Pretreatment options may
include, but are not limited to, oil/grease separation, sedimentation,
biofiltration, filtration, swales or filter strips. To minimize potential
groundwater impacts, it is desirable to infiltrate the cleanest runoff. To
achieve this, a design may propose greater infiltration of runoff from low
pollutant sources such as roofs, and less from higher pollution source areas
such as parking lots.
            (5)   Infiltration systems shall be designed to bypass higher flows
without incurring damage from erosion or loss of topsoil.
            (6)   Infiltration areas shall be fenced or otherwise protected
from compaction and/or disturbance before and during all land disturbing
activities.
            (7)   Constructed infiltration practices, such as infiltration
ponds and trenches, are discouraged in favor of other appropriate volume
control practices. Constructed infiltration practices shall not be used in the
following situations:
               (A)   For runoff from fueling and vehicle maintenance areas and
industrial areas with exposed significant materials.
               (B)   In areas with less than three feet (3') of vertical
separation from the bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of
seasonally saturated soils or top of bedrock.
               (C)   For areas with runoff from industrial, commercial, and
institutional parking lots and roads where there is less than five feet (5') of
separation from the bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of the
seasonal high groundwater.
               (D)   Where high levels of contaminants in soil or groundwater
will be mobilized by the infiltration of stormwater.
            (8)   Infiltration practices shall be restricted, without higher
engineering review that provides sufficient information to show that the
treatment system can function properly and prevent adverse impacts to
groundwater, when the infiltration practice will be constructed in areas:
               (A)   With predominately hydrologic soil group D soils;
               (B)   Within one thousand feet (1,000') up gradient, or one
hundred feet (100') down gradient of active karst features;
               (C)   Within a drinking water source management area (DWSMA) as
defined in the city's wellhead protection plan; or
               (D)   Where soil infiltration rates are more than 8.3 inches per
hour.
            (9)   Constructed infiltration facilities in areas of medium or
high groundwater susceptibility shown in the city wellhead protection plan, as
amended; within four hundred feet (400') of a community water system, or within
one hundred feet (100') of a private well, shall have acceptable pretreatment
of runoff.
            (10)   The use of green infrastructure techniques and practices
shall be the preferred BMPs for meeting the volume control standards. Examples
of green infrastructure include the following practices: filtration,
evapotranspiration, reuse, harvesting, conservation design, green roofs, trees,
or similar techniques on the site to reduce stormwater discharge volume.
            (11)   When the postconstruction stormwater management for total
suspended solids and total phosphorus cannot be cost effectively managed on the
site of the original construction activity, mitigation measures shall meet the
requirements of the NPDES/SDS general permit.
      11.   Flood Storage:
         a.   Site alteration or filling shall not cause a net decrease in
flood storage capacity below the projected 100-year flood elevation unless it
is shown that the proposed alteration or filling, together with the alteration
or filling of other land on the affected reach of the water body to the same
degree of encroachment as proposed by the applicant, will not cause high water
or aggravate flooding on other land and will not unduly restrict flood flows.
         b.   The applicant may be required to create compensatory storage to
mitigate loss of flood storage.
   C.   Waivers: The city may waive the on site stormwater runoff rate control
and water quality design criteria of this section if the city has regional
stormwater facilities capable of meeting the requirements stated herein. Waiver
of the on site stormwater facility siting requirements does not preclude the
city from collecting appropriate stormwater area charges and/or cash in lieu of
on site stormwater management fees. (Ord. 137, 8-11-2016)
   D.   Maintenance: All stormwater management structures and facilities to be
maintained by the city shall be located in outlots dedicated to the city. (Ord.
30, 10-23-2008)
   E.   Easements And Outlots:
      1.   The applicant shall dedicate or convey to the city easements or
deeds to outlots for ponding, flowage, and drainage purposes over hydrologic
features such as water bodies and stormwater basins as follows:
         a.   Easements: Flowage, drainage, ingress/egress, and conservation
areas;
         b.   Outlots: Wetlands and associated buffers, infiltration basins,
ponds and associated buffers.
      2.   Outlots and easements conveyed under this subsection shall include
the right of ingress and egress for inspection, monitoring, maintenance, and
enforcement purposes, including issuance of connection permits.
   F.   Private Stormwater Facilities:
      1.   Maintenance Agreement: While stormwater management facilities are
generally owned and managed by the city, situations may arise where a private
stormwater facility is appropriate. The applicant shall enter into a
maintenance agreement with the city that documents all responsibilities for
operation and maintenance of all stormwater treatment practices. Such
responsibility shall be documented in a maintenance plan and executed through a
maintenance agreement. The maintenance agreement shall be executed and recorded
against the parcel. The maintenance agreement shall be in a form approved by
the city, shall describe the inspection and maintenance obligations of this
section and shall, at a minimum:
         a.   Designate the applicant, who shall be permanently responsible for
maintenance of the structural or nonstructural measures.
         b.   Pass responsibility for such maintenance to successors in title.
         c.   Grant the city and its representatives an easement over the
parcel for the purposes of inspecting all stormwater treatment practice and
repairing and maintaining the facility, if necessary maintenance is not
performed after proper and reasonable notice to the applicant.
         d.   Include a maintenance plan that contains, but is not limited to,
the following:
            (1)   Identification of all stormwater treatment practices.
            (2)   A schedule for regular inspection, monitoring, and
maintenance for each practice. Monitoring shall verify whether the practice is
functioning as designed and may include, but is not limited to, quality,
temperature, and quantity of runoff.
            (3)   Identification of the applicant for conducting the
inspection, monitoring, and maintenance for each practice.
         e.   Identify a schedule and format for reporting compliance with the
maintenance plan to the city.
      2.   Inspection Of Stormwater Facility:
         a.   Inspection programs shall be established on any reasonable basis,
including, but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections;
inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations;
inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical
sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of
businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges
of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more
likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water
or sediment quality standards or the NPDES stormwater permit; and joint
inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws.
Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing maintenance and
repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material
or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of
drainage control facilities and other stormwater treatment practices.
         b.   When any new stormwater treatment practice is installed on
private property, or when any new connection is made between private property
and a public drainage control system, sanitary sewer, or combined sewer; the
property owner shall grant to the city an easement to enter the property at
reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This
includes the right to enter a property when the city has a reasonable basis to
believe that a violation of this section is occurring or has occurred, and to
enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a
violation of this section.
         c.   The city engineer, public works superintendent or designated
representative shall inspect all stormwater management facilities during
construction, during the first year of operation, and at least once every five
(5) years thereafter. The inspection records will be kept on file at the public
works department for a period of six (6) years. It shall be the responsibility
of the applicant to obtain any necessary easements or other property interests
to allow access to the stormwater management facilities for inspection and
maintenance purposes.
      3.   Records Of Installation And Maintenance Activities: The applicant
shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and repairs of
the stormwater treatment practices, and shall retain the records for at least
three (3) years. These records shall be made available to the city during
inspection of the stormwater treatment practice and at other reasonable times
upon request.
      4.   Failure To Maintain Practices: If an applicant fails or refuses to
meet the requirements of the maintenance agreement, the city, after reasonable
notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by
performing all necessary work to place the stormwater treatment practice in
proper working condition. In the event that the stormwater treatment practice
becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city shall notify the
applicant in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the applicant shall have
thirty (30) days to perform maintenance and repair of the facility in an
approved manner. After proper notice, the city may specially assess the owner
(s) of the stormwater treatment practice for the cost of repair work and any
penalties; and the cost of the work shall be assessed against the property and
collected along with ordinary taxes by the county. (Ord. 137, 8-11-2016)
11-11-2-1: ALTERNATIVE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES:
Because of unique physical characteristics of a special parcel, advances in the
science of stormwater management and the development of new technologies, it
may be possible to meet the intent of this chapter with combinations of new and
existing practices that provide equivalent performance. This chapter allows for
the waiver of specific criteria based on documentation and review of equivalent
approaches incorporated into project plans. Low impact development (LID)
practices are encouraged to be utilized to reduce and mitigate water quality
and rate impacts. (Ord. 30, 10-23-2008)
11-11-3: EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL:
   A.   Permit Required: No person or political subdivision shall commence a
land disturbing activity, unless specifically exempted by this section, without
first obtaining a permit from the city that incorporates a SWPPP meeting the
requirements of the MPCA for the activity, development, or redevelopment.
   B.   Criteria: Any SWPPP and the corresponding land disturbing activity
shall comply with the following criteria:
      1.   Stormwater pollution prevention measures shall be consistent with
approved BMPs, and shall be sufficient to retain construction generated
sediment on the site.
      2.   Stormwater pollution controls shall be installed on all down
gradient perimeters before commencing the land disturbing activity, and shall
not be removed without city approval or receipt of a certificate of completion.
      3.   Stormwater pollution prevention measures shall meet the standards
for the general permit authorization to discharge stormwater associated with
construction activity under the national pollutant discharge elimination
system/state disposal system permit program permit MN R100001 (NPDES/SDS
general construction permit) issued by the Minnesota pollution control agency,
as may be amended.
      4.   If the activity is taking place on a site where the soils are
currently disturbed (e.g., a tilled agricultural site that is being developed),
areas that will not be disturbed as part of the development and areas that will
not be disturbed according to the time frames and slopes specified in the
NPDES/SDS general construction permit shall be seeded with temporary or
permanent cover before commencing the proposed land disturbing activity.
      5.   Where five (5) or more acres of disturbed soil drain to a common
location, a temporary (or permanent) sediment basin must be provided prior to
the runoff leaving the site or entering surface waters. The basins shall be
designed and constructed according to the standards in the NPDES/SDS general
construction permit and required herein.
      6.   The permittee or applicant shall be responsible for final
stabilization of the site in accordance with the contract documents and the
NPDES/SDS general construction permit requirements. The site will be considered
as having achieved final stabilization following submission of a certificate of
completion by the permittee or applicant, and inspection and approval by the
city.
      7.   All temporary on site stormwater conveyance channels shall be
designed and constructed to convey the expected runoff from a 10-year, 24-hour
storm. Grading must direct all runoff up to and including the 100-year, 24-hour
storm to any temporary or permanent stormwater management basins on the site.
      8.   Temporary sedimentation ponds shall be designed to provide:
         a.   An outlet structure and volume to control the 2-year, 10-year and
100-year, 24-hour storm events per the stormwater management regulations,
section
 11-11-2 of this chapter.
         b.   An identified overflow spillway and downstream route sufficiently
stabilized to convey the 100-year, 24-hour storm event.
         c.   A normal water elevation above the OHW of adjacent water bodies
or normal water level (NWL) where an OHW is not established.
      9.   Slopes greater than four to one (4:1) shall have an erosion control
blanket installed immediately after finished grading.
   C.   Maintenance: The permittee or applicant shall be responsible for proper
installation, operation, and maintenance of all stormwater pollution controls
and soil stabilization measures in conformance with approved BMPs, and in
conformance with the maintenance requirements in the NPDES/SDS general
construction permit. The permittee or applicant is responsible for the
operation and maintenance of temporary erosion prevention and sediment control
BMPs for the duration of the construction work at the site. The permittee or
applicant is responsible until another permittee or applicant has assumed
control of the site according to the NPDES/SDS permit documentation over all
areas of the site that have not been finally stabilized or until the site has
undergone final stabilization, and has received an approved certificate of
completion.
   D.   Security: Any security required in accordance with this title shall be
maintained until final site stabilization and removal of erosion and sediment
control BMPs have taken place, and the payment of all fees and other amounts
due the city have been received and processed. (Ord. 30, 10-23-2008)
11-11-4: WETLANDS:
   A.   Wetland Application And Grading Permit Required: Wetlands or public
waters wetlands shall not be drained, filled, excavated or otherwise altered
without city approval of a wetland application and issuance of a grading permit
from the city.
   B.   Wetland Criteria: Any drainage, filling, excavation or other alteration
of a public waters wetland or wetland shall be conducted in compliance with the
following:
      1.   Minnesota statutes section 103G.245, the WCA Minnesota rules 8420,
and regulations adopted thereunder.
      2.   Treatment of stormwater runoff is required prior to discharge into a
wetland or infiltration area.
      3.   Wetland replacement/mitigation siting shall follow the priority
order below:
         a.   Mitigation on site.
         b.   Mitigation within the same major watershed within the city
limits.
         c.   Purchase of wetland credits shall only be allowed by city
agreement if the first two (2) preceding priorities cannot be met. The
applicant will pay compensatory damage to the city per square foot of wetland
filled according to the annual schedule of fees adopted by city council if
mitigation beyond city limits or wetland bank credits are used.
         d.   Transportation projects can follow the BWSR road replacement
program.
   C.   Buffer Criteria: The applicant for any land disturbing activity that
requires a permit shall maintain or restore buffers and setbacks required for
the original plat. Buffers adjacent to wetlands, waterways and ponds within the
parcel boundaries are required to be maintained or established as follows for
parcels platted after the effective date hereof:
      1.   A wetlands functional assessment for vegetative diversity shall be
submitted by the applicant for each wetland delineated for a project. Buffers
shall be maintained or established according to the following table. The
functional assessment and wetland rankings will be determined using the
Minnesota routine assessment method version 3.0 (MnRAM 3.0, as amended).
 
Buffer               Exceptional High    Medium  Low       Stormwater
Requirement                                                Ponds HWL
Average buffer width 50 feet     40 feet 30 feet 25 feet   10
Minimum buffer width 30 feet     30 feet 25 feet 16.5 feet 10
 
         a.   Exceptional Wetlands: Exceptional wetlands are most susceptible
to human impacts, are most unique, have the highest community resource
significance such as rare species habitats, and similar characteristics.
         b.   High Wetlands: High wetlands are relatively undisturbed but
exhibit evidence of more disturbance or degradation than exceptional wetlands.
High wetlands have conditions and functions that are susceptible to human
impacts, are connected to other wetlands or watercourses, and may contain
locally significant or rare wetland types.
         c.   Moderate Wetlands: Moderate wetlands typically provide a
diversity of habitats and are connected to other wetland or upland habitats to
provide wildlife habitat.
         d.   Low Wetlands: Low wetlands tend to be less susceptible to further
impacts than the other wetland management classifications. They also have low
diversity and connectivity to other wetlands and watercourses.
         e.   Stormwater Ponds: Stormwater ponds are ponds for treating and
detaining stormwater.
      2.   The following buffer area sizes are minimum requirements for
waterways identified on the waterway corridor classification map in the surface
water management plan:
 
Stream Classification                     Buffer Requirement
Upper reach - conservation corridor       150 foot average, 100 foot minimum,
                                          measured from edge of meander belt
Tributary connector - aquatic corridor    50 foot average, 35 foot minimum,
                                          measured from edge of meander belt
Water quality corridor - aquatic corridor 30 foot average, 20 foot minimum,
                                          measured from the center of channel
 
      3.   All structures shall have a minimum setback of thirty five feet
(35') from the delineated edge of wetlands and the HWL of stormwater ponds.
      4.   The first twenty five feet (25') of buffer, as measured from the
wetland, cannot be disturbed during project construction (i.e., cleared or
graded, except for temporary disturbances for public roads and utility
construction) and shall be protected from disturbance with temporary fencing
prior to construction. Vegetation can be replaced and site soils preparation
work completed within the first twenty five feet (25') if necessary to
establish acceptable buffer vegetation in accordance with these wetland
regulations.
      5.   Buffers shall apply whether or not the wetland is on the same parcel
as a proposed development. An applicant is required to delineate the boundary
for any wetland or portion thereof on the project land. An applicant shall not
be required to delineate wetlands on adjacent property, but shall review
available information to estimate the wetland boundary.
      6.   Buffer vegetation shall be maintained or, if necessary, established
and maintained as follows:
         a.   Where acceptable natural vegetation exists in buffer areas, the
retention of such vegetation in an undisturbed state is required unless an
applicant receives approval from the city to replace such vegetation. A buffer
has acceptable natural vegetation if it:
            (1)   Has a continuous, dense layer of perennial grasses that has
been uncultivated or unbroken for at least five (5) consecutive years; or
            (2)   Has an overstory of trees and/or shrubs that has been
uncultivated or unbroken for at least five (5) consecutive years; or
            (3)   Contains a mixture of the plant communities described above
that has been uncultivated or unbroken for at least five (5) years.
         b.   The city may determine existing buffer vegetation unacceptable
if:
            (1)   It is composed of undesirable plant species including, but
not limited to, common buckthorn, purple loosestrife, leafy spurge, or noxious
weeds; or
            (2)   It has topography that tends to channelize the flow of
runoff; or
            (3)   For some other reason it is unlikely to retain nutrients and
sediment.
         c.   Where buffers are not vegetated or have been cultivated or
otherwise disturbed within five (5) years of the permit application, such areas
shall be replanted and maintained. The buffer plantings shall be identified on
the permit application. The buffer landscaping shall comply with the following
standards:
            (1)   Buffers shall be planted with a seed mix approved by MnDOT,
BWSR, NRCS, or SWCD, with the exception of a onetime planting with an annual
nurse or cover crop such as oats or rye.
            (2)   The seed mix shall be broadcast according to MnDOT, BWSR,
NRCS, or SWCD specifications for the selected mix. The annual nurse cover crop
shall be applied at a minimum rate of thirty (30) pounds per acre. The MnDOT,
BWSR, or NRCS seed mix selected for permanent cover shall be appropriate for
the soil site conditions and free of invasive species.
            (3)   Native shrubs may be substituted for native forbs. All
substitutions must be approved by the city. Such shrubs may be bare root
seedlings and shall be planted at a minimum rate of sixty (60) plants per acre.
Shrubs shall be distributed so as to provide a natural appearance and shall not
be planted in rows.
            (4)   Any ground cover or shrub plantings installed within the
buffer are independent of any landscaping required elsewhere by the city.
            (5)   Grasses and forbs shall be seeded or planted using a method
of application that shall be approved by the city prior to planting or seeding.
            (6)   No fertilizer shall be used in establishing new buffers,
except on highly disturbed sites when necessary to establish acceptable buffer
vegetation and then limited to amounts indicated by an accredited soil testing
laboratory.
            (7)   All seeded areas shall be mulched immediately with clean
straw at a rate of two (2) tons per acre. Mulch shall be anchored with a disk
or tackifier.
            (8)   Buffers (both natural and created) shall be protected by
erosion and sediment control measures during construction. The erosion and
sediment control measures shall remain in place until the area crop is
established.
            (9)   During the first two (2) full growing seasons, the applicant
shall replant any buffer vegetation that does not survive and must remove any
volunteer trees, noxious weeds, or unintended vegetation by pulling or spraying
in a manner that does not harm intended plants. The applicant shall be
responsible for reseeding or replanting if the buffer changes at any time
through human intervention or activities. At a minimum, the buffer shall be
maintained as a "no mow" area.
      7.   When a buffer is required, the applicant shall, as a condition of
permit issuance:
         a.   Provide to the city a dedicated outlot or conservation easement
for buffers as part of platting and subdivision approval. The easement or
outlot submitted shall describe the boundaries of the wetland or public waters
wetland and buffer, identify the monuments and monument locations, and prohibit
any of the alterations set forth below and the removal of the buffer monuments
within the buffer, wetland, or public waters wetland;
         b.   File the approved easement for record and submit evidence thereof
to the city, or complete preliminary and final plats including dedicated outlot
(s); and
         c.   Install the monumentation required.
      8.   Subject to the exceptions below, activities including building,
storage, paving, mowing, plowing, introduction of noxious vegetation, cuffing,
dredging, filling, mining, dumping, grazing livestock, agricultural production,
yard waste disposal, or fertilizer application are prohibited within any
buffer. Noxious vegetation, such as European buckthorn, purple loosestrife and
reed canary grass, may be removed.
      9.   The following activities shall be permitted within any buffer:
         a.   Placement, maintenance, repair or replacement of public roads,
and utility and drainage systems that existed prior to creation of the buffer
or are required to comply with any subdivision approval or building permit so
long as any possible adverse impacts of public road, utility and drainage
systems on the function of the buffer have been avoided or minimized to the
extent practical;
         b.   Construction, maintenance, repair, reconstruction or replacement
of existing and future public roads or trails within a buffer, so long as any
adverse impacts of the facilities on the function of the buffer have been
avoided or minimized to the extent practical.
         c.   Clearing, grading, and seeding is allowed if part of an approved
wetland replacement plan.
         d.   Plantings approved by the city that enhance the natural
vegetation or selective clearing of dead trees or pruning of damaged trees or
removal of vegetation that is dead, diseased or poses a hazard.
      10.   Buffers shall be marked with signs to clearly designate the
boundaries within a site. A sign shall be required at each parcel line where it
intersects the outlot and at each change in easement or outlot alignment. Signs
shall have a maximum spacing of two hundred feet (200') along the boundary.
Additional signs shall be placed as necessary to visibly define the edge of the
buffer. A sign shall consist of a post and a buffer sign. The signs shall be
obtained from the city at the applicant's cost.
      11.   Other activities which would change the character of a wetland
shall not diminish the quantity, quality, or biological diversity of the
wetland.
   D.   Wetland Mitigation Monitoring: Wetland mitigation areas shall be
monitored in compliance with wetland conservation act rules 8420.0810. During
the growing season of each year, hydrologic and vegetative parameters shall be
measured. A wetland monitoring report shall be prepared and submitted annually
to the city by December 31 of each year during the five (5) year monitoring
period. The monitoring reports shall include the following components:
      1.   A description of the project location, size, current wetland type
(Cowardin or circular 39 classification), and desired wetland type (goal).
      2.   A comparison of the as built conditions in relation to the design
specifications and a rationale for significant changes. During the first
monitoring period, an as built survey drawing shall be submitted comparing the
design contours with the as built contours.
      3.   A summary of water level measurements or soil pit data collected to
date and a determination as to whether the hydrology in the wetlands meets the
design elevations and wetland hydrology criteria as defined in the federal
wetland delineation manuals. If standing water is expected, the hydrology of
the mitigation areas shall be recorded throughout the duration of the
monitoring period by installing staff gauges immediately upstream from each
control structure and measuring water levels on a monthly basis during the
growing season. In cases where there is little or no standing water, soil pits
shall be dug, depth of standing water recorded, and the location of each pit
located on a site plan of the mitigation site. Seasonal water level elevations
shall be measured at least three (3) times during the period April through
October (MSL or referenced to a known benchmark).
      4.   A list of the dominant vegetation in the wetland, including common
names of the vegetation exceeding twenty percent (20%) coverage and an
estimated percent of coverage. For wetland mitigation areas greater than one-
half (1/2) acre, plant species data from at least two (2) sample locations
shall be collected and their locations indicated on a site plan. Mitigation
areas less than one-half (1/2) acre only need plant species from one sample
location.
      5.   Color photographs of the project area taken during the period June
through August, referenced to the fixed photo reference points identified in
the wetland replacement plan and labeled accordingly.
      6.   A summary of management activities and/or corrective actions
conducted in the wetlands during the previous year and activities planned for
the following year (i.e., burning, tilling, regrading, herbicide application,
reseeding, etc.).
      7.   The city reserves the right to extend the wetland monitoring period
beyond five (5) years and require any monitoring securities be extended as part
of an approved wetland replacement plan in the event that the wetland
monitoring requirements are not met. It is possible that, based upon city
determination, wetland establishment criteria will be achieved prior to
completion of the five (5) year monitoring period, at which time, monitoring
report requirements may be terminated and securities retired.
   E.   Security: A letter of credit, sufficient to pay for the cost of
restoring the mitigated wetland areas shall be retained until the city has
accepted and approved the wetland monitoring results. (Ord. 49, 1-14-2010)
11-11-5: BRIDGE AND CULVERT CROSSINGS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person or political subdivision shall construct,
improve, repair, or alter a driveway, road, or utility across a watercourse
with a tributary area in excess of one acre without first obtaining a permit
from the city.
   B.   Criteria:
      1.   Bridge and culvert crossings shall:
         a.   Retain adequate hydraulic capacity.
         b.   Retain adequate navigational capacity, if applicable.
         c.   Not adversely affect water quality.
         d.   Represent the "minimal impact" solution to a specific need with
respect to all reasonable alternatives.
         e.   Allow for future erosion, scour, and sedimentation
considerations.
      2.   New road construction shall meet state and federal guidelines for
freeboard and overtopping by flood events.
   C.   Maintenance:
      1.   The maintenance, reconstruction, and stabilization of any public
crossing shall be the responsibility of the political subdivision with
jurisdiction over the crossing.
      2.   The maintenance, reconstruction, and stabilization of any private
crossing shall be the responsibility of the owner of the crossing, including
crossings placed in public rights of way by permit.
      3.   As a condition to the approval of a permit, the city may require the
applicant and owner to enter into a compliance agreement with the city. (Ord.
30, 10-23-2008)
11-11-6: DRAINAGE ALTERATIONS:
No person or political subdivision shall artificially drain surface water, nor
obstruct or redirect the natural flow of runoff, so as to affect a drainage
system established under Minnesota statutes chapter 103E, or harm the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the city, without first obtaining a
permit from the city. The applicant for a drainage alteration shall:
   A.   Describe the overall environmental impact of the proposed drainage
alteration and demonstrate that:
      1.   There is a reasonable necessity for such drainage alteration;
      2.   Reasonable care has been taken to avoid unnecessary injury to
upstream and downstream land;
      3.   The utility or benefit accruing to the land on which the drainage
will be altered reasonably outweighs the gravity of the harm resulting to the
land receiving the burden;
      4.   That downstream impacts have been controlled or mitigated per the
stormwater management regulations, section
11-11-2 of this chapter;
      5.   The drainage alteration is being accomplished by reasonably
improving and aiding the normal and natural system of drainage according to its
reasonable carrying capacity, or in the absence of a practicable natural drain,
a reasonable and feasible artificial drainage system is being adopted.
   B.   Provide a hydraulic design that complies with all other regulations.
   C.   Provide a stable channel and outfall. (Ord. 30, 10-23-2008)
11-11-7: GROUNDWATER:
All known noncompliant ISTS in the ten (10) year capture area of wellhead
protection areas (WHPA) within city limits, which have been identified by the
county, shall be upgraded to conform with Minnesota rule 7080 within three (3)
years of the effective date hereof. (Ord. 30, 10-23-2008)
11-11-8: GRADING OPERATIONS:
The following operating standards shall be observed at any grading site
permitted under this title:
   A.   Existing tree and ground cover shall be preserved to the extent
feasible.
   B.   Noxious weeds shall be eradicated at the site. Upland and nonbuffer
vegetation shall be kept mowed to twelve inches (12") maximum height to prevent
weeds from going to seed and affecting neighboring properties.
   C.   The maximum noise level at the perimeter of the site shall be within
the limits set by the Minnesota pollution control agency and the United States
environmental protection agency.
   D.   Earthwork and hauling operations shall be performed between the hours
of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. Monday through
Saturday. Such activity is also prohibited on the following holidays: New
Year's Day, Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor Day, Christmas Eve Day, and Christmas
Day.
   E.   Operators shall utilize all practical means to eliminate vibration on
adjacent property from equipment operation.
   F.   Operators shall use all practical means to reduce the amount of dust,
smoke, and fumes caused by the operations. When atmospheric or other conditions
make it impossible to prevent dust from migrating off site, operations shall
cease. (Ord. 30, 10-23-2008)
11-11-9: TREES AND WOODLANDS:
The following restrictions shall apply to all residential developments
occurring in wooded areas.
   A.   Structures shall be located in such a manner that the maximum number of
significant trees, as defined by the city subdivision ordinance 1 , be
preserved.
   B.   Prior to granting a building permit, it shall be the duty of the person
seeking the permit to demonstrate that there are no feasible or prudent
alternatives to the clear cutting of trees on the site.
   C.   Forestation, reforestation or landscaping shall utilize a variety of
tree species and shall not utilize any species presently under disease
epidemic. Species planted shall be hardy under local conditions and compatible
with the local landscape. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  12-9-9 of this code.
11-11-10: FLOOD REGULATIONS:
Lands which lie within the 100-year floodplain, including the floodway,
floodway fringe and general floodplain, shall be subject to the provisions of
the floodplain overlay district as provided in chapter 28, article D of this
title. (Ord. 111, 7-24-2014)
CHAPTER 12
SIGNS
SECTION:
11-12-1: Purpose And Intent
11-12-2: Definitions
11-12-3: Substitution Of Noncommercial Speech
11-12-4: Exempt Signs
11-12-5: Permitted Signs
11-12-5-1: No Permit Required
11-12-5-2: Permit Required
11-12-6: Calculating Advertising Display Area
11-12-7: Signs Requiring Conditional Use Permit
11-12-8: Nonconforming Signs
11-12-9: Prohibited Signs
11-12-10: Comprehensive Sign Plan Requirements
11-12-11: Permit Requirements
11-12-12: Modifications To Signs
11-12-13: Maintenance Requirements
11-12-14: Appeals
11-12-15: Variances
11-12-16: Fees
11-12-17: Enforcement
11-12-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the sign regulations is:
      1.   To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of promotion and
communication in the city;
      2.   To maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city's
ability to attract sources of economic development and growth;
      3.   To improve pedestrian and traffic safety;
      4.   To minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public
and private property; and
      5.   To enable the fair and consistent use of authority to enforce these
sign restrictions.
   B.   Intent: The provisions of this chapter are intended to encourage
creativity, a reasonable degree of freedom of choice, an opportunity for
effective communication, and a sense of concern for the visual amenities on the
part of those who design and display exterior signs while, at the same time,
assuring that the public is not endangered, or distracted by the unsafe,
disorderly, indiscriminate or unnecessary use of exterior signs. (Ord. 5, 12-
14-2006)
11-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
Sign related references included within this chapter shall have meanings as
provided in section
11-2-2 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-12-3: SUBSTITUTION OF NONCOMMERCIAL SPEECH:
The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this chapter may substitute
noncommercial speech in lieu of any other commercial speech or noncommercial
speech. This substitution of copy may be made without any additional approval
of permitting. The purpose of this section is to prevent any inadvertent
favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or favoring of any
particular noncommercial speech over any other noncommercial speech. This
section prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary. (Ord. 5, 12-
14-2006)
11-12-4: EXEMPT SIGNS:
All signs not expressly permitted under this chapter are prohibited in the city
unless exempt by statute or provisions outlined in this chapter. The following
signs, as defined in section
11-2-2 of this title, shall be exempt from regulation under this chapter:
Building markers.
Incidental signs.
Interior building signs.
Interior neon signs.
Public signs.
Works of art. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-12-5: PERMITTED SIGNS:
11-12-5-1: NO PERMIT REQUIRED:
The signs identified in this section are permitted subject to the regulations
set forth in this chapter. The following signs are specified as exempt and,
therefore, do not require sign permits. However, their size, area and number
are regulated as identified by this chapter. The table below indicates the type
of signs that may be displayed without a sign permit. Descriptions of the sign
type and display requirements follow. (Ord. 10, 7-26-2007)
   NO SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED
Type Of Sign Allowed Districts
Type Of Sign                            Allowed Districts
Address                                 All
Banners                                 All business, industrial and
                                        institutional
Directional/instructional, freestanding All except R-1, R-2 and UR
Directional/instructional, wall         All except R-1, R-2 and UR
Home occupation                         R-1, R-2, R-3, and UR
Marquee                                 All business
Nameplate - commercial/industrial/      All business, industrial and
institutional                           institutional
Nameplate, residential                  R-1, R-2, R-3, and UR
No trespass                             All
Noncommercial                           All
Off premises announcement               All business, industrial and
                                        institutional
Pennants/streamers                      All business, industrial and
                                        institutional
Public right of way                     Institutional
Real estate                             All
Temporary interior window               All business, industrial and
                                        institutional
Yard/garage sale                        R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and UR
 
(Ord. 53, 5-13-2010)
   A.   Address Signs: An address sign indicating identification numbers only,
in either written or numerical form, shall be located on the home or business
near the front entrance. An address sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet
in area. Address signs shall be exempt from sign permits and from the total
"advertising display area" allowed under section
11-12-6 of this chapter. In the case where a principal building is occupied by
more than one business or family dwelling unit, each separate front entrance of
the principal building shall bear a separate number. Numerals indicating the
official numbers for each principal building or each front entrance shall be
assigned by the zoning administrator and shall be posted in a manner as to be
visible from the street on which the property is located.
   B.   Banner Signs: There shall be no more than two (2) banner signs on any
lot. The total area of each banner sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square
feet each, and all banners shall be kept in good, readable condition and
changed each month. Banner signs other than those mounted flush against a
building facade shall not be permitted.
   C.   Directional/Instructional Freestanding Signs (On Premises): Where one-
way access and egress drives are approved, a sign indicating traffic direction
no more than four (4) square feet may be placed at a driveway within five feet
(5') of the street right of way. Such signs shall be no higher than five feet
(5') above the centerline of the adjacent right of way. A directional sign
indicating the entrance to a two-way driveway may be approved or required where
the zoning administrator or designee deems it is necessary to safely direct
drivers.
   D.   Directional/Instructional Wall Signs (On Premises): A sign indicating
traffic direction no more than sixteen (16) square feet in area may be placed
on a building. The bottom of the wall sign shall be placed on the building no
less than ten feet (10') above the finished grade/sidewalk/or adjacent street,
whichever is higher, at any point. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
   E.   Noncommercial Signs: Noncommercial signs are permitted on private
property in any zoning district with the express consent of the owner or
occupant of such property. In a state general election year, noncommercial
signs of any size may be posted in any number forty six (46) days before the
state primary until ten (10) days following the state general election.
Noncommercial signs posted in connection with elections held at times other
than as regulated by this section shall not be posted more than sixty (60) days
prior to the election and shall be removed by those responsible for the
erection of the sign or the property owner within seven (7) days. (Ord. 53, 5-
13-2010; amd. 2011 Code)
   F.   Home Occupation Signs: Only one sign, not exceeding four (4) square
feet, shall be allowed to be displayed on the interior or exterior of the
dwelling unit. The sign shall be displayed at the right or left side of the
front entry door, no more than ten feet (10') from the house, with a maximum
height of four feet (4').
   G.   Marquee Signs: In a business zone, signs may be placed on the roof of a
covered walk or marquee in a building complex on the vertical face of a marquee
and may project from the lower edge of the marquee not more than twenty four
inches (24"), but the bottom of a sign placed on a marquee shall be no less
than eight feet (8') above the sidewalk or above the centerline grade of the
adjacent street, whichever is higher, at any point. No part of the sign shall
extend above the top of the roofline for a covered walk or above the top of the
vertical face of the marquee, whichever is more restrictive. Signs shall not be
permitted anywhere on a marquee which projects over any public right of way.
   H.   Nameplate Signs, Business: One nameplate sign shall be allowed for each
permitted use or conditional use. Such sign shall not exceed six (6) square
feet in area per surface.
   I.   Nameplate Signs, Single-Family: One nameplate sign, up to two (2)
square feet in area per surface with a maximum of two (2) surfaces, shall be
permitted for single-family dwellings located in residential districts.
Nameplate signs are exempt from sign permits and are permitted as regulated by
this section.
   J.   No Trespass And No Dumping Signs: "No trespass" and "no dumping" signs
shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area per side and shall not exceed four
(4) in number, per lot. In urban reserve districts, such signs shall not be
less than three hundred feet (300') apart. "No trespass" and "no dumping" signs
do not require sign permits and are permitted as specified in this section.
   K.   Off Premises Announcement Signs: Off premises announcement signs shall
measure not more than two (2) square feet in size and shall be removed no later
than three (3) days after the event.
   L.   Pennants/Streamers: There shall be no more than two (2) pennants/
streamer signs on any lot. Temporary streamers and pennants may be erected for
a period of not more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
   M.   Public Right Of Way Signs: Signs shall not be allowed in the public
right of way, except the following: public signs erected by or on behalf of a
governmental body to post legal notices, identify public property, convey
public information, identify a community festival or event, and direct or
regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic; informational signs of a public
utility regarding its poles, lines, pipes, or facilities; emergency signs
erected by a governmental agency, a public utility company, or a contractor
doing authorized or permitted work within the public right of way. Signs
identified in this subsection are exempt from sign permits and fees.
   N.   Real Estate Signs: For the purpose of selling, renting or leasing
property, only one real estate sign may be placed per street frontage. Such
signs shall be set back at least one foot (1') from the property line or right
of way line, whichever is greater. Placement of real estate signs shall have
the express consent of the owner or occupant of the property. The size of such
sign shall be a maximum of ten (10) square feet for residential property and a
maximum of thirty two (32) square feet for all other properties. Such signs
shall be removed within seven (7) days following the leasing or closing of the
sale. Vacancy signs shall be no larger than four (4) square feet. Real estate
signs are exempt from sign permits and are permitted as specified in this
section.
   O.   Temporary Interior Window Signs: Temporary interior window signs which
are part of a display of merchandise or display relating to sales on the
premises are permitted, provided such signs are not to be displayed for a
period exceeding thirty (30) consecutive days. Such signs shall not occupy more
than seventy five percent (75%) of each individual window area facing the
street. Temporary interior window signs are exempt from sign permits and are
permitted as specified in this section.
   P.   Yard/Garage Sale Signs: Signs advertising yard/garage sales shall be
limited to six (6) square feet and may be displayed seven (7) days prior to the
sale and shall be removed immediately after the end of the yard/garage sale.
Yard/garage sale signs may be displayed off the premises. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-12-5-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
The signs identified in this section are permitted, provided a sign permit is
obtained from the city. Sign permit fees shall be adopted by the city council
under their annual fee schedule. Wall, freestanding and temporary signs that
identify or advertise a business, person, activity, goods, products or services
located "on premises" are permitted if installed and maintained as regulated
herein. Signs may not be displayed "off premises", except for the specific
circumstances described in this chapter. The following sign types are permitted
with an approved sign permit: (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
   SIGNS THAT REQUIRE A SIGN PERMIT
Type Of Sign Allowed Districts
Type Of Sign                    Allowed Districts
Area identification             All business, industrial and institutional
Awnings/canopies                All business, industrial and institutional
Balloon (inflatable)            All business, industrial and institutional
Beacons                         All business
Business                        All business, industrial and institutional
Changeable copy                 All business, industrial and institutional
Construction                    All
Electronic graphic display      All business, industrial and institutional
Ground monument                 All business, industrial and institutional
Illuminated                     All business, industrial and institutional
Institutional                   All business, industrial and institutional
Legal nonconforming business    All business and industrial
Nameplate, multiple residential R-3, R-4 and R-5
Permanent window                All business, industrial and institutional
Portable                        All business, industrial and institutional
Projecting                      B-2
Public service                  All business
Pylon/freestanding              All business, industrial and institutional
Street banner                   All
Subdivision identification      All
Temporary                       All business, industrial and institutional
Wall                            All business, industrial and institutional
 
(Ord. 55, 7-22-2010)
   A.   Area Identification Signs: A freestanding sign not to exceed thirty two
(32) square feet identifying the name of an office or business structure
containing two (2) or more independent operations; a single business consisting
of three (3) or more separate structures; or any integrated combination of the
above. The sign shall only identify an area, complex or development and shall
not, unless approved by the city council, contain the name of individual owners
or tenants. The sign shall not contain advertising. Area identification signs
exceeding thirty two (32) square feet shall require a conditional use permit.
   B.   Awnings/Canopy Signs: Signs consisting of letters and/or an
identification emblem, insignia, initial, logo, or other similar design may be
painted or imprinted on an awning. Awnings shall be considered part of the
total overall wall sign square footage allotted to the building. The bottom of
the awning shall be placed on the building no less than eight feet (8') above
the sidewalk or above the centerline grade of the adjacent street, whichever is
higher, at any point.
   C.   Balloon/Inflatable Signs: One temporary balloon/inflatable sign per
premises, not exceeding twenty feet (20') in height, may be erected for a
period of not more than fourteen (14) consecutive days. Balloon/inflatable
signs are allowed on the roof of a building, and the height of such sign shall
be measured at the base of the sign. In no case shall more than three (3)
permits per property be granted during any calendar year. Such signs shall be
set back no less than ten feet (10') from the property line or right of way
line, whichever is greater. Such signs shall not be placed in a location that
obstructs the view of motorists. In no case shall balloon/inflatable signs take
up required off street parking spaces.
   D.   Beacons: The use of revolving beacons, beamed lights or similar devices
is permitted, provided there shall be no more than one beacon on any lot. Said
beacons shall be displayed no longer than five (5) consecutive days per
calendar year, allowing one permit per calendar year. In no case shall beacons
take up required off street parking spaces. The position of the beam lights
shall not reflect on adjacent and adjoining properties including roadways. The
applicant for such a sign shall demonstrate that the light intensity and
frequency shall not be disruptive to traffic, pedestrians or other land uses on
adjacent lots.
   E.   Business Signs: A wall, ground monument or freestanding sign that
identifies or advertises a business, person, activity, goods, products, or
services located "on premises" is permitted as provided by the sign size, area
and location requirements identified herein. Business signs for multiple tenant
buildings shall be designed and coordinated to result in uniformity of signage
style and color for the entire building/complex.
   F.   Changeable Copy Signs: A sign that is designed so that characters,
letters, or illustrations can be changed or rearranged without altering the
face or the surface of the sign is permitted subject to the size and area
requirements identified herein. This sign classification applies to permanent
wall or freestanding signs and does not include portable reader board type
signs. Changeable copy signs shall be considered part of the total wall or
freestanding sign area allotted to the parcel.
   G.   Construction Signs: For the purpose of selling or promoting a
development project or subdivision less than twenty (20) acres, two (2) signs,
not to exceed sixty four (64) aggregate square feet of advertising surface, may
be erected on the project site. For projects of twenty (20) acres or greater,
the city shall determine the appropriate number of signs based on parcel size
and roadway frontage. Such sign shall be removed upon development completion of
ninety percent (90%) of the project. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
   H.   Electronic Graphic Display Signs (Dynamic Signs):
      1.   Type: Electronic graphic display signs shall be allowed as
freestanding or wall signs. No more than two (2) electronic graphic display
signs shall be allowed per lot/parcel (a 2 sided sign shall be considered 1
sign). Electronic graphic displays shall be designed to freeze the display in
the event of malfunction, and the owner shall discontinue the display
immediately upon malfunction, or upon notice from the city that the display
violates the city regulations.
      2.   Bulk And Setback Regulations: Freestanding electronic graphic
display signs shall be subject to the same area, height, and setback
requirements as other permitted pylon/freestanding business, industrial, and
institutional signs; except, that electronic graphic display signs shall not be
located within fifty feet (50') of a residential zoning district.
      3.   Animation, Video, Flashing And Motion (Frame Effects): Electronic
graphic display signs shall have messages that change instantaneously and do
not fade, dissolve, blink, or appear to simulate motion in any way. The use of
animation, frame effects, video display and flashing components (signs), as
defined in section
11-2-2 of this title, is prohibited.
      4.   Display Duration: All displays and/or messages shown on an
electronic display sign shall stay static for period of at least one second.
      5.   Automatic Dimming Technology: All electronic graphic display signs
shall be equipped with automatic dimming devices. Light cast upon adjacent
rights of way (as measured from the curb line or road edge) shall not exceed
three-tenths (0.3) foot-candle (meter reading). (Ord. 55, 7-22-2010)
   I.   Ground Monument Signs:
      1.   General Regulations:
         a.   One ground monument sign shall be allowed per lot/parcel per
street frontage.
         b.   All ground monument signs shall be no higher than seven feet (7')
above natural grade.
         c.   General ground monument signs shall not exceed eighty (80) square
feet in area with a maximum of two (2) sides.
         d.   Ground monument signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet
(10') from the property line.
         e.   All ground monument signs shall not be located within a fifty
foot (50') clear view triangle on corner lots.
         f.   Individual ground monument signs located within a planned and/or
common interest area, complex, or development shall be prohibited, unless
reviewed and approved by the city.
      2.   Specific Regulations:
         a.   Ground Monument Signs; Common Interest: One common interest
ground monument sign shall be allowed at each major entrance into the
industrial, business center, or institution for the sole purpose of identifying
the development, and/or listing the businesses therein. Such sign shall not
exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area.
         b.   Ground Monument Signs; Downtown: Ground monument signs within the
B-2 zoning district shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area. Such
signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the property line.
(Ord. 94, 4-26-2012)
   J.   Illuminated Signs: Illuminated signs shall be illuminated only by
steady, stationary, shielded light sources directed solely at the sign, or
internal to it, without causing glare for motorists, pedestrians, or
neighboring premises.
   K.   Institutional Signs: Institutional signs are on premises, freestanding
or wall signs which identify the name and other characteristics of the
institution; provided, that the total sign area complies with the sign type
under this section, except institutional signs may be no higher than seven feet
(7') above the grade of the adjacent street centerline.
   L.   Legal Nonconforming Signs: A legal nonconforming business located
within a building may display one on premises wall sign not to exceed twenty
four (24) square feet in area.
   M.   Nameplate Signs, Multiple Residential: In multiple zoning districts,
one nameplate sign for each dwelling group of six (6) or more units is
permitted. Such nameplate sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area per
surface, and no sign shall have more than two (2) surfaces.
   N.   Permanent Window Signs: One permanent window sign is permitted per
windowpane that does not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total window
area. The sign area of permanent window signs shall be calculated as part of
the maximum total permitted wall sign area for the building.
   O.   Portable Signs: A temporary portable sign may be used for a period not
to exceed sixty (60) days per calendar year with a maximum of six (6) separate
permits (example: 6 permits, 10 days each), per parcel of record. The maximum
size of such sign shall be thirty two (32) square feet and a maximum height of
six feet (6'). Such signs shall not be located within a thirty foot (30') clear
view triangle on corner lots and shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10')
from the property line or right of way line, whichever is greater (setback
measurement will be determined from the closest part of the sign to the
property or right of way line). Portable signs shall not be displayed off the
premises of the business that the sign is intended to advertise, with the
exception of public and charitable functions as approved by the city by an
administrative sign permit. In no case shall a portable sign take up required
off street parking spaces. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
   P.   Projecting Signs: One projecting sign shall be allowed per lot/parcel.
Projecting signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in size per side
(with a maximum of 2 sides). In the case of a corner lot, the side yard street
shall be allowed an additional projecting sign. The total combined sign area of
projecting and wall signs shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total
wall area. Projecting signs shall be located between ten feet (10') and twenty
feet (20') above the average ground level. Projecting signs shall not project
more than five feet (5') away from the building wall. Projecting signs shall be
made of wood, metal or of a similar looking material.
   Q.   Public Service Signs: Public service signs displaying the temperature,
time, date or other noncommercial messages are permitted, provided the sign
area of said signs shall be calculated as part of the maximum total permitted
wall or freestanding sign area for the building. (Ord. 55, 7-22-2010)
   R.   Pylon/Freestanding Signs: One pylon/freestanding sign shall be
permitted per street frontage per lot with a maximum of two (2) sides. A sign
over seven feet (7') in height shall be defined as a "pylon/freestanding sign".
No pylon/freestanding sign shall extend beyond a property line, building
restriction line or right of way line or be located closer than fifty feet
(50') to another freestanding sign. Pylon/freestanding signs may not be located
within a clear view triangle area of a corner lot. Setback, size, and height
requirements for pylon/freestanding signs shall be as follows:
   PYLON/FREESTANDING SIGNS
 
District                  Setback1 (Min.) Size Per Side (Max.) Height (Max.)
B-1 neighborhood business 10 ft.          100 sq. ft.          20 ft.
B-2 downtown business     5 ft.2          32 sq. ft.           16 ft.
B-4 highway (gateway)     10 ft.          150 sq. ft.          30 ft.
business
B-5 general business      10 ft.          150 sq. ft.          30 ft.
All other                 10 ft.          100 sq. ft.          20 ft.
 
Notes:
      1.    Setbacks shall be the distance between the closest part of the
sign/sign base and the property/right of way line.
      2.    Signs and sign components, which are 10 feet above grade or higher,
may project/extend into the setback no closer than 1 foot from the property
line. Such projecting signs shall be made of wood, metal or of a similar
looking material.
(Ord. 94, 4-26-2012)
   S.   Street Banner Signs: Street banner signs advertising public
entertainment or an event are permitted in any zoning district, provided a sign
permit is approved by the zoning administrator or designee for locations
authorized by the city engineer. Such sign may be displayed fourteen (14)
consecutive days prior to and three (3) days after the public entertainment or
event. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
   T.   Subdivision Identification Signs:
      1.   On Premises Subdivision Identification Signs: Freestanding
subdivision identification signs located upon private property which indicate
the name of a subdivision, neighborhood or business center shall be permitted
for the purpose of permanent identification subject to the following
requirements:
         a.   At each principal entrance to the subdivision, a maximum of two
(2) signs shall be allowed. Such signs shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet
of sign area per side with a maximum of two (2) sides, excluding decorative
landscaping and sign base.
         b.   The height of such signs shall not exceed ten feet (10') above
the natural grade.
         c.   When such signs are proposed and constructed by an individual or
firm other than the individual or association who will be responsible for the
maintenance, there shall be a covenant prepared by the proponent establishing
responsibility for the maintenance of the sign or signs over the entire project
or subdivision, to be approved by the city attorney, and to be recorded on the
property title(s) prior to issuance of the sign permit.
         d.   Appropriate easements shall be provided for the approved signs on
the property or properties where the signs are to be located. Such easements
shall be recorded prior to the issuance of the sign permit.
      2.   Off Premises Subdivision Identification Signs: Off premises
freestanding subdivision identification signs which indicate the name of a
preexisting residential subdivision or neighborhood may be permitted for the
purpose of identification subject to the following requirements:
         a.   Options for on site placement of such signs (on privately owned
property) do not exist, as determined by the city.
         b.   The off premises property abuts the residential subdivision or
neighborhood and is owned by the city.
         c.   The residential subdivision or neighborhood was established prior
to the effective date hereof.
         d.   The area of such signs shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet
per side with a maximum of two (2) sides.
         e.   The height of such signs shall not exceed ten feet (10') above
the natural grade and the sign and surrounding area shall require limited
maintenance.
         f.   Sign maintenance responsibilities and the need for corresponding
easements or maintenance agreements shall be determined by the city.
         g.   The city shall have the authority to remove the freestanding
subdivision identification sign at any time at its discretion. (Ord. 143, 10-
27-2016)
   U.   Temporary Signs: There shall be no more than one temporary sign on any
lot, and shall not be displayed more than fourteen (14) consecutive days, three
(3) times per year. In no case shall temporary signs take up required off
street parking spaces. Temporary uses (with a valid administrative permit) may
have one on site temporary sign not to exceed twenty four (24) square feet in
area and not more than six feet (6') in height. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
   V.   Wall Signs: Wall signs shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the
total wall area facing a street with a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet
per street frontage. Painted wall signs are prohibited under section
11-12-9 of this chapter. In the case of a corner lot, the side yard street
shall be allowed wall signage though shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of
the total building area facing the side yard street. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd.
2011 Code; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-12-6: CALCULATING ADVERTISING DISPLAY AREA:
   A.   The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or
other sign with only 1 face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square,
circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the
extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem or other display,
together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background
of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure
against which it is placed. The structural supports for a sign, whether they be
columns, pylons, or a building, or a part thereof, shall not be included in the
calculation of the advertising display area.
   B.   When attached to the surface of a building, canopy, awning, wall or
window, the sign area shall be calculated as that part of the smallest
rectangle or other geometric shape that encompasses all of the letters or
symbols. The sign area shall include all lettering, wording, and accompanying
designs or symbols.
   C.   The permitted sum of the area of all individual wall signs on a
building shall be computed by applying the formula contained in this section.
Properties fronting on two (2) or more streets are allowed the permitted wall
sign area for each street frontage. However, the total wall sign area that is
oriented toward a particular street may not exceed the percentage of the
building total sign space allocation that is derived from the permitted wall
sign area for that section of the building facing the street. (Ord. 5, 12-14-
2006)
11-12-7: SIGNS REQUIRING CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
The signs identified in this section are permitted subject to approval of a
conditional use permit. The process to obtain a conditional use permit is
outlined in section
11-3-2 of this title. The following signs may be displayed upon approval of a
conditional use permit. Descriptions of the sign type and display requirements
are as follows:
   SIGNS THAT REQUIRE A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
 
Type Of Sign                            Allowed Districts
Area identification exceeding 32 square All business, industrial and
feet                                    institutional
Illuminated, residential                R-3, R-4 and R-5
Menu board                              B-1, B-2, B-4 and B-5
 
(Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
   A.   Area Identification Signs: An "area identification sign" is a
freestanding sign identifying the name of an office or business structure
containing two (2) or more independent operations; a single business consisting
of three (3) or more separate structures; or any integrated combination of the
above. The sign shall only identify an area, complex or development and shall
not, unless approved by the city council, contain the name of individual owners
or tenants. The signs shall not contain advertising. Area identification signs
incorporating electronic graphic displays shall be subject to the requirements
of subsection
11-12-5-2H of this chapter. (Ord. 55, 7-22-2010; amd. 2011 Code)
   B.   Illuminated Signs: Illuminated signs shall be illuminated only by
steady, stationary, shielded light sources directed solely at the sign, or
internal to it, without causing glare for motorists, pedestrians, or
neighboring premises.
   C.   Menu Board Signs: One sign, thirty two (32) square feet or smaller, is
permitted for businesses that serve customers via automobiles. The menu board
sign area may be additional to the permitted wall and freestanding sign area
allotted to the building. Such signs shall require a conditional use permit and
demonstrate that the proposed sign location will not obstruct pedestrian or
vehicular movement or be located in an area objectionable to adjacent business
or residential lots. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-12-8: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Any sign, upon the effective date hereof, which does not conform to the
provisions of this title may be continued for a certain period of time subject
to the following conditions:
   A.   No such sign shall be expanded or enlarged except in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   If the use of a nonconforming sign is discontinued for a period of one
year, further use of the sign shall conform to this chapter.
   C.   If a nonconforming sign is destroyed by any cause to an extent
exceeding fifty percent (50%) of its fair market value as indicated by the
records of the city and no sign permit has been applied for within one hundred
eighty (180) days of when the sign was destroyed, a future sign on the site
shall conform to this chapter. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
   D.   Normal maintenance of a sign, including necessary nonstructural repairs
and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconformity,
is permitted. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. 2011 Code)
   E.   Replacement or refacing of a nonconforming sign with an electronic
graphic display shall be subject to the requirements of subsection
11-12-5-2H of this chapter. (Ord. 55, 7-22-2010)
11-12-9: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs, as defined in section
11-2-2 of this title, are prohibited as prescribed:
Animated signs.
Bench signs.
Electronic graphic display signs using animation, frame effects, video display,
and flashing components.
Flashing signs.
Multivision signs.
Off premises commercial advertising signs.
Painted wall signs.
Roof signs.
Rotating signs.
Shimmering signs.
Snipe signs.
Traffic interference signs. (Ord. 55, 7-22-2010)
11-12-10: COMPREHENSIVE SIGN PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
No permit shall be issued for an individual sign requiring a permit unless and
until a comprehensive sign plan of the entire lot and/or building on which the
sign will be erected has been submitted and approved by the zoning
administrator. The purpose of the comprehensive sign plan is to provide
accurate information for the city to calculate compliance with ordinance
requirements. The following information submittals are required unless exempted
by the zoning administrator:
   A.   An accurate site survey for all ground signs proposed to be located on
the subject site.
   B.   Accurate building wall elevations, drawn to scale, for all exterior
wall surfaces of the building where signs are located and/or proposed.
   C.   Square footage calculations for each exterior elevation of the
building, total building square footage, and the proposed location of signs on
each exterior wall elevation. The lettering or graphic style, lighting,
location on the building, materials and individual sign proportions are to be
indicated on the exterior elevation drawings.
   D.   An accurate indication on the survey of the location, area, and
dimensions of each existing freestanding sign and proposed future sign of any
type, whether requiring a permit or not. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-12-11: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: If a sign requiring a permit under the provisions of
this chapter is to be placed, constructed, erected, or modified on a building
or lot, the owner of the lot shall secure a sign permit prior to the
construction, placement, erection, or modification of such a sign, in
accordance with this section. Furthermore, the property owner shall maintain in
force, at all times, a sign permit for all such sign(s). Any sign involving
electrical components shall be wired by a licensed electrician.
   B.   Individual Permit Requirements:
      1.   No sign shall be placed, constructed, erected, changed or relocated
without a permit issued by the zoning administrator or designee, unless the
provisions of this chapter exempt the sign from permit requirements.
      2.   Application for a sign permit shall be made in writing upon forms
furnished by the zoning administrator. Such application shall contain the
location by street and address number of the proposed sign structure, as well
as the name and address of the owner and the sign contractor or erector. The
zoning administrator may require the filing of plans or other pertinent
information where it is necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
      3.   The permit application shall be signed by the property owner or
owner's representative. When the applicant is any person other than the owner
of the property, it shall also be signed by the owner of the property. The
application shall contain the following information:
         a.   Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the property owner,
sign owner, and erector.
         b.   Location of the sign or structure.
         c.   Scale drawing of the proposed sign(s) showing its position in
relation to the nearest buildings, structures, public streets, rights of way
and property lines.
         d.   Plans, specifications, and method of construction or attachment
to the building or in the ground, including all dimensions, showing all light
sources, wattage, type and color of lights, and details of any light shields or
shades.
         e.   Other information as may be required by the zoning administrator
or designee.
   C.   Temporary Sign Permits: Temporary signs shall be allowed only within
business, industrial, or institutional zoning districts upon the issuance of a
sign permit, which shall be subject to the following requirements:
      1.   The permit application shall be signed by the property owner.
      2.   Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the property owner, sign
owner and erector.
      3.   Scale drawing indicating sign dimensions and square footage of each
proposed temporary sign. The proposed location of the temporary sign(s) on the
building and/or lot shall also be indicated.
      4.   The dates proposed for display and removal of each temporary sign
shall be indicated on the sign permit application.
   D.   Lapse Of Permit: A sign permit shall lapse automatically if the
business activity on the premises is discontinued for a period of one hundred
twenty (120) days. The zoning administrator or designee will notify the
landowner, in writing, that the sign will need to be removed. If the sign is
not removed within thirty (30) days' notice of permit expiration, the city may
have the sign removed and assess costs back to the property by Minnesota
statutes chapter 429, as may be amended from time to time. Seasonal businesses,
as determined by the city zoning administrator, shall be exempt from the one
hundred twenty (120) day discontinuance period.
   E.   Cancellation Of Permit; Renewals: A sign permit shall become null and
void if the work for which the permit was issued has not been completed within
a period of six (6) months after the date of permit approval. A permit may be
renewed one time for an additional six (6) months, and no additional fee shall
be collected for the renewal. This subsection does not apply to temporary or
conditional use permits. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-12-12: MODIFICATIONS TO SIGNS:
   A.   Permit Requirements: An application for modification of an existing
sign shall be accompanied by detailed drawings to show the dimensions, design,
structure, and location of each particular sign, to the extent that such
details are not contained on the sign plan. One application and permit may
include multiple signs on the same building and/or lot.
   B.   Exemptions: The following sign modifications shall not require a sign
permit. These exemptions shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the
sign from the responsibility of its erection and maintenance, and its
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any other law or provision
regulating the same.
      1.   The changing of the advertising copy or message on a marquee,
changeable copy, electronic message or similar sign specifically designed for
the use of replaceable copy. Electric signs shall not be included in this
exception.
      2.   Painting, repainting, replacement of a sign face copy (tenant/
ownership change), cleaning or maintenance of a legal advertising structure or
sign shall be allowed without a sign permit, provided no structural alterations
are being made to the sign. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-12-13: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
All signs shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good structural
condition at all times. Maintenance shall include painting, repainting,
cleaning, replacement or repair of defective parts, replacement of missing
letters and other necessary acts. Any sign which the city finds is in a
dangerous or defective condition shall be removed or repaired by the owner of
the sign or the owner of the premises on which the sign is located. (Ord. 5,
12-14-2006)
11-12-14: APPEALS:
To provide for a reasonable interpretation of the provisions of this chapter, a
permit applicant may appeal an interpretation by the zoning administrator,
where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision,
or determination made in the enforcement of this chapter. The appeal process
shall follow the procedures outlined in subsection
11-3-1F of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-12-15: VARIANCES:
Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the provisions of this chapter, the city
council has the power to vary the requirements of this chapter in harmony with
the general purpose and intent hereof, so that the public health, safety and
general welfare maybe secured and substantial justice done. The procedure for
variances to this chapter shall follow the procedures set forth in section
11-3-7 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-12-16: FEES:
   A.   The city council shall establish the permit fee structure for signs on
an annual basis. The sign permit fees shall be indicated on the annual city fee
schedule as adopted by the city council.
   B.   Signs which need a conditional use permit shall pay the established
sign permit fee, plus such additional fee as may be required for the
conditional use permit.
   C.   No fee shall be required for signs exempted by section
11-12-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-12-17: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Notice Of Violation; Compliance Required: If the city finds that any
sign, temporary or permanent, or other advertising structure regulated herein
is in disrepair (parts missing or broken, chipped paint, bent parts, etc.),
unsafe or unsecured, a menace to the public, or in violation of the provisions
of this chapter, the zoning administrator or designee shall give written notice
to the holder of the permit or property owner, as may be applicable. The holder
of the permit or property owner, as may be applicable, shall remove or alter
the structure so as to comply with the standards required by this chapter and
indicated by the zoning administrator within seven (7) days after issuance of
such notice. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. 2011 Code)
   B.   Summary Removal: The city may cause any sign or sign structure which is
an immediate public hazard to be removed summarily after a reasonable attempt
has been made to have the property owner remove the sign.
   C.   Copies Of Notice: When the city sends, by certified mail, the notice of
violation, copies will be sent to both the permit holder and the property
owner, if they are different persons.
   D.   Impoundment Of Illegal Signs: The city may impound signs which have
been illegally installed upon public property or within public rights of way or
easements. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
CHAPTER 13
TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
SECTION:
11-13-1: Purpose
11-13-2: General Standards
11-13-3: Collocation/Sharing Of Facilities
11-13-4: Accessory And Secondary Use Antennas
11-13-5: Personal Wireless Service Antennas
11-13-6: Satellite Dishes
11-13-7: Commercial And Public Radio And Television Transmitting Antennas;
Public Utility Microwave Antennas
11-13-8: Required Information For Conditional Use Permits
11-13-9: Inspections
11-13-10: Small Wireless Facilities And Wireless Support Structures
11-13-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish predictable and balanced
regulations for the siting and screening of wireless communications equipment,
including technology associated with amateur radio services, satellite dishes,
personal wireless service, radio or television transmitting antennas, public
safety communication, and public utility microwave equipment in the City. These
regulations are necessary to:
   A.   Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to
accommodate new wireless communication antennas in order to reduce the number
of new towers necessary to serve the community.
   B.   Ensure antennas and towers are designed, located, and constructed in
accordance with all applicable code requirements to avoid potential damage to
adjacent properties from failure of the antenna and tower through structural
standards and setback requirements.
   C.   Require antennas and tower sites to be secured in order to discourage
trespassing and vandalism.
   D.   Require tower equipment to be screened from the view of persons located
on properties contiguous to the site and/or to be camouflaged in a manner to
complement existing structures to minimize adverse visual effects of antennas
and towers. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-13-2: GENERAL STANDARDS:
The following standards shall apply to all personal wireless service, public
utility, microwave, radio and television broadcast transmitting, radio and
television receiving, satellite dish and shortwave radio transmitting and
receiving antennas:
   A.   Tower Construction Requirements: All antennas and towers erected,
constructed, or located within the City, including all necessary wiring, shall
comply with the following requirements:
      1.   All towers shall comply with applicable Federal, State, and local
regulations. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
      2.   Towers and their antennas shall be certified by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer to conform with the latest structural standards
and wind loading requirements of the State Building Code and the Electronics
Industry Association and all other applicable reviewing agencies. (Ord. 5, 12-
14-2006; amd. 2011 Code)
      3.   With the exception of necessary electric and telephone service and
connection lines approved by the City, no part of any antenna or tower nor any
lines, cable, equipment, wires or braces in connection with either shall at any
time extend across or over any part of the right-of-way, public street,
highway, sidewalk, or property line.
      4.   Towers and their antennas shall be designed to conform with accepted
electrical engineering methods and practices and to comply with the provisions
of the National Electrical Code.
      5.   All towers shall be constructed to conform with the requirements of
the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
      6.   All towers shall be reasonably protected against unauthorized
climbing.
      7.   Antennas and towers may only be erected in accordance with
applicable zoning restrictions.
      8.   Towers shall be constructed of corrosive resistant metal material.
      9.   Persons responsible for all communication towers and their antennas
shall maintain a general liability insurance policy that provides coverage from
any damage to property or injuries to persons caused by collapse of the tower.
Said insurance policy shall provide coverage on an occurrence basis in an
amount no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
      10.   The city may employ the services of an independent technical expert
to evaluate the application for new communications towers and antennas, and the
applicant shall pay all reasonable costs of such review and independent
analysis.
   B.   Structural Design And Installation: Structural design, mounting and
installation of the antenna shall be in compliance with manufacturer's
specifications and, as may be necessary, as determined by the building
official, shall be verified and approved by a professional engineer.
   C.   Signs And Advertising: No signage, advertising, or identification of
any kind intended to be visible from the ground or other structures is
permitted, except applicable warning and equipment information signage required
by the manufacturer or by federal, state, or local authorities.
   D.   Height Restrictions:
      1.   Height Determination: Except as otherwise provided in this
subsection, the height of towers shall be determined by measuring the vertical
distance from the tower's point of contact with the ground to the highest point
of the tower, including all antennas or other attachments. When towers are
mounted upon other structures, the combined height of the structure at the
tower's point of attachment and tower shall meet the height restrictions of
this subsection.
      2.   Maximum Heights: Except as otherwise provided in this subsection,
the maximum heights for towers and antennas are as follows:
         a.   In all districts and areas of the city, the maximum height of
towers and antennas shall be no taller than necessary to provide the functions
required, as certified by a registered electrical engineer or other qualified
professional.
         b.   In all residentially zoned property, the maximum height of any
tower, including all antennas and other attachments, shall be thirty five feet
(35'); except, that no tower shall be in excess of a height equal to the
distance from the base of the antenna and tower to the nearest overhead
electrical power line which serves more than one dwelling or place of business,
less five feet (5').
         c.   In all nonresidential zoning districts, the maximum height of any
tower, including all antennas and other attachments, shall not exceed one foot
(1') for each one foot (1') the tower is set back from residentially zoned
property, up to a maximum height of one hundred eighty feet (180'), by
conditional use permit. The city council may allow towers up to two hundred
feet (200') high if the applicant can demonstrate that, based upon the
topography of the site and surrounding area, siting of the antenna, antenna
design, surrounding tree cover and structures and/or through the use of
screening, that off site views of the tower will be minimized.
      3.   Exceptions: The following are exceptions to the maximum height
restrictions for towers:
         a.   Multiuser Towers: Multiuser towers may exceed the height
limitations of this subsection by up to twenty feet (20'); provided, that if
only the antennas of a single wireless communications provider will be attached
to the tower at the time of application, the additional twenty feet (20') will
not be used but will remain vacant for use by a second wireless communications
provider.
         b.   Amateur Radio Antenna Towers: In accordance with the preemption
ruling PRB1 of the federal communications commission, towers supporting amateur
radio antennas that comply with all other requirements of this chapter are
exempted from the height limitations of this subsection up to a total height of
seventy feet (70'); provided, that such height is technically necessary to
receive and broadcast amateur radio signals.
         c.   Attached Towers And Devices: Towers and other antenna devices
which are attached to a structure and not freestanding may be located on
residentially zoned property under the following conditions:
            (1)   The towers and antennas are located upon existing or proposed
structures allowed as principal or conditional uses in the underlying zoning
district and/or upon public structures; and
            (2)   The towers and antennas are limited to a height of fifteen
feet (15') projecting above the structure. The city council may permit antenna
heights of up to twenty five feet (25') above the structure if the applicant
can demonstrate that, by a combination of antenna design, positioning of the
structure and/or by screening erected or already in place on the structure, off
site views of the antenna are minimized to accepted levels.
         d.   Public Utility Structures: Public utility structures, including,
but not limited to, water towers, antennas, lights and signals, power and
telephone poles, and poles supporting emergency warning devices.
   E.   Illumination: Towers shall not be artificially illuminated unless
required by law or by a governmental agency to protect the public's health and
safety. When incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light fixtures
used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots, or similar areas may be attached
to the tower. Any lighting shall not project onto surrounding residential
property.
   F.   License Requirement: When applicable, proposals to erect a new antenna
shall be accompanied by any required federal, state, or local agency licenses.
   G.   Color And Design: Towers shall be painted silver or have a galvanized
finish to reduce visual impact and shall be of a monopole design.
   H.   Amateur Radio Antenna Towers: Amateur radio support structures (towers)
shall be installed in accordance with the instructions furnished by the
manufacturer of that tower model. Because of the experimental nature of the
amateur radio service, antennas mounted on such a tower may be modified or
changed at any time so long as the published allowable load on the tower is not
exceeded and the structure of the tower remains in accordance with the
manufacturer's specifications.
   I.   Abandoned Towers: All abandoned or unused towers shall be removed from
the site, unless a time extension is approved by the city. In the event that a
tower is not removed within twelve (12) months of the cessation of operations
at a site, the tower, antenna or associated facilities may be removed by the
city and the costs of removal assessed against the property. After the
facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an
improved state. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-13-3: COLLOCATION/SHARING OF FACILITIES:
   A.   No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates that
no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna. Supporting evidence may consist of any of the following conditions:
      1.   No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic
area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
      2.   Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet
the applicant's engineering requirements.
      3.   Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
      4.   The applicant's proposed system would cause electromagnetic
interference with the system on the existing tower or structure, or the system
on the existing tower or structure would cause interference with the
applicant's proposed system.
      5.   The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner to
share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure
for sharing are unreasonable. Costs are considered reasonable if they conform
to contractual terms standard in the industry or do not exceed the cost of new
tower development.
      6.   The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render existing towers or structures unsuitable.
   B.   New towers with a minimum height of one hundred twenty five feet (125')
shall be designed to accommodate at least two (2) other users. New towers with
a minimum height of ninety nine feet (99') shall be designed to accommodate one
additional user. Towers shall also be designed to allow for future
rearrangement of antennas on the tower and accept antennas mounted at different
heights.
   C.   The holder of a permit for a tower shall allow collocation for
additional users as may be accommodated based on the tower design and shall not
make access to the tower and tower site for the additional users economically
unfeasible. If an additional user(s) demonstrates (through an independent
arbitrator or other pertinent means, with the cost to be shared by the holder
of the permit and the proposed additional user) that the holder of a tower
permit has made access to such tower and tower site economically unfeasible,
then the permit shall become null and void. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-13-4: ACCESSORY AND SECONDARY USE ANTENNAS:
The following standards shall apply to all accessory and secondary use antennas
including radio and television receiving antennas, satellite dishes, temporary
mobile antennas (TVROs), shortwave radio dispatching antennas, or those
necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers,
federally licensed amateur radio stations and television receivers:
   A.   Accessory or secondary use antennas shall not be erected in any
required yard (except a rear yard) or within public or private utility and
drainage easements, and shall be set back a minimum of three feet (3') from all
lot lines.
   B.   Guywires or guywire anchors shall not be erected within public or
private utility and drainage easements, and shall be set back a minimum of one
foot (1') from all lot lines.
   C.   Accessory or secondary use antennas and necessary support structures,
monopoles or towers may extend a maximum of fifteen feet (15') above the normal
height restriction for the affected zoning district, except support structures
and antennas used in the amateur radio service may extend a maximum of two (2)
times the normal height restriction for the affected zoning district.
   D.   The installation of more than one support structure per property shall
require the approval of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-13-5: PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE ANTENNAS:
   A.   Residential And Urban Reserve District Standards:
      1.   Antennas Located Upon Public Structures Or Existing Towers: Personal
wireless service antennas located upon public structures or existing towers
shall require the processing of an administrative permit and shall comply with
the following standards:
         a.   The applicant shall demonstrate, by providing a coverage/
interference analysis and capacity analysis prepared by a professional
engineer, that location of the antennas as proposed is necessary to meet the
frequency reuse and spacing needs of the cellular system and to provide
adequate portable telephone coverage and capacity to areas which cannot be
adequately served by locating the antennas in a less restrictive district.
         b.   Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed
within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment building is
necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching equipment, it shall be
situated in the rear yard of the principal use, shall have an exterior finish
similar to the principal building, and shall be screened from view of
neighboring properties and the public right of way by landscaping where
appropriate. Proposed fencing shall comply with the residential fence standards
1 .
         c.   An administrative permit is issued in compliance with the
procedures established by the city council.
      2.   Antennas Not Located Upon Public Structures Or Existing Towers:
Personal wireless service antennas not located upon a public structure or
existing tower shall require the processing of a conditional use permit and
shall comply with the following standards:
         a.   The applicant shall demonstrate, by providing a coverage/
interference analysis and capacity analysis prepared by a professional
engineer, that location of the antennas as proposed is necessary to meet the
frequency reuse and spacing needs of the cellular system and to provide
adequate portable cellular telephone coverage and capacity to areas which
cannot be adequately served by locating the antennas in a less restrictive
district.
         b.   The antennas shall be located on an existing structure, if
possible, and shall not extend more than fifteen feet (15') above the
structural height of the structure to which they are attached.
         c.   If no existing structure which meets the height requirements for
the antennas is available for mounting purposes, the antennas may be mounted on
a single ground mounted pole; provided, that:
            (1)   The pole shall not exceed seventy five feet (75') in height.
            (2)   The setback of the pole from the nearest residential
structure is not less than the height of the antenna. Exceptions to such
setback may be granted only from structures on the same parcel if a qualified
structural engineer specifies in writing that any collapse of the pole will
occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable circumstances.
         d.   Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed
within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment building is
necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching equipment, it shall be
situated in the rear yard of the principal use and shall be screened from view
by landscaping where appropriate. Exterior finish of such a building shall be
similar to that of the principal structure on the property.
         e.   Unless the antenna is mounted on an existing structure, at the
discretion of the city, a security fence not greater than eight feet (8') in
height with a maximum opacity of fifty percent (50%) shall be provided around
the support structure. The fence shall be of design and materials approved by
the city council.
         f.   The conditional use permit provisions of section
11-3-2 of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
   B.   Business And Institutional District Standards:
      1.   Antennas Located Upon Public Structures Or Existing Towers: Personal
wireless service antennas located upon public structures or existing towers
shall comply with the following standards.
         a.   Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed
within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment building is
necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching equipment, it shall be
situated in the rear yard of the principal use and shall be screened from view
by landscaping where appropriate. The exterior finish for such building shall
comply with the requirements for buildings in the B business districts or INS
district, as may be applicable.
         b.   An administrative permit is issued in compliance with the
procedures established by the city council.
      2.   Antennas Not Located Upon Public Structures Or Existing Towers:
Personal wireless service antennas not located upon public structures or
existing towers shall require the processing of a conditional use permit and
shall comply with the following standards:
         a.   The applicant shall demonstrate, by providing a coverage/
interference analysis and capacity analysis prepared by a professional
engineer, that location of the antennas as proposed is necessary to meet the
frequency reuse and spacing needs of the cellular system and to provide
adequate portable cellular telephone coverage and capacity to areas which
cannot be adequately served by locating the antennas in a less restrictive
district.
         b.   The antennas shall be located on an existing structure, if
possible, and shall not extend more than fifteen feet (15') above the
structural height of the structure to which they are attached.
         c.   If no existing structure which meets the height requirements for
the antennas is available for mounting purposes, the antennas may be mounted on
a single ground mounted monopole; provided, that:
            (1)   The pole shall not exceed seventy five feet (75') in height.
            (2)   The setback of the pole from the nearest residential
structure is not less than the height of the antenna. Exceptions to such
setback may be granted from residential structures on the same parcel if a
qualified structural engineer specifies in writing that any collapse of the
pole will occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable circumstances.
         d.   Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed
within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment building is
necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching equipment, it shall be
situated in the rear yard of the principal use and shall be screened from view
by landscaping where appropriate. The exterior finish for such building shall
comply with the requirements for buildings in the B business districts.
         e.   Unless the antenna is mounted on an existing structure, at the
discretion of the city, a security fence not greater than eight feet (8') in
height with a maximum opacity of fifty percent (50%) shall be provided around
the support structure.
         f.   The conditional use permit provisions of section
11-3-2 of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
   C.   Industrial District Standards:
      1.   Antennas Located Upon Public Structures Or Existing Towers: Personal
wireless service antennas located upon public structures or existing towers
shall require the processing of an administrative permit and shall comply with
the following standards: An administrative permit is issued in compliance with
the procedures established by the city council.
      2.   Antennas Not Located Upon Public Structures Or Existing Towers:
Personal wireless service antennas not located upon public structures or
existing towers shall require the processing of an administrative permit and
shall comply with the following standards:
         a.   The antennas shall be located upon existing structures if
possible.
         b.   If there is no existing structure which meets the height
requirements for mounting the antennas, the antennas may be mounted upon a
supporting pole or tower not exceeding one hundred sixty five feet (165') in
height. Such pole or tower shall be located on a parcel having a dimension
equal to the height of the pole or tower measured between the base of the pole
or tower located nearest the property line and said property line, unless a
qualified structural engineer specifies in writing that the collapse of the
pole or tower will occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable
circumstances.
         c.   An administrative permit is issued in compliance with the
procedures established by the city council. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  11-5-5F of this title.
11-13-6: SATELLITE DISHES:
   A.   Residential And Urban Reserve District Standards: Single satellite dish
TVROs greater than one meter (1 m) in diameter may be allowed as a conditional
use within the residential zoning and urban reserve districts of the city and
shall comply with the following standards:
      1.   All accessory and secondary use provisions of this title are
satisfactorily met.
      2.   The lot on which the satellite dish antenna is located shall be of
sufficient size to assure that an obstruction free receive window can be
maintained within the limits of the property ownership.
      3.   Except where the antenna is screened by a structure exceeding the
antenna height, landscape buffering and screening shall be maintained on all
sides of the satellite dish antenna in a manner in which growth of the
landscape elements will not interfere with the receive window.
      4.   The satellite dish antenna is not greater than three meters (3 m) in
diameter.
      5.   The conditional use permit provisions of section
11-3-2 of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
   B.   Business, Institutional And Industrial District Standards: Commercial,
private and public satellite dish transmitting or receiving antennas greater
than two meters (2 m) in diameter may be allowed as a conditional use within
the B business districts, INS institutional district, and I industrial district
(s) of the city and shall comply with the following standards:
      1.   All accessory and secondary use provisions of this title are
satisfactorily met.
      2.   The lot on which the satellite dish antenna is located shall be of
sufficient size to assure that an obstruction free transmit-receive window or
windows can be maintained within the limits of the property ownership.
      3.   Except where the antenna is screened by a structure exceeding the
antenna height, landscape buffering and screening shall be maintained on all
sides of the satellite dish antenna in a manner in which growth of the
landscape elements will not interfere with the transmit-receive window.
      4.   The conditional use permit provisions of section
11-3-2 of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied. (Ord. 5,
12-14-2006)
11-13-7: COMMERCIAL AND PUBLIC RADIO AND TELEVISION TRANSMITTING ANTENNAS;
PUBLIC UTILITY MICROWAVE ANTENNAS:
Commercial and public radio and television transmitting and public utility
microwave antennas shall comply with the following standards:
   A.   Such antennas shall be considered a conditional use within the
industrial zoning districts of the city and shall be subject to the regulations
and requirements of section
11-3-2 of this title. Where such antennas and/or antenna support structures are
not an accessory use to a related principal use such as a television or radio
studio, such antennas and/or antenna support structures shall be required to be
processed as a planned unit development (PUD) according to the provisions of
chapter 28, article C of this title. The City may require conditions relating
to aesthetic or other issues, and may require that one or more payments in lieu
of Property Taxes is made by the applicants and/or operators to compensate for
the loss of potential Property Tax revenue to the City.
   B.   The antennas, transmitting towers, or array of towers shall be located
on a continuous parcel having a dimension equal to the height of the antenna,
transmitting tower, or array of towers measured between the base of the antenna
or tower located nearest a property line and said property line, unless a
qualified structural engineer specifies in writing that the collapse of any
antenna or tower will occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable
circumstances.
   C.   Unless the antenna is mounted on an existing structure, at the
discretion of the City, a fence not greater than eight feet (8') in height with
a maximum opacity of fifty percent (50%) shall be provided around the support
structure and other equipment. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-13-8: REQUIRED INFORMATION FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
In addition to the information required elsewhere in this title for an
application for a building permit for towers and their antennas, applications
for conditional use permits for such towers shall include the following
supplemental information:
   A.   A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which does
the following:
      1.   Describes the tower height and design including a cross section and
elevation.
      2.   Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting
positions for collocation antennas and the minimum separation distances between
antennas.
      3.   Describes the tower's capacity, including the number and type of
antennas that it can accommodate.
   B.   For all personal wireless service towers, a letter of intent committing
the tower owner and his or her successors to allow the shared use of the tower
if an additional user agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions
for shared use, so long as there is no negative structural impact upon the
tower and there is no disruption to the service provided.
   C.   Before the issuance of a building permit, the following supplemental
information shall be submitted:
      1.   Confirmation that the proposed tower complies with the requirements
of the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications Commission, and
any appropriate State review authority or that the tower is exempt from those
regulations.
      2.   A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which
demonstrates the tower's compliance with the applicable structural and
electrical, but not radio frequency, standards. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006)
11-13-9: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   All towers may be inspected at least once each year by the building
official to determine compliance with original construction standards.
Deviations from original design for which a permit is obtained constitutes a
violation of this chapter.
   B.   Notice of violations shall be sent by registered mail to the owner of
the property, and the owner shall have thirty (30) days from the date the
notification is issued to make repairs. The owner shall notify the building
official that the repairs have been made, and as soon as possible thereafter,
another inspection shall be made and the owner notified of the results. (Ord.
5, 12-14-2006)
11-13-10: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES AND WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURES:
Notwithstanding any other provision in this title to the contrary, small
wireless facilities and wireless support structures as defined in title 8,
chapter 1 of this Code and located in the public right-of-way are exempt from
this title. Location and placement of small wireless facilities and wireless
support structures shall be as provided in title 8, chapter 1 of this Code.
(Ord. 185, 4-11-2019)
CHAPTER 14
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
11-14-1: Purpose
11-14-2: Ground Source Heat Pump Systems
11-14-3: Wind Energy Systems
11-14-4: Solar Energy Systems
11-14-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to:
   A.   Accommodate alternative energy sources by removing regulatory barriers
and creating a clear regulatory path for approving alternative energy systems.
   B.   Create a livable community where development incorporates sustainable
design elements such as resource and energy conservation and use of renewable
energy.
   C.   Protect and enhance air quality and decrease use of fossil fuels.
   D.   Accommodate alternative energy development in locations where the
technology is viable and environmental, economic and social impacts can be
mitigated. (Ord. 85, 12-1-2011)
11-14-2: GROUND SOURCE HEAT PUMP SYSTEMS:
   A.   Zoning District Allowance: Ground source heat pump systems in
accordance with the standards in this chapter are allowed as a permitted
accessory use in all zoning districts.
   B.   Standards:
      1.   System Requirements:
         a.   Only closed loop ground source heat pump systems utilizing heat
transfer fluids as defined in section
11-2-2 of this title are permitted. Open loop ground source heat pump systems
are not permitted.
         b.   Ground source heat pump systems in public waters may be permitted
as a conditional use in accordance with section
11-3-2 of this title and subject to the following:
            (1)   Approval from the Minnesota department of natural resources.
            (2)   Written consent of all property owners and/or approval by an
association in accordance with its adopted bylaws.
            (3)   Demonstrated compliance with applicable city permit
requirements.
         c.   Ground source heat pump systems in water bodies owned or managed
by the city of Elko New Market are not permitted.
      2.   Setbacks:
         a.   All components of ground source heat pump systems including
pumps, borings and loops shall be set back at least five feet (5') from
interior side lot lines and at least ten feet (10') from rear lot lines.
         b.   Aboveground equipment associated with ground source heat pumps
shall not be installed in the front yard of any lot or the side yard of a
corner lot adjacent to a public right of way and shall meet all required
setbacks for the applicable zoning district.
      3.   Easements: Ground source heat pump systems shall not encroach on
public drainage, utility roadway or trail easements.
      4.   Noise: Ground source heat pump systems shall comply with Minnesota
pollution control agency standards outlined in Minnesota rules chapter 7030.
      5.   Screening: Ground source heat pumps are considered mechanical
equipment and subject to the screening requirements of section
11-5-4 of this title.
      6.   Safety: Ground source heat pumps shall be certified by Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc., and meet the requirements of the state building code.
   C.   Abandonment: If a ground source heat pump system remains nonfunctional
or inoperative for a continuous period of one year, the system shall be deemed
to be abandoned and shall constitute a public nuisance. The owner shall remove
the abandoned system at their expense after a demolition permit has been
obtained in accordance with the following:
      1.   The heat pump and any external mechanical equipment shall be
removed.
      2.   Pipes or coils below the land surface shall be filled with grout to
displace the heat transfer fluid. The heat transfer fluid shall be captured and
disposed of in accordance with applicable regulations. The top of the pipe,
coil or boring shall be uncovered and grouted.
      3.   Lake ground source heat pump systems shall be completely removed
from the bottom of the body of water.
   D.   Permits: A building permit shall be obtained for any ground source heat
pump system prior to installation. Borings for vertical systems are subject to
approval by the Minnesota department of public health. (Ord. 85, 12-1-2011)
11-14-3: WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS:
   A.   Zoning District Allowance: Small wind turbine systems in accordance
with the standards in this chapter are allowed as a permitted accessory use in
all zoning districts.
   B.   General Standards: The following standards shall be applicable to small
wind turbine systems in all zoning districts:
      1.   Number: No more than one wind energy system is permitted per parcel.
      2.   Setbacks: The base of the wind turbine tower shall be set back from
all property lines a distance equal to the highest possible extension of the
system apparatus.
      3.   Roof Mounting: Roof mounted wind turbines shall be permitted only
when a determination is made by the city building official that the underlying
roof structure will support such system and all applicable building standards
are satisfied.
      4.   Rotor Clearance: No part of a rotor blade shall be located within
thirty feet (30') of the ground and within twenty feet (20') of the nearest
tree, structure or aboveground utility facility.
      5.   Noise: Wind energy systems shall comply with Minnesota pollution
control agency noise standards outlined in Minnesota rules chapter 7030 at all
property lines.
      6.   Screening: Wind energy systems are exempt from the screening
requirements of section
11-5-4 of this title.
      7.   Aesthetics: All portions of the wind energy system shall be a
nonreflective, nonobtrusive color, subject to the approval of the zoning
administrator. The appearance of the turbine, tower and any other related
components shall be maintained throughout the life of the wind energy system
pursuant to industry standards. Systems shall not be used for displaying any
advertising. Systems shall not be illuminated.
      8.   Feeder Lines: The electrical collection system shall be placed
underground within the interior of each parcel. The collection system may be
placed overhead near substations or points of interconnection to the electric
grid.
      9.   Safety:
         a.   Wind energy systems shall meet minimum standards such as
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 61400-2 or the American Wind
Energy Association's (AWEA) small wind turbine performance and safety standard
or other standards as determined by the city building official.
         b.   Wind energy systems shall be certified by Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc., and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, the Small
Wind Certification Council or other body as determined by the city. The city
reserves the right to deny a building permit for proposed wind energy systems
deemed to have inadequate certification or testing for operation in a severe
winter climate.
         c.   Wind energy systems shall be maintained under an agreement or
contract by the manufacturer or other qualified entity.
         d.   All grid connected systems shall have an agreement with the local
utility prior to the issuance of a building permit. A visible external
disconnect shall be provided if required by the utility.
      10.   Abandonment: If a wind energy system remains nonfunctional or
inoperative for a continuous period of one year, the system shall be deemed to
be abandoned and shall constitute a public nuisance. The owner shall remove the
abandoned system at their expense after a demolition permit has been obtained.
Removal includes the entire structure including foundations to below natural
grade and transmission equipment.
      11.   Permits: A building permit, and conditional use permit if required,
shall be obtained for any wind energy system prior to installation.
   C.   UR And Residential District Standards:
      1.   Mounting: All wind turbine systems shall be roof mounted. Ground
mounted systems are not permitted.
      2.   Height: Wind energy systems shall not extend more than six feet (6')
above the highest point of the roof.
   D.   Commercial, Industrial And Institutional District Standards:
      1.   Mounting: Subject to the requirements of this chapter, wind energy
systems may either be roof mounted or ground mounted.
      2.   Height:
         a.   Except as may otherwise be allowed by conditional use permit,
wind turbine systems shall conform to the maximum height requirements of the
applicable Commercial, Industrial or Institutional Zoning District.
         b.   Wind turbine system heights in excess of the maximum height
requirement of the applicable zoning district may be permitted by conditional
use permit provided that:
            (1)   The system height, as measured from the base of the tower for
ground mounted systems, or base of the building for roof mounted systems, to
the highest possible extension of the system apparatus shall not exceed seventy
five feet (75').
            (2)   The additional system height is required to allow for the
improved operation of the wind energy system.
            (3)   The additional wind energy system height results in a net
energy gain.
            (4)   The wind energy system does not adversely affect solar access
to adjacent properties.
            (5)   The wind energy system complies with all other engineering,
building, safety and fire regulations.
            (6)   The wind energy system is found to not have any adverse
impacts on the area, including the health, safety and general welfare of
occupants of neighboring properties and users of public rights-of-way.
            (7)   The criteria and applicable standards of section
11-3-2 of this title are considered and determined to be satisfied.
      3.   Ground Mounted Systems:
         a.   Ground mounted wind energy systems shall not be installed in the
front yard of any lot or in the side yard of a corner lot adjacent to a public
right-of-way.
         b.   Only monopole towers are permitted.
         c.   System height shall be measured from the base of the tower to the
highest possible extension of the system apparatus.
         d.   Ground located wind energy systems shall not encroach on public
drainage, utility roadway or trail easements.
      4.   Blade Length: A maximum blade length of fifteen feet (15') is
permitted. (Ord. 85, 12-1-2011)
11-14-4: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS:
   A.   Zoning District Allowance: Solar energy systems in accordance with the
standards in this chapter are allowed as a permitted accessory use in all
zoning districts. (Ord. 85, 12-1-2011)
   B.   Standards:
      1.   Purpose: Solar energy systems shall serve only the parcel on which
they are located.
      2.   Exemption: Passive or building integrated solar energy systems are
exempt from the requirements of this chapter and shall be regulated as any
other building element.
      3.   Height: Roof mounted solar energy systems shall comply with the
maximum height requirements in the applicable zoning district. Ground mounted
solar energy systems shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height.
      4.   Location: In Urban Reserve and Residential Zoning Districts, ground
mounted solar energy systems shall be limited to the rear yard. In Commercial,
Industrial and Institutional Districts, ground mounted solar energy systems may
be permitted in side yards and rear yards.
      5.   Setbacks: Ground mounted solar energy systems shall comply with all
accessory structure setbacks in the applicable zoning district, except as
otherwise provided in subsection B5a of this section. Roof mounted systems
shall comply with all building setbacks in the applicable zoning district and
shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter of the building on which the
system is mounted.
         a.   Institutional Zone Setbacks: On institutionally zoned parcels
with a lot area of ten (10) acres or greater, ground mounted solar energy
systems shall comply with the following setbacks:
            (1)   Side yards: Fifty feet (50').
            (2)   Rear yards: Fifty feet (50').
            (3)   From properties zoned or guided under the comprehensive plan
for residential, or used for residential purposes: One hundred feet (100').
      6.   Roof Mounting: Roof mounted solar collectors may be flush mounted,
bracket mounted, or ballasted. Bracket mounted and ballasted solar collectors
shall be permitted only when a determination is made by the City building
official that the underlying roof structure will support apparatus, wind, and
snow loads and all applicable building standards are satisfied.
      7.   Easements: Solar energy systems shall not encroach on public
drainage, utility roadway or trail easements.
      8.   Screening: Solar energy systems shall be screened from view to the
extent possible without impacting their function.
      9.   Maximum Area:
         a.   Size Limitations: Ground mounted solar energy systems shall be
limited in size to the maximum area requirement allowed for accessory
structures or no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the rear yard,
whichever is less, except as otherwise provided in subsection B9b of this
section.
         b.   Institutional Zone Limitations: On Institutionally zoned parcels
with a lot area of ten (10) acres or greater, ground mounted solar energy
systems shall comply with the following area limitations:
 
Lot Area             Maximum Area Allowed
10 acres to 20 acres 11,000 square feet
Over 20 acres        22,000 square feet
 
         c.   Calculations Of Area: The area of a ground mounted solar energy
system shall be comprised of the total solar energy system footprint, including
the space between systems, calculated based on the extent of the perimeter of
the entire system.
      10.   Aesthetics: All solar energy systems shall minimize glare toward
vehicular traffic and adjacent properties.
      11.   Feeder Lines: The electrical collection system shall be placed
underground within the interior of each parcel. The collection system may be
placed overhead near substations or points of interconnection to the electric
grid. (Ord. 197, 8-8-2019)
   C.   Safety:
      1.   Standards: Solar energy systems shall meet the minimum standards
outlined by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), the American
Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE),
ASTM International, British Standards Institution (BSI), International
Organization for Standardization (ISO), Underwriter's Laboratory (UL), the
Solar Rating and Certification Corporation (SRCC) or other standards as
determined by the City building official.
      2.   Certification: Solar energy systems shall be certified by
Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory,
the Solar Rating and Certification Corporation or other body as determined by
the Community Development Director. The City reserves the right to deny a
building permit for proposed solar energy systems deemed to have inadequate
certification.
      3.   Utility Connection: All grid connected systems shall have an
agreement with the local utility prior to the issuance of a building permit. A
visible external disconnect shall be provided if required by the utility.
   D.   Abandonment: If a solar energy system remains nonfunctional or
inoperative for a continuous period of one year, the system shall be deemed to
be abandoned and shall constitute a public nuisance. The owner shall remove the
abandoned system at their expense after a demolition permit has been obtained.
Removal includes the entire structure including transmission equipment.
   E.   Permit: A building permit shall be obtained for any solar energy system
prior to installation. (Ord. 85, 12-1-2011; amd. Ord. 231, 6-10-2021)
CHAPTER 15
RESERVED
(Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
CHAPTER 16
RESERVED
(Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
CHAPTER 17
RESERVED
(Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
CHAPTER 18
RESERVED
(Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
CHAPTER 19
RESERVED
(Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
CHAPTER 20
RESERVED
(Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
CHAPTER 21
RESERVED
(Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
CHAPTER 22
RESERVED
(Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
CHAPTER 23
RESERVED
(Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
CHAPTER 24
ZONING DISTRICTS, MAP AND LAND USE TABLE
SECTION:
11-24-1: Districts Established
11-24-2: Zoning Map
11-24-3: Determination Of District Boundaries
11-24-4: Zoning Of Annexed Land
11-24-5: Land Use Table
11-24-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
In order to classify, regulate and restrict the location of trade and industry,
and the location of buildings designated for specific uses, to protect
residential uses, to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings
hereafter erected or altered, to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of
lot areas, and to regulate and determine the areas of yards and open space
within and surrounding such buildings, the city is hereby divided into zoning
districts. The use, height and area regulations shall be uniform in each
district, and said districts shall be known as:
Residential districts:
 R-1 Suburban single-family residential district
 R-2 Urban (small lot) single-family residential district
 R-3 Medium density residential district
 R-4 High density residential district
 R-5 Downtown residential district
Business districts:
 B-1 Neighborhood business district
 B-2 Downtown business district
 B-4 Highway business district
 B-5 General business district
 B-6 Business campus district
Industrial districts:
 I-1 Limited industrial district
 I-2 General industrial district
Special districts:
 UR  Urban reserve district
 INS Institutional district
 PUD Planned unit development district
 FP  Floodplain overlay district
 
(Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 111, 7-24-2014; Ord. 244,
3-10-2022)
11-24-2: ZONING MAP:
The location and boundaries of the districts established by this chapter are
hereby set forth on the zoning map entitled "Elko New Market Zoning Map". Said
map shall be on file with the zoning administrator and hereinafter referred to
as the "zoning map". Said map and all the notations, references and other
information shown thereon shall have the same force and effect as if fully set
forth herein and thereby made a part of this title by reference. It is the
responsibility of the zoning administrator to maintain the Elko New Market
zoning map, and amendments thereto shall be recorded on said map. The official
Elko New Market zoning map shall be kept on file with the city. (Ord. 5, 12-14-
2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
11-24-3: DETERMINATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
   A.   Zoning district boundary lines established by this title generally
follow lot lines, the centerlines of railroad rights of way, street rights of
way, watercourses or the corporate limit lines, all as they exist upon the
effective date hereof. Appeals concerning the exact location of a zoning
district boundary line shall be heard by the city council serving as the board
of zoning appeals and adjustments pursuant to subsection
11-3-1F of this title.
   B.   Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official
action by the city, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street,
alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such
vacation, and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be
subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts.
   C.   All streets, alleys, public ways and railroad rights of way, if not
otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as
the property in the most restrictive classification immediately abutting such
alleys, streets, public ways or railroad rights of way. Where the centerline of
a street, alley, public way or railroad right of way serves as a district
boundary, the zoning of such area, unless otherwise specifically designated,
shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such
centerline.
   D.   All areas within the corporate limits of the city which are under water
and which are not shown as included within any zone shall be subject to all
regulations of the zone which immediately adjoins such water area. If such
water area adjoins two (2) or more zones, the boundaries of each zone shall be
construed to be extended into the water area in a straight line until they meet
the other district at the halfway point and/or to the corporate limits. (Ord.
5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
11-24-4: ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND:
All territory hereafter annexed to the city which is not shown on the zoning
map shall automatically, upon annexation, be classified within the UR urban
reserve district and shall be subject to all regulations, notations, references
and conditions as are applicable to said district until such time that a
determination may be made as to the proper district classification for such
territory and an amendment can be made to that effect. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006;
amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
11-24-5: LAND USE TABLE:
Land Use Table
P = Permitted Use PA = Permitted Accessory Use C = Conditional
Use
I = Interim Use A = Administrative Use Blank = Prohibited Use
Land Use R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 B-1 B-2 B-4 B-5 B-6 I-1 I-2 UR INS
Land Use Table
P = Permitted Use PA = Permitted Accessory Use C = Conditional Use
I = Interim Use A = Administrative Use Blank = Prohibited Use
Land Use          R-1  R-2  R-3 R-4 R-5 B-1 B-2 B-4  B-5  B-6  I-1  I-2  UR INS
Accessory and
secondary use     PA   PA   PA  PA  PA  PA  PA  PA   PA   PA   PA   PA   PA PA
antennas
Accessory drive-
through                                 C       A    A
facilities
Accessory         PA   PA   PA
dwelling units
Accessory
enclosed retail,
rental, or
service activity,
the area of which
does not exceed                                                PA   PA
twenty percent
(20%) of the
gross floor area
of the principal
use
Accessory outdoor                   C                          C    C
dining/seating
Accessory outdoor
dining/seating,
the area of which
does not exceed
fifteen percent                         A   A   A    A
(15%) of the
gross floor area
of the principal
use
Accessory outdoor
dining/seating,
the area of which
exceeds fifteen                         C   C   C    C
percent (15%) of
the gross floor
area of the
principal use
Accessory outdoor                   C
sales and display
Accessory outdoor
sales and
display, the area
of which does not
exceed fifteen                          A   A   A    A
percent (15%) of
the gross floor
area of the
principal use
Accessory outdoor
sales and
display, the area
of which exceeds
fifteen percent                         C   C   C    C
(15%) of the
gross floor area
of the principal
use
Accessory         PA/C PA/C PA  PA  PA      PA
structures
Accessory
structures, but
such use shall
not exceed thirty                       PA      PA   PA                     PA
percent (30%) of
the gross floor
space of the
principal use
Accessory
structures, but
such use shall
not exceed fifty                                          PA   PA   PA
percent (50%) of
the gross floor
space of the
principal use
Amateur radio     A                                                      A
antennas
Animal shelters
as an accessory                             I
to animal feed
stores
Apartments
containing more                 P
than eight (8)
attached units
Apartments, up to
eight (8)                   P
attached units
Auto repair,                                    C         P    P    P
major
Auto repair,                                    C    C    P    P
minor
Bed and breakfast                           P
Boarding or
renting of rooms
to not more than            PA  PA
two (2)
individuals per
dwelling unit
Breweries with                                                 C    C
taprooms
Breweries without                                              P    P
a taproom
Breweries, small,                       C   C   C    C    C    P
with taprooms
Brewpubs                                P   P   P    P
Cemeteries        C    C                                                 C  C
Clinics                                 P   P   P    P
Colleges,
seminaries, and
other                                                                       C
institutions of
higher education
Commercial and
public radio and
television
transmitting                                                                C
antennas, and
public utility
microwave
antennas
Commercial car                          C       C    C
washes
Commercial                                      P         P    P
kitchens
Commercial
outdoor                C    C   C
recreation
Commercial,
private, and
public satellite
dish transmitting                       C       C    C    C    C    C    C
or receiving
antennas greater
than two meters
(2 m) in diameter
Community center                                                            C
Contractor                                                P    P    P
operations
Crematorium                                                         P
Cultural                                P   P        P
establishment
Daycare
facilities (in    PA   PA   PA  PA  PA                                   PA
home)
Daycare                                 P   C   P    P
facilities
Detached
accessory         C    C    C
dwelling unit
Distilleries with                                              C    C
a cocktail room
Distilleries
without a                                                      P    P
cocktail room
Driving ranges as I                                                      I  I
a principal use
Essential
services
involving
transmission
pipelines and
transmission or
substation lines  C    C    C   C   C   C   C   C    C    C    C    C    C  C
in excess of
thirty five
kilovolts (35 kV)
and up to one
hundred kilovolts
(100 kV)
Essential
services, except
transmission
pipelines and
transmission or
substation lines  A    A    A   A   A   A   A   A    A    A    A    A    A  A
in excess of
thirty five
kilovolts (35 kV)
and up to one
hundred kilovolts
(100 kV).
Event centers                           C       P    C    P
Farms, farmsteads                                                        P  I
and farming
Forestry,
nurseries,
greenhouses and                                                          P
tree farms,
excluding retail
sales
Funeral homes or                                P    P
mortuaries
Gardening and
other
horticultural
uses where no     PA   PA   PA
sale of products
is conducted on
the premises
Golf courses      C                                                         C
Governmental and
public utility                          P   P   P    P    P                 P
buildings
Ground source     PA   PA   PA  PA  PA  PA  PA  PA   PA   PA   PA   PA   PA PA
heat pump systems
Heavy equipment                                                C    C
sales
Heavy equipment                                                C    C
service
Home occupations  PA   PA   PA  PA  PA      PA                           PA
Hospitals                                       C    C    C                 C
Interim home      I    I    I   I                                        I
occupations
Keeping of                      PA  PA      PA                              PA
animals
Keeping of        PA   PA
backyard chickens
Keeping of
domestic animals  PA   PA   PA
for noncommercial
purposes
Kennel,                                         C    C    C    C    C
commercial animal
Living quarters
which are
provided as an
accessory use to                                                            C
a principal or
conditional use
in this article
Lumberyards                                     C         C    P    P
Manufactured home           C   C
parks
Manufacturing,                                                      P
heavy
Manufacturing,                                            C    P    P
light
Microdistilleries
with cocktail                           C   C   C    C
rooms
Mining and land   I    I    I   I   I   I   I   I    I    I    I    I    I  I
reclamation
Ministorage/self-
service storage                                 C         C    C
facilities
Mixing of
residential and
business uses                       C
within one
principal
building
Model homes       A    A    A   A
More than one
principal                           P   P   P   P    P    P    P    P
building on a
base lot
Motels and hotels                               P    P
Motor fuel                              C       C    C
stations
Motor vehicle                                   C         P
sales
Multiple-family
dwelling
structures                          P
containing six
(6) or more
dwelling units
Off street        PA   PA   PA  PA
parking
Off street
parking and off-                    PA  PA  PA  PA   PA   PA   PA   PA   PA PA
street loading
Off street
parking lots as a
principal use,
with the                                    P                               C
exception of
semi-trailer
trucks
Office                                  P   P   P    P    P    PA   PA
Operation and
storage of
vehicles,
equipment and
machinery which
are incidental                                                           PA
and customary to
permitted or
conditional uses
allowed in this
district
Outdoor sale and/
or rental as a                                            C    C    C
principal or
accessory use
Outdoor service
as a principal or                                         C    C    C
accessory use
Outdoor storage
as a principal or                                              C    C
accessory use
Outdoor storage
as an accessory                                           C                 PA
use
Parks, play
fields,
recreational uses P    P        P                                           P/
and directly                                                                P A
related buildings
and structures
Personal services                       P   P   P    P
Personal wireless
service antennas
located on public                       P   P   P    P    P    P    P
structure or
existing tower
Personal wireless
service antennas  A    A    A   A                                        A  A
located upon a
structure
Personal wireless
service antennas
not located on                  C   C   C   C   C    C    C    C    C    C  C
public structure
or existing tower
Play and
recreational
facilities,                 PA  PA
accessory to an
existing
permitted use
Play equipment
accessory to a                      PA      PA
permitted use
Preschool,
elementary,                                                                 P
junior or senior
high schools
Private clubs or                        C   C   C    C    C
lodges
Private garages
and parking
spaces for                                                               PA
operable
passenger cars
and trucks
Private
recreational      PA   PA   PA
vehicles and
equipment
Recreation,                             C   C   C    C    C
commercial
Recreation,                             P   P   P    P    P    P    P
physical
Religious                                                                   P
institution
Research facility                               P         P    P
Residential
dwellings which
do not occupy the                           P
ground floor
space of a
building
Residential
programs as       P    P    P   P   P                                    P  C
regulated by
State Statute
Restaurants                             P   P   P    P
Retail                                  P   P   P    P    PA
establishments
Roof mounted wind
energy systems
which extend not
more than six     PA   PA   PA  PA  PA                                   PA
feet (6') above
the highest point
of the roof
Satellite
antennas greater                        C   C   C    C    C    C    C       C
than two meters
(2 m) in diameter
Satellite TVROs
greater than one  C    C    C   C   C                                    C
meter (1 m) in
diameter
Service                                 P   P   P    P    P
establishments
Sexually oriented                               P/PA P/PA P/PA P/PA P/PA
business
Signs                               PA  PA  PA  PA   PA   PA   PA   PA
Single-family
detached          P    P    P
dwellings
Single-family
dwellings with
density not                                                              P
greater than one
dwelling unit per
forty (40) acres
Solar energy      PA   PA   PA  PA  PA  PA  PA  PA   PA   PA   PA   PA   PA PA
systems
Stands for
agricultural
products produced C
on the premises
by owner
Storage of
private
recreational                                                             PA
vehicles and
equipment
Swimming pools,
tennis courts and
other
recreational
facilities which
are operated for  PA   PA                                                PA
the enjoyment and
convenience of
the residents of
the principal use
and their guests
Temporary outdoor                       A   A   A    A    A    A    A       A
uses
Temporary outdoor
uses for the sale
of agricultural                                                          P
products
restricted to
farms
Tool houses,
toolsheds and
similar buildings
for storage of
domestic and farm                                                        PA
supplies and
noncommercial
recreational
equipment
Townhouses and
condominiums
containing more                 P
than eight (8)
attached units
Townhouses and
condominiums, up            P
to eight (8)
attached units
Truck stop                                                     C
Truck terminals                                                     P
Two family                  P
dwelling units
Veterinary
clinic, without                         P       P    P
animal kennels
Warehousing/                                              P    P    P
distribution
Wholesale                                                 P    P    P
showrooms
Wildlife areas                                                           P
and game refuges
Wind energy
systems up to                                                  PA   PA
fifty feet (50')
in height
Wind energy
systems up to                               PA            PA
forty-five feet
(45') in height
Wind energy
systems up to                                   C    C    C    C    C       C
seventy-five feet
(75') in height
Wind energy
systems up to                           PA      PA   PA                     PA
thirty-five feet
(35') in height
 
(Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
CHAPTER 25
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. R-1 SUBURBAN SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-25A-1: Purpose
11-25A-2: Permitted Uses
11-25A-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
11-25A-4: Conditional Uses
11-25A-5: Interim Uses
11-25A-6: Uses By Administrative Permit
11-25A-7: Lot Area, Width And Setback Requirements
11-25A-8: Building Height
11-25A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-1 Suburban Single-Family Residential District is to
provide for low density detached single-family uses in developed and developing
areas of the community that are predominantly residential in character. The R-
1 Zoning District is intended for those areas containing unique physical
features worthy of preservation, or those areas not located near major
transportation corridors, higher density housing, Commercial Zoning Districts,
or historic residential development centers. (Ord. 181, 12-20-2018)
11-25A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
uses in the R-1 District:
Parks, play fields, recreational uses and directly related buildings and
structures.
Residential programs as regulated by State Statute.
Single-family detached dwellings. (Ord. 166, 2-22-2018)
11-25A-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
accessory uses in the R-1 District:
Accessory dwelling units as regulated by section
11-5-20 of this title except in cases where a conditional use permit is
required for detached accessory buildings pursuant to section
11-6-6 of this title.
Accessory structures as regulated by chapter 6 of this title.
Daycare facilities (in home) as regulated by State Statute.
Gardening and other horticultural uses where no sale of products is conducted
on the premises.
Ground source heat pump systems as regulated by chapter 14 of this title.
Keeping of backyard chickens as regulated by section
6-4-5-1 of this Code.
Keeping of domestic animals for noncommercial purposes.
Off street parking as regulated by chapter 9 of this title.
Permitted home occupations as regulated by section
11-5-17 of this title.
Private recreational vehicles and equipment as regulated by section
11-8-2 of this title.
Roof mounted wind energy systems which extend not more than six feet (6') above
the highest point of the roof as regulated by chapter 14 of this title.
Secondary or accessory use antennas as regulated by chapter 13 of this title.
Solar energy systems as regulated by chapter 14 of this title.
Swimming pools, tennis courts and other recreational facilities which are
operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal
use and their guests. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85,
12-1-2011; Ord. 130, 4-28-2016, eff. 6-1-2016; Ord. 222, 1-14-2021)
11-25A-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional
uses in the R-1 District and require a conditional use permit based upon
procedures set forth in section
11-3-2 of this title:
Accessory structures as regulated by chapter 6 of this title.
Cemeteries.
Detached accessory dwelling uses as regulated by section
11-5-20 of this title except in cases where detached accessory buildings are
permitted without a conditional use permit pursuant to section
11-6-6 of this title.
Essential services involving transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty five (35) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts; provided, that the applicable provisions of section
11-4-5 of this title are determined to be satisfied.
Golf courses including clubhouses containing the following accessory uses:
restaurants/bars, pro shops, meeting rooms and locker rooms.
Satellite TVROs greater than one meter (1 m) in diameter as regulated by
chapter 13 of this title.
Stands for agricultural products produced on the premises by owner. (Ord. 5,
12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 222, 1-14-2021; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-25A-5: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses
in the R-1 District and are governed by the procedures set forth in section
11-3-3 of this title:
Driving ranges as a principal use.
Interim home occupations as regulated by section
11-5-17 of this title.
Mining, sand and gravel extraction, and land reclamation and alteration;
provided, that the uses will be in compliance with the provisions hereof or
other applicable provisions of this Code. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80,
11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-25A-6: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following uses are allowed
by administrative permit in an R-1 District based upon procedures set forth in
section
11-3-4 of this title:
Amateur radio antennas as regulated by chapter 13 of this title.
Essential services, except transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty five (35) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts, as regulated by section
11-4-5 of this title.
Model homes as regulated by section
11-5-10 of this title.
Personal wireless service antennas located upon a structure as regulated by
chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
11-25A-7: LOT AREA, WIDTH AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-1 District,
subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in
this title:
   A.   Lot Area:
      1.   Lot area (interior): Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
      2.   Lot area (corner): Twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square
feet.
   B.   Lot Width:
      1.   Lot width (interior): Eighty five feet (85').
      2.   Lot width (corner): One hundred feet (100').
   C.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front yard: Thirty feet (30').
      2.   Side yards:
         a.   Interior: Ten feet (10').
         b.   Corner: Twenty five feet (25').
      3.   Rear yard: Thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-
17-2011)
11-25A-8: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Structures shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height, except as
provided in section
11-5-2 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
ARTICLE B. R-2 URBAN (SMALL LOT) SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-25B-1: Purpose
11-25B-2: Permitted Uses
11-25B-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
11-25B-4: Conditional Uses
11-25B-5: Interim Uses
11-25B-6: Uses By Administrative Permit
11-25B-7: Lot Area, Width And Setback Requirements
11-25B-8: Building Height
11-25B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-2 Urban (Small Lot) Single-Family Residential District is
to provide for single-family dwelling units at a relatively dense urban scale
in areas of the community that are located near major transportation corridors,
higher density housing, Commercial Zoning Districts, or historic residential
development centers. (Ord. 181, 12-20-2018)
11-25B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
uses in an R-2 District:
Parks, play fields, recreational uses, and directly related buildings and
structures.
Residential programs as regulated by State Statute.
Single-family detached dwellings. (Ord. 166, 2-22-2018)
11-25B-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
accessory uses in the R-2 District:
Accessory dwelling units as regulated by section
11-5-20 of this title except in cases where a conditional use permit is
required for detached accessory buildings pursuant to section
11-6-6 of this title.
Accessory structures as regulated by chapter 6 of this title.
Daycare facilities (in home) as regulated by State Statute.
Gardening and other horticultural uses where no sale of products is conducted
on the premises.
Ground source heat pump systems as regulated by chapter 14 of this title.
Keeping of backyard chickens as regulated by section
 6-4-5-1 of this Code.
Keeping of domestic animals for noncommercial purposes.
Off street parking as regulated by chapter 9 of this title.
Permitted home occupations as regulated by section
11-5-17 of this title.
Private recreational vehicles and equipment as regulated by section
11-8-2 of this title.
Roof mounted wind energy systems which extend not more than six feet (6') above
the highest point of the roof as regulated by chapter 14 of this title.
Secondary or accessory use antennas as regulated by chapter 13 of this title.
Solar energy systems as regulated by chapter 14 of this title.
Swimming pools, tennis courts and other recreational facilities which are
operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal
use and their guests. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85,
12-1-2011; Ord. 130, 4-28-2016, eff. 6-1-2016; Ord. 222, 1-14-2021)
11-25B-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional
uses in the R-2 District and require a conditional use permit based upon
procedures set forth in section
11-3-2 of this title:
Accessory structures as regulated by chapter 6 of this title.
Cemeteries.
Commercial outdoor recreation.
Detached accessory dwelling units as regulated by section
11-5-20 of this title except in cases where detached accessory buildings are
permitted without a conditional use permit pursuant to section
11-6-6 of this title.
Essential services, except transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty five (35) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts, as regulated by section
11-4-5 of this title.
Satellite TVROs greater than one meter (1 m) in diameter as regulated by
chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord.
222, 1-14-2021; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-25B-5: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses
in the R-2 District and are governed by the procedures set forth in section
11-3-3 of this title:
Interim home occupations as regulated by section
11-5-17 of this title.
Mining, sand and gravel extraction, and land reclamation and alteration;
provided, that the use will be in compliance with the provisions hereof or
other applicable provisions of this Code. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80,
11-17-2011)
11-25B-6: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following uses are allowed
by administrative permit in an R-2 District based upon procedures set forth in
and regulated by section
11-3-4 of this title:
Essential services, except transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty five (35) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts, as regulated by section
11-4-5 of this title.
Model homes as regulated by section
11-5-10 of this title.
Personal wireless service antennas located upon a structure as regulated by
chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
11-25B-7: LOT AREA, WIDTH AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-2 District,
subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in
this title:
   A.   Lot area: Eight thousand four hundred (8,400) square feet.
   B.   Lot width: Seventy feet (70').
   C.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front yard: Thirty feet (30').
      2.   Side yard:
         a.   Interior: Seven feet (7').
         b.   Corner: Twenty five feet (25').
      3.   Rear yard: Thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 181, 12-20-2018)
11-25B-8: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Structures shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height, except as
provided in section
11-5-2 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
EL836   11-25C.txt
ARTICLE C. R-3 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-25C-1: Purpose
11-25C-2: Permitted Uses
11-25C-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
11-25C-4: Conditional Uses
11-25C-5: Interim Uses
11-25C-6: Uses By Administrative Permit
11-25C-7: Common Areas
11-25C-8: Lot Area, Width And Setback Requirements
11-25C-9: Building Height
11-25C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-3 Medium Density Residential District is to establish low
to moderate density residential housing in single or multiple-family structures
that satisfies the following planning objectives:
   A.   Create a cohesive medium density neighborhood that provides attractive
living environments and contributes to the City's identity.
   B.   Provide attractive and durable medium density housing options as a
means of addressing the City's life cycle housing needs.
   C.   Preserve natural land forms, open spaces, greenways for scenic
enjoyment and recreational use through the regulation of medium density
residential land use.
   D.   Allow for the subdivision of twinhome, quadraminium and townhome base
lots to permit individual private ownership of a single dwelling within such a
structure.
   E.   Comply with the provisions of this chapter, other applicable provisions
of this title, and the City subdivision ordinance. (Ord. 181, 12-20-2018)
11-25C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
uses in the R-3 District:
Apartments, up to eight (8) attached units.
Residential programs as regulated by State Statute.
Single family dwelling units.
Townhouses and condominiums, up to eight (8) attached units.
Two family dwelling units. (Ord. 181, 12-20-2018)
11-25C-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
accessory uses in the R-3 District:
Accessory dwelling units as regulated by section
11-5-20 of this title except in cases where a conditional use permit is
required for detached accessory buildings pursuant to section
11-6-6 of this title.
Accessory structures as regulated by chapter 6 of this title.
Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two (2) individuals per dwelling
unit.
Daycare facilities (in home) as regulated by State Statute.
Gardening and other horticultural uses where no sale of products is conducted
on the premises.
Ground source heat pump systems as regulated by chapter 14 of this title.
Keeping of domestic animals for noncommercial purposes.
Off street parking as regulated by chapter 9 of this title.
Permitted home occupations as regulated by section
11-5-17 of this title.
Play and recreational facilities, accessory to an existing permitted use.
Private recreational vehicles and equipment as regulated by section
11-8-2 of this title.
Roof mounted wind energy systems which extend not more than six feet (6') above
the highest point of the roof as regulated by chapter 14 of this title.
Secondary or accessory use antennas as regulated by chapter 13 of this title.
Solar energy systems as regulated by chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-
2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85, 12-1-2011; Ord. 222, 1-14-2021)
11-25C-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional
uses in the R-3 District and require a conditional use permit based upon
procedures set forth in section
11-3-2 of this title:
Commercial outdoor recreation.
Detached accessory dwelling units as regulated by section
11-5-20 of this title except in cases where detached accessory buildings are
permitted without a conditional use permit pursuant to section
11-6-6 of this title.
Essential services involving transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty five (35) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts; provided, that the applicable provisions of section
11-4-5 of this title are determined to be satisfied.
Manufactured home parks.
Satellite TVROs greater than one meter (1 m) in diameter as regulated by
chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord.
222, 1-14-2021; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-25C-5: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses
in an R-3 District and require an interim use permit based upon procedures set
forth in and regulated by section
11-3-3 of this title:
Interim home occupations as regulated by section
11-5-17 of this title.
Mining, sand and gravel extraction, and land reclamation and alteration;
provided, that the use will be in compliance with the provisions hereof or
other applicable provisions of this Code. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80,
11-17-2011)
11-25C-6: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following uses are allowed
by administrative permit in an R-3 District based upon procedures set forth in
and regulated by section
11-3-4 of this title:
Essential services, except transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty five (35) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts, as regulated by section
11-4-5 of this title.
Model homes as regulated by section
11-5-10 of this title.
Personal wireless service antennas located upon a structure as regulated by
chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
11-25C-7: COMMON AREAS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the R-3 District
governing common areas:
   A.   Ownership: All common areas within an R-3 development including, but
not limited to, open space, wetlands, greenways, drainage ponds, driveways,
private drives, parking areas, play areas, etc., shall be owned in one of the
following manners:
      1.   By a condominium association pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section
515A.1-106, as may be amended.
      2.   By the owner of each townhome unit lot, with each owner of a unit
having an equal and undivided interest in the common area.
   B.   Homeowners' Association: A homeowners' association shall be established
for all quadraminium, threeplex and fourplex multiple-family and townhome
developments within the R-3 District, subject to review and approval of the
City Attorney. The association shall be responsible for all exterior building
maintenance, approval of any exterior architectural modifications, landscaping,
snow clearing and regular maintenance of private driveways and other areas
owned in common when there is more than one individual property owner having
interest within the development. (Ord. 181, 12-20-2018)
11-25C-8: LOT AREA, WIDTH AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-3 District subject
to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
   A.   Lot Area:
      1.   Single-family dwellings:
         a.   Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: Seven thousand two hundred
(7,200) square feet.
         b.   Minimum unit lot area: Sufficient area to include the living
area, garages, decks, patios, or porches of the individual dwelling unit.
      2.   Two-family dwellings:
         a.   Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: Six thousand (6,000) square
feet.
         b.   Minimum unit lot area: Sufficient area to include the living
area, garages, decks, patios, or porches of the individual dwelling unit.
      3.   Structures with more than two (2) dwelling units:
         a.   Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: Three thousand five hundred
(3,500) square feet.
         b.   Minimum base lot area: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
         c.   Minimum unit lot area: Sufficient area to include the living
area, garages, decks, patios, or porches of the individual dwelling unit.
   B.   Lot Width:
      1.   Single-family dwelling units: Sixty feet (60') for single family
dwelling units.
      2.   Two-family dwellings: One hundred feet (100').
      3.   Structures with more than two (2) dwelling units: One hundred feet
(100').
      4.   Unit lot: Minimum of twenty five feet (25') in width and of
sufficient area to include the living area, garages, decks, patios, or porches
of the individual dwelling unit.
   C.   Setbacks:
      1.   Single-family dwellings:
         a.   Front: Twenty five feet (25') from public right-of-way. Twenty
five feet (25') from back of curb line of private drives.
         b.   Side: Seven feet (7'). Twenty five feet (25') from side/corner.
         c.   Rear: Twenty feet (20').
         d.   Rear yard abutting street: Twenty five feet (25').
         e.   Major collector or arterial street: Forty five feet (45').
         f.   Wetland: Forty feet (40') from delineated edge.
      2.   Two-family dwellings:
         a.   Front: Twenty five feet (25') from public right-of-way. Twenty
five feet (25') from back of curb line of private drives.
         b.   Side: Seven feet (7'). Twenty five feet (25') from side/corner.
         c.   Rear: Twenty feet (20').
         d.   Rear yard abutting street: Twenty five feet (25').
         e.   Major collector or arterial street: Forty five feet (45').
         f.   Wetland: Forty feet (40') from delineated edge.
         g.   Setback between buildings: For lots with more than one principal
structure on a base lot, the setback between buildings shall be a minimum of
twenty feet (20').
      3.   Structures with more than two (2) dwelling units:
         a.   Front: Twenty five feet (25') from public right-of-way. Twenty
five feet (25') from back of curb line of private drives. Fifteen feet (15')
from private parking areas.
         b.   Side: Ten feet (10'). Twenty five feet (25') from side/corner.
         c.   Rear: Twenty feet (20').
         d.   Rear yard abutting street: Twenty five feet (25').
         e.   Major collector or arterial street: Forty five feet (45').
         f.   Wetland: Forty feet (40') from delineated edge.
         g.   Setback between buildings: For lots with more than one principal
structure on a base lot, the setback between buildings shall be a minimum of
twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 181, 12-20-2018)
11-25C-9: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Structures shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height, except as
provided in section
11-5-2 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
ARTICLE D. R-4 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-25D-1: Purpose
11-25D-2: Permitted Uses
11-25D-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
11-25D-4: Conditional Uses
11-25D-5: Interim Uses
11-25D-6: Uses By Administrative Permit
11-25D-7: Common Areas
11-25D-8: Lot Area, Width And Setback Requirements
11-25D-9: Building Height
11-25D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-4 High Density Residential District is to create, preserve
and enhance areas for multi-family use at higher densities for both permanent
and transient families. The district shall be applied in areas served by public
utilities, with good accessibility to thoroughfares, public community centers,
libraries, shopping, and where such development is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan and planning policies. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80,
11-17-2011)
11-25D-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
uses in the R-4 District:
Apartments containing more than eight (8) attached units.
Parks, play fields, recreational uses and directly related buildings and
structures.
Residential programs as regulated by State Statute.
Townhouses and condominiums containing more than eight (8) attached units.
(Ord. 181, 12-20-2018)
11-25D-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
accessory uses in the R-4 District:
Accessory structures as regulated by chapter 6 of this title.
Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two (2) individuals per dwelling
unit.
Daycare facilities (in home) as regulated by State Statute.
Ground source heat pump systems as regulated by chapter 14 of this title.
Keeping of animals subject to title 6, chapter 4 of this Code or as may be
amended.
Off street parking as regulated by chapter 9 of this title.
Permitted home occupations as regulated by section
11-5-17 of this title.
Play and recreational facilities accessory to an existing permitted use.
Roof mounted wind energy systems which extend not more than six feet (6') above
the highest point of the roof as regulated by chapter 14 of this title.
Secondary or accessory use antennas as regulated by chapter 13 of this title.
Solar energy systems as regulated by chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-
2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85, 12-1-2011)
11-25D-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional
uses in an R-4 District and require a conditional use permit based upon
procedures set forth in and regulated by section
11-3-2 of this title:
Commercial outdoor recreation.
Daycare facilities as regulated by section
11-5-14 of this title.
Essential services involving transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty five (35) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts; provided, that the applicable provisions of section
11-4-5 of this title are determined to be satisfied.
Manufactured home parks.
Personal wireless service antennas not located on a public structure, or
existing tower; provided, that the applicable provisions of chapter 13 of this
title are determined to be satisfied.
Satellite TVROs greater than one meter (1 m) in diameter as regulated by
chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord.
179, 10-25-2018; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-25D-5: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses
in an R-4 District and require an interim use permit based upon procedures set
forth in section
11-3-3 of this title:
Interim home occupations as regulated by section
11-5-17 of this title.
Mining, sand and gravel extraction, and land reclamation and alteration;
provided, that the use will be in compliance with the provisions hereof or
other applicable provisions of this Code. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80,
11-17-2011)
11-25D-6: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following uses are allowed
by administrative permit in an R-4 District based upon procedures set forth in
and regulated by section
11-3-4 of this title:
Essential services, except transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty five (35) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts, as regulated by section
11-4-5 of this title.
Model homes as regulated by section
11-5-10 of this title.
Personal wireless service antennas located upon a structure as regulated by
chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
11-25D-7: COMMON AREAS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the R-4 District
governing common areas:
   A.   Ownership: All common areas within an R-4 development including, but
not limited to, open space, wetlands, greenways, drainage ponds, driveways,
private drives, parking areas, play areas, etc., shall be owned in one of the
following manners:
      1.   Condominium ownership pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 515A.1-
106, as may be amended from time to time.
      2.   Townhome subdivision common areas shall be owned by the owners of
each unit lot, with each owner of a unit having an equal and undivided interest
in the common area.
   B.   Homeowners' Association: A homeowners' association shall be established
for all townhome developments within the R-4 District, subject to review and
approval of the City Attorney, and shall be responsible for all exterior
building maintenance, approval of any exterior architectural modifications,
landscaping, snow clearing and regular maintenance of private driveways and
other areas owned in common when there is more than one individual property
owner having interest within the development. (Ord. 181, 12-20-2018)
11-25D-8: LOT AREA, WIDTH AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-4 District subject
to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
   A.   Lot Area:
      1.   Minimum base lot area: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
      2.   Minimum unit lot area: Sufficient area to include the living area,
garages, decks, patios, or porches of the individual dwelling unit.
   B.   Lot Width:
      1.   Base lot: One hundred feet (100').
      2.   Unit lot: Minimum of twenty five feet (25') in width and of
sufficient area to include the living area, garages, decks, patios, or porches
of the individual dwelling unit. (Ord. 181, 12-20-2018)
   C.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front: Thirty feet (30') from public right-of-way. Twenty five feet
(25') from back of curb line of private drives. Fifteen feet (15') from private
parking areas. (Ord. 196, 8-8-2019)
      2.   Side: Thirty feet (30'). Thirty feet (30') from side/corner.
      3.   Rear: Thirty feet (30').
      4.   Rear yard abutting street: Thirty feet (30').
      5.   Major collector or arterial street: Fifty feet (50').
      6.   Wetland: Forty feet (40') from delineated edge.
      7.   Setback between buildings: For lots with more than one principal
structure on a base lot, the setback between buildings shall be a minimum of
twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 181, 12-20-2018)
11-25D-9: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Structures shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height, except as
provided in section
11-5-2 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
ARTICLE E. R-5 DOWNTOWN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-25E-1: Purpose
11-25E-2: Permitted Uses
11-25E-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
11-25E-4: Conditional Uses
11-25E-5: Interim Uses
11-25E-6: Uses By Administrative Permit
11-25E-7: Lot Area, Width And Setback Requirements
11-25E-8: Building Height
11-25E-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-5 Downtown Residential District is to provide high density
residential housing and integrated commercial space in the downtown area of the
City, as directed by the City Downtown Master Plan. A compatible mix of land
uses shall be achieved through the mitigation of land use conflicts between
differing uses. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-
2022)
11-25E-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
uses in the R-5 District:
More than one principal building on a base lot.
Multiple-family dwelling structures containing six (6) or more dwelling units.
Residential programs as regulated by State Statute. (Ord. 166, 2-22-2018; amd.
Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-25E-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
accessory uses in an R-5 District:
Accessory or secondary use antennas.
Accessory structures.
Daycare facilities (in home).
Ground source heat pump systems.
Home occupations.
Keeping of animals.
Off street parking and off street loading.
Play equipment accessory to a permitted use.
Roof mounted wind energy systems which extend not more than six feet (6') above
the highest point of the roof.
Signs.
Solar energy systems. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85,
12-1-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-25E-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional
uses in the R-5 District and require a conditional use permit based upon
procedures set forth in section
11-3-2 of this title:
Accessory outdoor dining/seating.
Accessory outdoor sales and display.
Essential services involving transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty-five (35) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts.
Mixing of residential and business uses within one principal building.
Personal wireless service antennas not located on a public structure, or
existing tower.
Satellite TVROs greater than one meter (1 m) in diameter. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006;
amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 179, 10-25-2018; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-25E-5: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses
in an R-5 District and require an interim use permit based upon procedures set
forth in and regulated by section
11-3-3 of this title:
Mining and land reclamation. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011;
Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-25E-6: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following uses are allowed
by administrative permit in an R-5 District based upon procedures set forth in
and regulated by section
11-3-4 of this title:
Essential services, except transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty-five (35) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-
2022)
11-25E-7: LOT AREA, WIDTH AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an R-5 district,
subject to additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in
this title:
   A.   Minimum lot area: None.
   B.   Minimum lot width: None.
   C.   Setbacks:
      1.   From streets:
         a.   Collector or arterial streets: Ten feet (10').
         b.   Local streets: None; except, that not less than eighty percent
(80%) of lot frontage shall be built out to the property line.
      2.   Side yard: None.
      3.   Rear yard: None.
      4.   Setback between buildings: For lots with more than one principal
structure on a base lot, the setback between buildings shall be a minimum of
twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-
10-2022)
11-25E-8: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Structures shall not exceed forty five feet (45') in height, except as provided
in section
11-5-2 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244,
3-10-2022)
CHAPTER 26
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-26A-1: Purpose
11-26A-2: Permitted Uses
11-26A-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
11-26A-4: Conditional Uses
11-26A-5: Interim Uses
11-26A-6: Uses By Administrative Permit
11-26A-7: Lot Area, Width And Setback Requirements
11-26A-8: Building Height
11-26A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the B-1 Neighborhood Business District is to provide for the
establishment of local commercial centers complementary to and in harmony with
adjacent residential uses and which deal directly with the customer for whom
the goods or services are furnished. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-
2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
uses in the B-1 District:
Brewpubs.
Clinics.
Cultural establishment.
Daycare facilities.
Governmental and public utility buildings.
More than one principal building on a base lot.
Office.
Personal services.
Personal wireless service antennas located on a public structure or existing
tower.
Recreation, physical.
Restaurants.
Retail establishments.
Service establishment.
Veterinary clinic, without animal kennels. (Ord. 179, 10-25-2018; amd. Ord.
244, 3-10-2022)
11-26A-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
The following are permitted accessory uses in a B-1 District:
Accessory and secondary use antennas.
Accessory structures, but such use shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the
gross floor space of the principal use.
Ground source heat pump systems.
Off street parking and off-street loading.
Signs.
Solar energy systems.
Wind energy systems up to thirty-five feet (35') in height. (Ord. 5, 12-14-
2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85, 12-1-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26A-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional
uses in the B-1 District and require a conditional use permit based upon
procedures set forth in section
11-3-2 of this title:
Accessory drive-through facilities.
Accessory outdoor dining/seating, the area of which exceeds fifteen percent
(15%) of the gross floor area of the principal use.
Accessory outdoor sales and display, the area of which exceeds fifteen percent
(15%) of the gross floor area of the principal use.
Breweries, small, with taprooms.
Commercial car washes.
Commercial, private, and public satellite dish transmitting or receiving
antennas greater than two meters (2 m) in diameter.
Essential services involving transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty-five kilovolts (35 kV) and up to one
hundred kilovolts (100 kV).
Event centers.
Microdistilleries with cocktail rooms.
Motor fuel stations.
Personal wireless service antennas not located upon a public structure or
existing tower.
Private clubs or lodges.
Recreation, commercial.
Satellite antennas greater than two meters (2 m) in diameter. (Ord. 5, 12-14-
2006; amd. Ord. 74, 8-11-2011; Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85, 12-1-2011; Ord.
179, 10-25-2018; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26A-5: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses
in the B-1 District and require an interim use permit based upon procedures set
forth in and regulated by section
11-3-3 of this title:
Mining and land reclamation. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011;
Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26A-6: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following uses are allowed
by administrative permit in a B-1 District based upon procedures set forth in
and regulated by section
11-3-4 of this title:
Accessory outdoor dining/seating, the area of which does not exceed fifteen
percent (15%) of the gross floor area of the principal use.
Accessory outdoor sales and display, the area of which does not exceed fifteen
percent (15%) of the gross floor area of the principal use.
Essential services, except transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty-five kilovolts (35 kV) and up to one
hundred kilovolts (100 kV).
Temporary outdoor uses. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 74, 8-11-
2011; Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26A-7: LOT AREA, WIDTH AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a B-1 District, subject
to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
   A.   Lot area: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.
   B.   Lot width: One hundred feet (100').
   C.   Setbacks:
      1.   From streets:
         a.   Arterial streets: Thirty-five feet (35').
         b.   Collector and local streets: Thirty feet (30').
      2.   Side yards: Twenty feet (20').
      3.   Rear yards: Thirty feet (30').
      4.   Setback between buildings: For lots with more than one principal
structure on a base lot, the setback between buildings shall be a minimum of
twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-
10-2022)
11-26A-8: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Structures shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height, except as
provided in section
11-5-2 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244,
3-10-2022)
ARTICLE B. B-2 DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-26B-1: Purpose
11-26B-2: Permitted Uses
11-26B-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
11-26B-4: Conditional Uses
11-26B-5: Interim Uses
11-26B-6: Uses By Administrative Permit
11-26B-7: Lot Area, Width And Setback Requirements
11-26B-8: Building Height
11-26B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the B-2 downtown business district is to provide for a mix of
business and multi-family housing in the downtown area of the city as directed
by the city's downtown master plan. The downtown business district provides the
highest density and greatest intensity of development within the city. The
objective of this district is to preserve the small-town character through high
design standards and a pedestrian oriented environment. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006;
amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
uses in the B-2 district:
Bed and breakfast.
Brewpubs.
Clinics.
Cultural establishments.
Governmental and public utility buildings.
More than one principal building on a base lot.
Off street parking lots as a principal use, with the exception of semitractors/
semitrailers.
Office.
Personal services.
Personal wireless service antennas located on a public structure or existing
tower.
Recreation, physical.
Residential dwellings which do not occupy the ground floor space of a building.
Restaurants.
Retail establishments.
Service establishments. (Ord. 66, 5-12-2011; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 75, 8-25-
2011; Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 134, 5-26-2016; Ord. 179, 10-25-2018; Ord. 244,
3-10-2022)
11-26B-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
accessory uses in the B-2 District:
Accessory or secondary use antennas as regulated by chapter 13 of this title.
Accessory structures.
Ground source heat pump systems.
Home occupations.
Keeping of animals.
Off street parking and off-street loading.
Play equipment accessory to a residential dwelling.
Signs.
Solar energy systems.
Wind energy systems up to forty-five feet (45') in height. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006;
amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85, 12-1-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26B-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional
uses in a B-2 district and require a conditional use permit based upon
procedures set forth in and regulated by section
11-3-2 of this title:
Accessory outdoor dining/seating, the area of which exceeds fifteen percent
(15%) of the gross floor area of the principal use.
Accessory outdoor sales and display, the area of which exceeds fifteen percent
(15%) of the gross floor area of the principal use.
Breweries, small, with taprooms.
Daycare facilities.
Essential services involving transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty-five kilovolts (35 kV) and up to one
hundred kilovolts (100 kV).
Microdistilleries with cocktail rooms.
Personal wireless service antennas not located on a public structure or
existing tower.
Private clubs or lodges.
Recreation, commercial.
Satellite antennas greater than two meters (2 m) in diameter. (Ord. 5, 12-14-
2006; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 74, 8-11-2011; Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85, 12-1-
2011; Ord. 134, 5-26-2016; Ord. 179, 10-25-2018; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26B-5: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses
in a B-2 District and require an interim use permit based upon procedures set
forth in and regulated by section
11-3-3 of this title:
Animal shelters as an accessory to animal feed stores.
Mining and land reclamation. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 75, 8-25-2011; Ord.
80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26B-6: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following uses are allowed
by administrative permit in a B-2 district based upon procedures set forth in
and regulated by section
11-3-4 of this title:
Accessory outdoor dining/seating, the area of which does not exceed fifteen
percent (15%) of the gross floor area of the principal use.
Accessory outdoor sales and display, the area of which does not exceed fifteen
percent (15%) of the gross floor area of the principal use.
Essential services, except transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty-five (35) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts.
Temporary outdoor uses. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 74, 8-11-
2011; Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26B-7: LOT AREA, WIDTH AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a B-2 district, subject
to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: None.
   B.   Minimum Lot Width: None.
   C.   Setbacks:
      1.   From streets:
         a.   Collector or arterial streets: Ten feet (10').
         b.   Local streets: None; except, that not less than eighty percent
(80%) of lot frontage shall be built out to the property line.
      2.   Side yards: None.
      3.   Rear yard: None. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord.
244, 3-10-2022)
11-26B-8: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Except as otherwise provided in section
11-5-2 of this title, the following height requirements shall apply:
   A.   Minimum building height: Twenty feet (20').
   B.   Maximum building height: Forty-five feet (45'). (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006;
amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
ARTICLE C. B-3 ORIGINAL TOWNSITE DISTRICT
(Rep. by Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
ARTICLE D. B-4 HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-26D-1: Purpose
11-26D-2: Permitted Uses
11-26D-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
11-26D-4: Conditional Uses
11-26D-5: Interim Uses
11-26D-6: Uses By Administrative Permit
11-26D-7: Lot Area, Width And Setback Requirements
11-26D-8: Building Height
11-26D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the B-4 highway business district is to provide for commercial
and service activities oriented to the traveling public and in close proximity
to major streets, while creating an attractive "gateway" to the city which
fosters high quality development of businesses, with careful attention to the
appearance of the site and buildings. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-
2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26D-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
uses in the B-4 district:
Brewpubs.
Clinics.
Commercial kitchens.
Daycare facilities.
Event centers.
Funeral homes or mortuaries.
Governmental and public utility buildings and structures.
More than one principal building on a base lot.
Motels and hotels.
Offices.
Personal services.
Personal wireless service antennas located on a public structure or existing
tower.
Recreation, physical.
Research facility.
Restaurants.
Retail establishments.
Service establishments.
Sexually oriented business.
Veterinary clinics, without animal kennels. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80,
11-17-2011; Ord. 134, 5-26-2016; Ord. 179, 10-25-2018; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26D-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
accessory uses in the B-4 District:
Accessory and secondary use antennas.
Accessory structures, but such use shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the
gross floor space of the principal use.
Ground source heat pump systems.
Off street parking and off street loading.
Sexually oriented businesses.
Signs.
Solar energy systems.
Wind energy systems up to thirty-five feet (35') in height. (Ord. 5, 12-14-
2006; amd. Ord. 74, 8-11-2011; Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85, 12-1-2011; Ord.
244, 3-10-2022)
11-26D-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional
uses in the B-4 District and require a conditional use permit based upon
procedures set forth in section
11-3-2 of this title:
Accessory outdoor dining/seating, the area of which exceeds fifteen percent
(15%) of the gross floor area of the principal use.
Accessory outdoor sales and display, the area of which exceeds fifteen percent
(15%) of the gross floor area of the principal use.
Auto repair, minor or major.
Breweries, small, with taprooms.
Commercial car washes.
Commercial, private, and public satellite dish transmitting or receiving
antennas greater than two meters (2 m) in diameter.
Essential services involving transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty-five kilovolts (35 kV) and up to one
hundred kilovolts (100 kV).
Hospitals.
Kennel, commercial animal.
Lumberyards.
Microdistilleries with cocktail rooms.
Ministorage/self-service storage facilities.
Motor fuel stations.
Motor vehicle sales.
Personal wireless service antennas not located upon a public structure or
existing tower.
Private clubs or lodges.
Recreation, commercial.
Satellite antennas greater than two meters (2 m) in diameter.
Wind energy systems up to seventy-five feet (75') in height. (Ord. 5, 12-14-
2006; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 74, 8-11-2011; Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85, 12-1-
2011; Ord. 134, 5-26-2016; Ord. 179, 10-25-2018; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26D-5: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses
in the B-4 District and require an interim use permit based upon procedures set
forth in and regulated by section
11-3-3 of this title:
Mining and land reclamation. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011;
Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26D-6: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following uses are allowed
by administrative permit in the B-4 District based upon procedures set forth in
and regulated by section
11-3-4 of this title:
Accessory drive-through facilities.
Accessory outdoor dining/seating, the area of which does not exceed fifteen
percent (15%) of the gross floor area of the principal use.
Accessory outdoor sales and display, the area of which does not exceed fifteen
percent (15%) of the gross floor area of the principal use.
Essential services, except transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty-five (35) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts.
Temporary outdoor uses. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 74, 8-11-
2011; Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26D-7: LOT AREA, WIDTH AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a B-4 district, subject
to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
   A.   Lot Area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
   B.   Lot Width: One hundred twenty-five feet (125').
   C.   Setbacks:
      1.   From streets:
         a.   Arterial streets: Thirty-five feet (35').
         b.   Collector and local streets: Thirty feet (30').
      2.   Side yards: Ten feet (10'), except side yards abutting a residential
district shall be no less than fifty feet (50').
      3.   Rear yards: Twenty-five feet (25'), except rear yards abutting a
residential district shall be no less than fifty feet (50').
      4.   Setback between buildings: For lots with more than one principal
structure on a base lot, the setback between buildings shall be a minimum of
twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-
10-2022)
11-26D-8: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Structures shall not exceed thirty-five feet (35') in height, except as
provided in section
11-5-2 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244,
3-10-2022)
ARTICLE E. B-5 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-26E-1: Purpose
11-26E-2: Permitted Uses
11-26E-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
11-26E-4: Conditional Uses
11-26E-5: Interim Uses
11-26E-6: Uses By Administrative Permit
11-26E-7: Lot Area, Width And Setback Requirements
11-26E-8: Building Height
11-26E-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the B-5 General Business District is to provide for the
establishment of general commercial development which draw and serve customers
from the entire community or region. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-
2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26E-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
uses in the B-5 District:
Brewpubs.
Clinics.
Cultural establishments.
Daycare facilities.
Funeral homes and mortuaries.
Governmental and public related utility buildings and structures.
More than one principal building on a base lot.
Motels and hotels.
Offices.
Personal services.
Personal wireless service antennas located on a public structure or existing
tower.
Recreation, physical.
Restaurants.
Retail establishments.
Service establishments.
Sexually oriented businesses.
Veterinary clinics, without animal kennels. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80,
11-17-2011; Ord. 134, 5-26-2016; Ord. 179, 10-25-2018; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26E-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
accessory uses in the B-5 District:
Accessory and secondary use antennas.
Accessory structures, but such use shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the
gross floor space of the principal use.
Ground source heat pump systems.
Off street parking and off-street loading.
Sexually oriented businesses.
Signs.
Solar energy systems.
Wind energy systems up to thirty-five feet (35') in height. (Ord. 5, 12-14-
2006; amd. Ord. 39, 4-23-2009; Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85, 12-1-2011; Ord.
244, 3-10-2022)
11-26E-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional
uses in the B-5 district and require a conditional use permit based upon
procedures set forth in section
11-3-2 of this title:
Accessory outdoor dining/seating, the area of which exceeds fifteen percent
(15%) of the gross floor area of the principal use.
Accessory outdoor sales and display, the area of which exceeds fifteen percent
(15%) of the gross floor area of the principal use.
Auto repair, minor.
Breweries, small, with taprooms.
Commercial car washes.
Commercial, private, and public satellite dish transmitting or receiving
antennas greater than two meters (2 m) in diameter.
Essential services involving transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty-five kilovolts (35 kV) and up to one
hundred kilovolts (100 kV).
Event centers.
Hospitals.
Kennel, commercial animal.
Microdistilleries with cocktail rooms.
Motor fuel stations.
Personal wireless service antennas not located upon a public structure or
existing tower.
Private clubs or lodges.
Recreation, commercial.
Satellite antennas greater than two meters (2 m) in diameter.
Wind energy systems up to seventy-five feet (75') in height. (Ord. 5, 12-14-
2006; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 74, 8-11-2011; Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85, 12-1-
2011; Ord. 134, 5-26-2016; Ord. 179, 10-25-2018; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26E-5: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses
in the B-5 District and require an interim use permit based upon procedures set
forth in and regulated by section
11-3-3 of this title:
Mining and land reclamation. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011;
Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26E-6: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following uses are allowed
by administrative permit in a B-5 District based upon procedures set forth in
and regulated by section
11-3-4 of this title:
Accessory drive-through facilities.
Accessory outdoor dining/seating, the area of which does not exceed fifteen
percent (15%) of the gross floor area of the principal use.
Accessory outdoor sales and display, the area of which does not exceed fifteen
percent (15%) of the gross floor area of the principal use.
Essential services, except transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty-five (35) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts.
Temporary outdoor uses. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 74, 8-11-
2011; Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26E-7: LOT AREA, WIDTH AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a B-5 district, subject
to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
   A.   Lot Area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
   B.   Lot Width: One hundred feet (100').
   C.   Setbacks:
      1.   From streets:
         a.   Arterial streets: Thirty-five feet (35').
         b.   Collector and local streets: Thirty feet (30').
      2.   Side yards: Ten feet (10'); except, that side yards abutting a
residential district shall be no less than thirty feet (30').
      3.   Rear yard: Twenty feet (20'); except, that rear yards abutting a
residential district shall be no less than thirty feet (30').
      4.   Setback between buildings: For lots with more than one principal
structure on a base lot, the setback between buildings shall be a minimum of
twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-
10-2022)
11-26E-8: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Structures shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height, except as
provided in section
11-5-2 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244,
3-10-2022)
ARTICLE F. B-6 BUSINESS WAREHOUSING DISTRICT
(Rep. by Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
ARTICLE G. B-6 BUSINESS CAMPUS DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-26G-1: Purpose
11-26G-2: Permitted Uses
11-26G-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
11-26G-4: Conditional Uses
11-26G-5: Interim Uses
11-26G-6: Uses By Administrative Permit
11-26G-7: Lot Area, Width And Setback Requirements
11-26G-8: Building Height
11-26G-9: Maximum Building Size
11-26G-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the B-6 business campus district is to provide for the mix of
commercial and limited industrial uses in an environment which provides a high
level of amenities, including landscaping, preservation of natural features,
architectural controls, pedestrian trails, and other features. Limits will be
placed on the type, size and intensity of uses in this district to ensure and
protect compatibility with adjacent residential uses. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd.
Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26G-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
uses in a B-6 district:
Auto repair, minor or major.
Contractor operations.
Commercial kitchens.
Event centers.
Governmental and public utility buildings and structures.
More than one principal building on a base lot.
Motor vehicle sales.
Offices.
Personal wireless service antennas located on a public structure or existing
tower.
Recreation, physical.
Research facility.
Service establishments.
Sexually oriented businesses.
Warehousing/distribution.
Wholesale showrooms. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244,
3-10-2022)
11-26G-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
accessory uses in a B-6 district:
Accessory and secondary use antennas.
Accessory structures, but such use shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
gross floor space of the principal use.
Ground source heat pump systems.
Off street parking and off-street loading.
Retail.
Sexually oriented businesses.
Signs.
Solar energy systems.
Wind energy systems up to forty-five feet (45') in height. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006;
amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85, 12-1-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26G-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional
uses in the B-6 district and require a conditional use permit based upon
procedures set forth in section
11-3-2 of this title:
Breweries, small, with taprooms.
Commercial, private, and public satellite dish transmitting or receiving
antennas greater than two meters (2 m) in diameter.
Essential services involving transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty five kilovolts (35 kV) and up to one
hundred kilovolts (100 kV).
Hospitals.
Kennel, commercial animal.
Lumberyards.
Manufacturing, light.
Ministorage/self-service storage facilities.
Outdoor service, sale and rental as a principal or accessory use.
Outdoor storage as an accessory use.
Personal wireless service antennas not located upon a public structure or
existing tower.
Private clubs or lodges.
Recreation, commercial.
Satellite antennas greater than two meters (2 m) in diameter.
Wind energy systems up to seventy-five feet (75') in height. (Ord. 5, 12-14-
2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85, 12-1-2011; Ord. 179, 10-25-2018; Ord.
244, 3-10-2022)
11-26G-5: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses
in the B-6 District and require an interim use permit based upon procedures set
forth in and regulated by section
11-3-3 of this title:
Mining and land reclamation. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011;
Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26G-6: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following uses are allowed
by administrative permit in a B-6 District based upon procedures set forth in
and regulated by section
11-3-4 of this title:
Essential services, except transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty-five kilovolts (35 kV) and up to one
hundred kilovolts (100 kV).
Temporary outdoor uses. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 80, 11-17-
2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-26G-7: LOT AREA, WIDTH AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a B-6 District, subject
to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
   A.   Lot Area: Thirty thousand (30,000) square feet.
   B.   Lot Width: One hundred feet (100').
   C.   Setbacks:
      1.   From streets:
         a.   Arterial streets: Forty-five feet (45').
         b.   Collector and local streets: Thirty feet (30').
      2.   Side yards: Twenty feet (20'); except, that side yards abutting a
residential district shall be no less than fifty feet (50').
      3.   Rear yards: Twenty feet (20'); except, that rear yards abutting a
residential district shall be no less than fifty feet (50').
      4.   Setback between buildings: For lots with more than one principal
structure on a base lot, the setback between buildings shall be a minimum of
twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-
10-2022)
11-26G-8: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Structures shall not exceed forty five feet (45') in height, except as provided
in section
11-5-2 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244,
3-10-2022)
11-26G-9: MAXIMUM BUILDING SIZE:
Principal buildings shall not exceed a building footprint of one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet. The building footprint shall be considered the
area lying within a perimeter of pier foundation. Roof overhangs, eaves and
cantilevers projecting beyond the building footprint shall not be considered in
the calculation of principal building footprint. (Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
CHAPTER 27
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. I-1 LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-27A-1: Purpose
11-27A-2: Permitted Uses
11-27A-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
11-27A-4: Conditional Uses
11-27A-5: Interim Uses
11-27A-6: Uses By Administrative Permit
11-27A-7: Lot Area, Width And Setback Requirements
11-27A-8: Building Height
11-27A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the I-1 limited industrial district is to provide for the
establishment of warehousing and light industrial development. Industrial uses
allowed in this district shall be limited to those which can compatibly exist
adjacent to both lower intensity business uses and high intensity manufacturing
uses. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-27A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
uses in the I-1 district:
Auto repair, minor or major.
Breweries without a taproom.
Breweries, small, with taprooms.
Commercial kitchens.
Contractor operations.
Distilleries without a cocktail room.
Lumberyards.
Manufacturing, light.
More than one principal building on a base lot.
Personal wireless service antennas located on a public structure or existing
tower.
Recreation, physical.
Research facilities.
Sexually oriented businesses.
Warehousing/distribution.
Wholesale showrooms. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 134,
5-26-2016; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-27A-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
accessory uses in the I-1 district:
Accessory and secondary use antennas.
Accessory enclosed retail, rental, or service activity, the area of which does
not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the gross floor area of the principal use.
Accessory structures, but such use shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
gross floor space of the principal use.
Ground source heat pump systems.
Off street parking and off-street loading.
Office.
Sexually oriented businesses.
Signs.
Solar energy systems.
Wind energy systems up to fifty feet (50') in height. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd.
Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85, 12-1-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-27A-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional
uses in an I-1 district and require a conditional use permit based upon
procedures set forth in section
11-3-2 of this title:
Accessory outdoor dining/seating.
Breweries with taprooms.
Commercial, private, and public satellite dish transmitting or receiving
antennas greater than two meters (2 m) in diameter.
Distilleries with cocktail rooms.
Essential services involving transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty-five kilovolts (35 kV) and up to one
hundred kilovolts (100 kV).
Heavy equipment sales.
Heavy equipment service.
Kennel, commercial animal.
Ministorage/self-service storage facilities.
Outdoor service, sale and rental as a principal or accessory use.
Outdoor storage as a principal or accessory use.
Personal wireless service antennas not located upon a public structure or
existing tower.
Satellite antennas greater than two meters (2 m) in diameter.
Truck stop.
Wind energy systems up to seventy-five feet (75') in height. (Ord. 5, 12-14-
2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85, 12-1-2011; Ord. 134, 5-26-2016; Ord.
244, 3-10-2022)
11-27A-5: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses
in the I-1 district and require an interim use permit based upon procedures set
forth in and regulated by section
11-3-3 of this title:
Mining and land reclamation. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011;
Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-27A-6: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following uses are allowed
by administrative permit in an I-1 district based upon procedures set forth in
and regulated by section
11-3-4 of this title:
Essential services, except transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty-five (35) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts.
Temporary outdoor uses. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 80, 11-17-
2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-27A-7: LOT AREA, WIDTH AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an I-1 district,
subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in
this title:
   A.   Lot Area: One (1) acre.
   B.   Lot Width: One hundred fifty feet (150').
   C.   Setbacks:
      1.   From streets:
         a.   Arterial streets: Fifty feet (50').
         b.   Collector and local streets: Thirty feet (30').
      2.   Side yards: Ten feet (10'); except, that side yards abutting a
residential district shall be no less than fifty feet (50').
      3.   Rear yard: Twenty feet (20'); except, that rear yards abutting a
residential district shall be no less than fifty feet (50').
      4.   Setback between buildings: For lots with more than one principal
structure on a base lot, the setback between buildings shall be a minimum of
twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-
10-2022)
11-27A-8: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Structures shall not exceed fifty feet (50') in height, except as provided in
section
11-5-2 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244,
3-10-2022)
ARTICLE B. I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-27B-1: Purpose
11-27B-2: Permitted Uses
11-27B-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
11-27B-4: Conditional Uses
11-27B-5: Interim Uses
11-27B-6: Uses By Administrative Permit
11-27B-7: Lot Area, Width And Setback Requirements
11-27B-8: Building Height
11-27B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the I-2 general industrial district is to provide areas suitable
for the location of general industrial activities which have adequate and
convenient access to major streets and provide effective controls for
"nuisance" and pollution characteristics. It is further the intent of this
district to encourage industrial development in a compact and orderly manner
that is compatible with and buffered from adjacent uses. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006;
amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)1)
11-27B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
uses in the I-2 district:
Automobile repair, major.
Breweries without a taproom.
Contractor operations.
Crematorium.
Distilleries without a cocktail room.
Lumberyards.
Manufacturing, light or heavy.
More than one principal building on a base lot.
Personal wireless service antennas located on a public structure or existing
tower.
Recreation, physical.
Sexually oriented businesses.
Truck terminals.
Warehousing/distribution.
Wholesale showrooms. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 134,
5-26-2016; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-27B-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
accessory uses in the I-2 district:
Accessory and secondary use antennas.
Accessory enclosed retail, rental, or service activity, the area of which does
not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the gross floor area of the principal use.
Accessory structures, but such use shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
gross floor space of the principal use.
Ground source heat pump systems.
Off street parking and off street loading.
Office.
Sexually oriented businesses.
Signs.
Solar energy systems.
Wind energy systems up to fifty feet (50') in height. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd.
Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85, 12-1-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-27B-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional
uses in the I-2 district and require a conditional use permit based upon
procedures set forth in section
11-3-2 of this title:
Accessory outdoor dining/seating.
Breweries with taprooms.
Commercial, private, and public satellite dish transmitting or receiving
antennas greater than two meters (2 m) in diameter.
Distilleries with cocktail rooms.
Essential services involving transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty-five kilovolts (35 kV) and up to one
hundred kilovolts (100 kV).
Heavy equipment sales.
Heavy equipment service.
Kennel, commercial animal.
Outdoor service, sale and rental as a principal or accessory use.
Outdoor storage as a principal or accessory use.
Personal wireless service antennas not located upon a public structure or
existing tower.
Satellite antennas greater than two meters (2 m) in diameter.
Wind energy systems up to seventy-five feet (75') in height. (Ord. 5, 12-14-
2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85, 12-1-2011; Ord. 134, 5-26-2016; Ord.
244, 3-10-2022)
11-27B-5: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses
in the I-2 district and require an interim use permit based upon procedures set
forth and regulated by section
11-3-3 of this title:
Mining and land reclamation. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011;
Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-27B-6: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following uses are allowed
by administrative permit in an I-2 district based upon procedures set forth in
and regulated by section
11-3-4 of this title:
Essential services, except transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty-five (35) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts.
Temporary outdoor uses. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 80, 11-17-
2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-27B-7: LOT AREA, WIDTH AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in an I-2 district,
subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in
this title:
   A.   Lot Area: One (1) acre.
   B.   Lot Width: One hundred fifty feet (150').
   C.   Setbacks:
      1.   From streets:
         a.   Arterial streets: Fifty feet (50').
         b.   Collector and local streets: Thirty feet (30').
      2.   Side yard: Twenty feet (20'); except, that side yards abutting a
residential district shall be no less than fifty feet (50').
      3.   Rear yard: Twenty-five feet (25'); except, that rear yards abutting
a residential district shall be no less than fifty feet (50').
      4.   Setback between buildings: For lots with more than one principal
structure on a base lot, the setback between buildings shall be a minimum of
twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-
10-2022)
11-27B-8: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Structures shall not exceed fifty feet (50') in height, except as provided in
section
11-5-2 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 244,
3-10-2022)
CHAPTER 28
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. UR URBAN RESERVE DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-28A-1: Purpose
11-28A-2: Permitted Uses
11-28A-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
11-28A-4: Conditional Uses
11-28A-5: Interim Uses
11-28A-6: Uses By Administrative Permit
11-28A-7: Lot Area, Width And Setback Requirements
11-28A-8: Building Height
11-28A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the UR Urban Reserve District is to preserve areas where urban
public utilities are not presently available. These lands are to be retained in
a natural state or in agricultural use pending the proper timing for the
economical provision of sewer and water, streets, parks, storm drainage and
other public utilities and services so that orderly development can occur.
(Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
11-28A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
uses in a UR District:
Farms, farmsteads, farming and agricultural related buildings and structures
subject to State pollution control standards, but not including animal feedlots
or other commercial operations.
Forestry, nurseries, greenhouses and tree farms, excluding retail sales.
Residential programs as regulated by State Statute.
Single-family dwellings with density not greater than one dwelling unit per
forty (40) acres.
Temporary outdoor uses for the sale of agricultural products restricted to
farms.
Wildlife areas and game refuges. (Ord. 166, 2-22-2018)
11-28A-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
accessory uses in the UR District:
Daycare (in home) as regulated by State Statute.
Ground source heat pump systems as regulated by chapter 14 of this title.
Off street parking and off street loading as regulated by chapter 9 of this
title.
Operation and storage of vehicles, equipment and machinery which are incidental
and customary to permitted or conditional uses allowed in this district.
Permitted home occupations as regulated by section
11-5-17 of this title.
Private garages and parking spaces for operable passenger cars and trucks.
Roof mounted wind energy systems which extend not more than six feet (6') above
the highest point of the roof as regulated by chapter 14 of this title.
Secondary or accessory use antennas as regulated by chapter 13 of this title.
Solar energy systems as regulated by chapter 14 of this title.
Storage of private recreational vehicles and equipment as regulated by
subsection
 11-8-2 of this title.
Swimming pools, tennis courts and other recreational facilities which are
operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal
use and their guests.
Tool houses, toolsheds and similar buildings for storage of domestic and farm
supplies and noncommercial recreational equipment. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd.
Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85, 12-1-2011)
11-28A-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional
uses in the UR district and require a conditional use permit based upon
procedures set forth in section
11-3-2 of this title:
Cemeteries.
Commercial, private, and public satellite dish transmitting or receiving
antennas greater than two meters (2 m) in diameter as regulated by chapter 13
of this title.
Commercial riding stables, dog kennels, animal hospitals and overnight care and
similar uses; provided, that the provisions of this code relating to animals
are considered and determined to be satisfied.
Essential services involving transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty five (35) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts; provided, that the applicable provisions of section
11-4-5 of this title are determined to be satisfied.
Personal wireless service antennas not located upon a public structure or
existing tower as regulated by chapter 13 of this title.
Satellite TVROs greater than one meter (1 m) in diameter as regulated by
chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011; Ord.
244, 3-10-2022)
11-28A-5: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses
in the UR district and require an interim use permit based upon procedures set
forth in and regulated by section
11-3-3 of this title:
Driving ranges (golf).
Interim home occupations as regulated by section
11-5-17 of this title.
Mining, sand and gravel extraction, and land reclamation and alteration;
provided, that the use will be in compliance with the provisions hereof or
other applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80,
11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-28A-6: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following uses are allowed
by administrative permit in a UR district based upon procedures set forth in
and regulated by section
11-3-4 of this title:
Amateur radio antennas as regulated by chapter 13 of this title.
Essential services, except transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty five (35) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts, as regulated by section
11-4-5 of this title.
Personal wireless service antennas located upon a structure as regulated by
chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
11-28A-7: LOT AREA, WIDTH AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in a UR district, subject
to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
title:
   A.   Lot area: Forty (40) acres.
   B.   Lot width: Three hundred feet (300').
   C.   Setbacks:
      1.   Lots greater than five (5) acres in size:
         a.   Front yard: Fifty feet (50').
         b.   Side yard: Fifty feet (50').
         c.   Side yard street: Fifty feet (50').
         d.   Rear yard: Fifty feet (50').
      2.   Lots five (5) acres or less in size:
         a.   Front yard: Thirty feet (30').
         b.   Side yards:
            (1)   Interior: Ten feet (10').
            (2)   Corner: Twenty five feet (25').
         c.   Rear yard: Thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80,
11-17-2011)
11-28A-8: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Structures shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height, except as
provided in section
11-5-2 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
EL836   11-28B.txt
ARTICLE B. INS INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-28B-1: Purpose
11-28B-2: Permitted Uses
11-28B-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
11-28B-4: Conditional Uses
11-28B-5: Interim Uses
11-28B-6: Uses By Administrative Permit
11-28B-7: Lot Area And Setback Requirements
11-28B-8: Building Height
11-28B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the INS institutional district is to provide a specific zoning
district for facilities devoted to serving the public. It is unique in that the
primary objective of uses within this district is the provision of services,
frequently on a nonprofit basis, rather than the sale of goods or services. It
is intended that uses within this district will be compatible with adjoining
development and typically located on an arterial street or thoroughfare. (Ord.
5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
11-28B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
uses in the INS district:
Governmental or public regulated utilities, buildings or structures necessary
for the health, safety, and general welfare of the city.
Preschool, elementary, junior or senior high schools having a regular course of
study accredited by the state of Minnesota.
Public parks, play fields, recreational uses and directly related buildings and
structures as a principal use.
Publicly owned civic or cultural buildings, such as libraries, city offices,
auditoriums, public administration buildings and historical developments.
Religious institutions, such as churches, chapels, temples and synagogues.
(Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
11-28B-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are permitted
accessory uses in the INS district:
Accessory uses, buildings and structures; provided, that such uses shall not
exceed thirty percent (30%) of the gross floor space of the principal use.
Ground source heat pump systems as regulated by chapter 14 of this title.
Keeping of animals subject to the provisions of this code.
Off street parking and loading as regulated by chapter 9 of this title.
Open and outdoor storage; provided, that:
   A.   The storage area is screened from view of abutting residential uses,
residential zoning districts, and rights of way in accordance with subsection
11-5-4A of this title.
   B.   The storage area is not located within a front yard.
   C.   The storage area is surfaced with asphalt or concrete.
   D.   All lighting is hooded and directed such that the light source is not
visible from abutting uses and rights of way.
   E.   The storage area shall not take up off street parking space or loading
areas required for conformity with this title.
   F.   Storage of materials shall not be considered hazardous under federal or
state environmental law.
Parks, playgrounds, and athletic fields accessory to a principal use.
Secondary or accessory use antennas or satellites as regulated by chapter 13 of
this title.
Solar energy systems as regulated by chapter 14 of this title.
Wind energy systems up to thirty five feet (35') in height as regulated by
chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 38, 4-23-2009; Ord.
80, 11-17-2011; Ord. 85, 12-1-2011)
11-28B-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are conditional
uses in the INS District and require a conditional use permit based upon
procedures set forth in section
11-3-2 of this title:
Cemeteries.
Colleges, seminaries, and other institutions of higher education.
Commercial and public radio and television transmitting antennas, and public
utility microwave antennas.
Community centers.
Essential services involving transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty-five kilovolts (35 kV) and up to one
hundred kilovolts (100 kV).
Golf courses.
Hospitals.
Living quarters which are provided as an accessory use to a principal or
conditional use in this article.
Off street parking lots as a principal use.
Personal wireless service antennas not located on an existing structure or
tower.
Residential programs as regulated by State Statute.
Satellite antennas greater than two meters (2 m) in diameter.
Wind energy systems up to seventy-five feet (75') in height. (Ord. 166, 2-22-
2018; amd. Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-28B-5: INTERIM USES:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following are interim uses
in the INS District and require an interim use permit based upon procedures set
forth and regulated by section
11-3-3 of this title:
Farms, farmsteads and farming.
Driving ranges (golf).
Mining, sand and gravel extraction, and land reclamation and alteration;
provided, that the use will be in compliance with the provisions hereof or
other applicable provisions of this Code. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80,
11-17-2011; Ord. 244, 3-10-2022)
11-28B-6: USES BY ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT:
Subject to applicable provisions of this title, the following uses are allowed
in the INS District by administrative permit based upon procedures set forth in
and regulated by section
11-3-4 of this title:
Essential services, except transmission pipelines and transmission or
substation lines in excess of thirty five (35) kilovolts and up to one hundred
(100) kilovolts, as regulated by section
11-4-5 of this title.
Personal wireless service antennas located upon an existing structure or tower
or temporary mobile tower as regulated by chapter 13 of this title.
Temporary outdoor uses as regulated by section
11-5-11 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 80, 11-17-
2011)
11-28B-7: LOT AREA AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the INS district
subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in
this title:
   A.   Lot area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
   B.   Setbacks:
      1.   Front yard: Forty feet (40').
      2.   Side yards: Twenty feet (20').
      3.   Rear yard: Fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-
17-2011)
11-28B-8: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Structures shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height, except as
provided in section
 11-5-2 of this title. (Ord. 5, 12-14-2006; amd. Ord. 80, 11-17-2011)
EL836   11-28C.txt
ARTICLE C. PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-28C-1: Purpose And Intent
11-28C-2: Application To Certain Properties
11-28C-3: Allowed Uses
11-28C-4: Lot, Setback And Building Height Requirements
11-28C-5: Integrated Design
11-28C-6: Procedure
11-28C-7: Periodic PUD Review
11-28C-8: Modifications/Amendments Of A PUD
11-28C-9: Additional Requirements
11-28C-10: Preexisting PUDs
11-28C-11 - 11-28C-20: Reserved
11-28C-21: PUD Districts And Entitlements
11-28C-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of the PUD planned unit development district is to provide
comprehensive procedures and standards intended to allow flexibility in the
development of residential neighborhoods and/or nonresidential areas that would
not be possible under a conventional zoning district. The decision to zone
property to a PUD is a public policy decision for the city council to make in
its legislative capacity. The intent of this article is to:
   A.   Provide for the establishment of PUD (planned unit development) zoning
districts in appropriate settings and situations to create or maintain a
development pattern that complies with the city comprehensive plan.
   B.   Allow for the mixing of land uses within a development when such mixing
of land uses could not otherwise be accomplished under this title.
   C.   Provide for variations to the strict application of the land use
regulations in this title in order to improve site design and operation, while
at the same time incorporating design elements (e.g., construction materials,
landscaping, lighting, etc.) that exceed the city's standards to offset the
effect of any variations.
   D.   Promote a more creative and efficient approach to land use within the
city, while at the same time protecting and promoting the health, safety,
comfort, aesthetics, economic viability, and general welfare of the city.
   E.   Preserve and enhance natural features and open spaces.
   F.   Maintain or improve the efficiency of public streets and utilities.
   G.   Ensure the establishment of appropriate transitions between differing
land uses. (Ord. 127, 3-24-2016)
11-28C-2: APPLICATION TO CERTAIN PROPERTIES:
PUD districts shall be applied to property only in conjunction with projects
which fulfill the purpose of such application. PUD zoning designations shall
not be applied to property in advance of specific development applications.
(Ord. 127, 3-24-2016)
11-28C-3: ALLOWED USES:
All permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, conditional uses, interim uses,
and uses allowed by administrative permit contained in the various base zoning
districts defined in chapter 24 of this title shall be treated as potential
allowable uses within a PUD district, provided they would be allowed on the
site under the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 127, 3-24-2016)
11-28C-4: LOT, SETBACK AND BUILDING HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS:
The various lot area, lot width, setback, and building height regulations of
the most closely related conventional zoning district shall be considered
presumptively appropriate but may be departed from to accomplish the purposes
described in section
11-28C-1 of this article. (Ord. 127, 3-24-2016)
11-28C-5: INTEGRATED DESIGN:
A PUD shall consist of a harmonious arrangement and selection of land uses in
groupings of buildings that are planned and designed as an integrated unit. The
integrated design shall include elements such as building orientation and
materials, utilities, parking areas, traffic and pedestrian circulation,
landscaping, and open spaces. (Ord. 127, 3-24-2016)
11-28C-6: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Sketch Plan: Prior to the filing of a formal application, the applicant
shall submit a sketch plan of the project to the zoning administrator. A sketch
plan shall be processed according to the information requirements, standards
and procedures for sketch plans as established by section
11-3-6 of this title.
   B.   Development Stage Plan: Development stage submissions shall depict and
outline the proposed implementation of the sketch plan stage for the PUD.
Information from the sketch plan stage may be included for background and to
provide a basis for the submitted plan. The development stage submissions shall
include, but not be limited to, the submission requirements stipulated in
subsection
11-3-6F of this title.
   C.   Final Stage Plan: After approval of the development stage plan, the
applicant may apply for final plan approval for all or a portion of the PUD.
The applicant shall submit the following material for review by and approval of
the zoning administrator prior to issuance of any building permit(s):
      1.   If the PUD will be developed in different phases, the applicant
shall submit a phasing plan for construction of the various elements of the
entire PUD.
      2.   Development plans in final form, based on the approved development
stage plan, covering that portion of the PUD where building permits will be
requested under the phasing plan.
      3.   Proof of recording any easements and restrictive covenants prior to
the sale of any land or dwelling unit within the PUD and of the establishment
and activation of any entity that is to be responsible for the management and
maintenance of any public or common open space or service facility.
      4.   All certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication
of land and recordation of documents.
      5.   Final architectural working drawings of all structures.
      6.   A final plat and final engineering plans and specifications for
streets, utilities and other public improvements, together with a development
contract agreement for the installation of such improvements and financial
guarantees for the completion of such improvements.
      7.   Any other plan, agreements, or specifications necessary for the
zoning administrator to review the proposed final plan.
   D.   Processing:
      1.   Preapplication Meeting: Prior to the filing of an application for
PUD, the applicant of the proposed PUD is encouraged to arrange for and attend
a meeting with the zoning administrator. The primary purpose of the meeting
shall be to provide the applicant with an opportunity to gather information and
obtain guidance as to the general suitability of his proposal for the area for
which it is proposed and its conformity to the provisions of this article
before incurring substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys and
other data.
      2.   Sketch Plan: Prior to the filing of a formal application, the
applicant shall submit a sketch plan of the project to the zoning
administrator. A sketch plan will be processed according to the information
requirements, standards and procedures for sketch plans as established by
subsection A of this section.
      3.   Development Stage:
         a.   Application Procedure:   PUD zoning applications shall be
processed according to the evaluation criteria and procedures outlined in
section
11-3-2 of this title.
         b.   Information Requirements:
            (1)   The information required for all PUD development stage plan
applications shall be as specified in subsection
11-3-6F of this title.
            (2)   The zoning administrator, planning commission, and/or city
council may excuse an applicant from submitting any specific item of
information or document required by this subsection D3b which it finds to be
unnecessary to the consideration of the specific PUD being considered.
         c.   Zoning Enactment: A rezoning of a parcel of land to PUD shall not
become effective until such time as the city council approves an ordinance
reflecting said amendment, which shall take place at the time the city council
approves the development stage plan.
      4.   Final Stage: After approval of a development stage plan for all or a
portion of the proposed PUD, the applicant shall submit the materials outlined
in subsection C of this section for review by the zoning administrator prior to
issuance of a building permit(s). (Ord. 127, 3-24-2016)
11-28C-7: PERIODIC PUD REVIEW:
The city council may require periodic review of a PUD as a condition to
approval of a PUD development stage plan in order to ensure compliance with the
conditions of the PUD. At such time, the city council may, at its discretion,
choose to take additional testimony on the PUD. (Ord. 127, 3-24-2016)
11-28C-8: MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS OF A PUD:
   A.   Minor Plan Modifications/Amendments: Plan modifications/amendments
qualifying as minor, as defined by subsection
11-3-2F of this title, shall be processed pursuant to that subsection.
   B.   Major Modification/Amendments: The same review procedure shall be
followed for a major modification/amendment of a PUD as was followed with
respect to the applicant's development stage plan, outlined in subsection
11-28C-6D3 of this article and pursuant to section
11-3-2 of this title. (Ord. 127, 3-24-2016)
11-28C-9: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Records Kept: The zoning administrator shall maintain a record of all
PUD districts approved by the city, including information on a project's
allowed uses, all pertinent project plans, any conditions imposed on a project
by the city council, and such other information as the zoning administrator may
deem appropriate.
   B.   Withdrawal Of Application: Any application under this article may be
withdrawn by an applicant without prejudice at any time prior to final city
council action thereon.
   C.   Platting Of A PUD: In the event that a PUD is to be subdivided into
lots or parcels for the purpose of separate ownership, such PUD shall be
platted under the platting procedures of the city subdivision ordinance and the
related requirements of the county. The preliminary plat shall be processed in
conjunction with the development stage plan as outlined in subsection
11-28C-6D3 of this article. A separate action on the final plat shall be
processed before the city council prior to or in conjunction with the final
stage of the PUD.
   D.   Conveyance Of Property Within A PUD: In the event that any real
property within an approved PUD is conveyed in total or in part, the buyer(s)
thereof shall be bound by all provisions of the PUD and the general plan for
that project. However, nothing in this subsection shall be construed as to make
such conveyed property nonconforming with regard to normal zoning standards as
long as the conveyed property conforms with the approved PUD and the
development plan for a project.
   E.   Agreement/Financial Guarantee: Following the approval of the
development plan but prior to final plan approval, the applicant shall enter
into an agreement with the city relating to the terms of the PUD, and shall
also provide such financial guarantees as the city requires or deems necessary.
Such agreement may take the form of:
      1.   A development contract; and/or
      2.   Site improvement performance agreement; and/or
      3.   Another form of legally binding instrument as may be required by the
city. (Ord. 127, 3-24-2016)
11-28C-10: PREEXISTING PUDS:
PUDs which predate the adoption of this chapter shall remain in force except as
otherwise amended under the city's zoning ordinance. (Ord. 127, 3-24-2016)
11-28C-11 - 11-28C-20:   RESERVED:
(Ord. 127, 3-24-2016)
11-28C-21: PUD DISTRICTS AND ENTITLEMENTS:
PUDs which do not predate the adoption of this chapter and their approved
entitlements are provided as follows:
PUD-1:_Elko_Speedway,_Ordinance_no._149_and_Ordinance_no._239
PUD-5:_Boulder_Pointe_Sixth_Addition,_Ordinance_no._162
PUD-6:_Boulder_Pointe_Seventh_Addition,_Ordinance_no._171
PUD-7:_Dakota_Acres_1st_Addition,_Ordinance_no._176
PUD-8:_Pete's_Hill,_Ordinance_no._199,_no._206,_no._233
(Ord. 150, 3-23-2017; amd. Ord. 162, 8-24-2017; Ord. 171, 4-26-2018; Ord. 176,
9-27-2018; Ord. 199, 8-22-2019; Ord. 206, 12-19-2019; Ord. 233, 6-24-2021; Ord.
239, 12-2-2021)
ARTICLE D. FP FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-28D-1: Statutory Authorization, Findings Of Fact And Purpose
11-28D-2: General Provisions
11-28D-3: Establishment Of Floodplain Districts
11-28D-4: Requirements For All Floodplain Districts
11-28D-5: Floodway District (FW)
11-28D-6: Flood Fringe District (FF)
11-28D-7: General Floodplain District (GF)
11-28D-8: Subdivision Standards
11-28D-9: Utilities, Railroads, Roads, Bridges
11-28D-10: Manufactured Homes And Recreational Vehicles
11-28D-11: Administration
11-28D-12: Nonconformities
11-28D-13: Violations And Penalties
11-28D-14: Amendments
11-28D-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE:
This floodplain ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies
contained in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 103F; Minnesota Rules, Parts 6120.5000
- 6120.6200; the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program
codified as 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 59 -78; and the planning and
zoning enabling legislation in Minnesota Statutes, Chapters 462. The purpose of
the FP Floodplain Overlay District is:
   A.   To regulate development in the flood hazard areas of the City of Elko
New Market. These flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation, which
may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption
of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for
flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base. It is the purpose
of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by
minimizing these losses and disruptions.
   B.   To maintain the community's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
   C.   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 225, 1-28-2021)
11-28D-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lands to Which Chapter Applies: This chapter applies to all lands
within the jurisdiction of the City of Elko New Market within the boundaries of
the Floodway, Flood Fringe and General Floodplain Districts and further
detailed in Sections
11-28D-2(B) and
11-28D-3(A).
      1.   The Floodway, Flood Fringe or General Floodplain Districts are
overlay districts superimposed on all existing zoning districts. The standards
imposed in the overlay districts are in addition to any other requirements in
this ordinance. In case of a conflict, the more restrictive standards will
apply.
      2.   Where a conflict exists between the floodplain limits illustrated on
the official floodplain maps and actual field conditions, the base flood
elevations shall be the governing factor in locating the outer boundaries of
the one percent (1%) annual chance floodplain.
      3.   The regulatory limits of the district boundaries shall be further
extended outward based on the horizontal extension of the regulatory flood
protection elevation (RFPE), defined in Section
11-2-2 of this title, listed under Flood Related Definitions.
      4.   Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries will be
given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Planning Commission
and to submit technical evidence.
   B.   Incorporation of Maps by Reference: The following maps together with
all attached material are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part
of the Official Zoning Map and this chapter. The attached material includes the
Flood Insurance Study for Scott County, Minnesota, and Incorporated Areas,
dated February 12, 2021 and the Flood Insurance Rate map panels enumerated
below, dated February 12, 2021, all prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. These materials are on file in the Elko New Market City
Hall.
   27139C0310E
   27139C0320E
   27139C0330E
   27139C0335E
   27139C0340E
   27139C0345E
   C.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this chapter
to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or other
private agreements. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions,
the provisions of this chapter prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with
this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
   D.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: This chapter does not imply that
areas outside the floodplain districts or land uses permitted within such
districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter does not
create liability on the part of the City of Elko New Market or its officers or
employees for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or
any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
   E.   Severability: If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of law, the
remainder of this chapter shall not be affected and shall remain in full force.
   F.   Definitions: Definitions applicable to this Section 11-28D can be found
in Section
11-2-2 of this title and specifically listed under Flood Related Definitions.
   G.   Annexations: The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by reference
into Section
11-28D-2(B) above may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the
corporate boundaries of the City of Elko New Market at the time of adoption of
this chapter. If any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the City
of Elko New Market after the date of adoption of this chapter, the newly
annexed floodplain lands will be subject to the provisions of this chapter
immediately upon the date of annexation. (Ord. 225, 1-28-2021)
11-28D-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS:
   A.   Districts:
      1.   Floodway District: Those areas within Zone A areas as shown as shown
on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps adopted in Section
11-28D-2(B), which are determined to be located in the floodway based on the
floodway and flood fringe delineation methods outlined in Section
11-28D-7(B).
      2.   Flood Fringe District: Those areas within Zone A areas as shown on
the Flood Insurance Rate Maps adopted in Section
11-28D-2(B), which are determined to be located in the flood fringe based on
the floodway and flood fringe delineation methods outlined in Section
11-28D-7(B).
      3.   General Floodplain District: Those areas within Zone A areas as
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps adopted in Section
11-28D-2(B).
   B.   Applicability: Where Floodway and Flood Fringe districts are delineated
on the floodplain maps, the standards in Sections
11-28D-5 or
11-28D-6 will apply, depending on the location of a property. Locations where
Floodway and Flood Fringe districts are not delineated on the floodplain maps
are considered to fall within the General Floodplain district and the standards
in Section
11-28D-7 will apply. (Ord. 225, 1-28-2021)
11-28D-4: REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS:
   A.   Permit Required: A permit must be obtained from the Zoning
Administrator to verify if a development meets all applicable standards
outlined in this chapter prior to conducting the following activities.
      1.   The erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation, or alteration
of any building, structure, or portion thereof. Normal maintenance and repair
also require a permit if such work, separately or in conjunction with other
planned work, constitutes a substantial improvement as defined in this chapter.
      2.   The construction of a dam, on-site septic system, or any fence not
meeting the definition of a farm fence outlined in Section
11-2-2 of this chapter.
      3.   The change or extension of a nonconforming use.
      4.   The repair of a structure that has been damaged by flood, fire,
tornado, or any other source.
      5.   The placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of
materials or equipment within the floodplain.
      6.   Relocation or alteration of a watercourse (including stabilization
projects or the construction of new or replacement culverts and bridges),
unless a public waters work permit has been obtained from the Department of
Natural Resources.
      7.   Any other type of "development" as defined in this chapter.
   B.   Minimum Development Standards: All new development must be:
      1.   Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
      2.   Constructed with materials and equipment resistant to flood damage;
      3.   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
      4.   Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, ductwork,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding;
      5.   Reasonably safe from flooding and consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area;
      6.   Assured to provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
   C.   Floodplain developments must not adversely affect the hydraulic
capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse
or drainage system.
   D.   Materials that, in time of flooding, are buoyant, flammable, explosive,
or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life shall be stored at or
above the flood protection elevation, floodproofed, or protected by structural
measures consistent with the standards set forth herein. Furthermore, storage
of materials likely to cause pollution of the waters, as defined in Minnesota
Statutes, Section 115.01, if subject to flooding are prohibited unless adequate
safeguards approved by the state water pollution control agency are provided.
   E.   Critical Facilities, as defined in Section
11-2-2, are to be located, so that the lowest floor is not less than two feet
above the base flood elevation, or the 0.2% annual chance flood elevation,
whichever is higher. (Ord. 225, 1-28-2021)
11-28D-5: FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW):
   A.   Permitted Uses: The following uses, subject to the standards set forth
in Section
11-28D-5(B), are permitted uses if otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning
district or any applicable overlay district:
      1.   General farming, pasture, grazing, farm fences, outdoor plant
nurseries, horticulture, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
      2.   Loading areas, parking areas, streets, trails, airport landing
strips, railroads, bridges, culverts, utility transmission lines and pipelines.
      3.   Open space uses, including but not limited to private and public
golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds,
boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves,
game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, hunting and fishing areas, and
single or multiple purpose recreational trails.
      4.   Residential yards, lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas,
provided these uses do not include associated accessory structures.
      5.   Grading or land alterations associated with stabilization projects.
   B.   Standards For Floodway Permitted Uses: In addition to the applicable
standards outline in Section
11-28D-4(B):
      1.   The use must have a low flood damage potential.
      2.   The use must not involve structures.
      3.   The use must not obstruct flood flows, or increase velocities,
stages, or flood damages, as certified by a registered professional engineer.
      4.   Development that will change the course, current or cross section of
protected wetlands or public waters is required to obtain a public waters work
permit in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Section 103G.245 or a utility
crossing license in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Section 84.415, from
the Department of Natural Resources, or demonstrate that no permit is required,
before applying for a local permit.
      5.   Any facility that will be used by employees or the general public
must be designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for
evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the depth
(in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a
product of four upon occurrence of the base flood.
   C.   Conditional Uses: The following uses may be allowed as conditional uses
following the standards and procedures set forth in Section
11-28D-11(D) and further subject to the standards set forth in Section
11-28D-5(D), if otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district.
      1.   Structures accessory to primary uses listed in
11-28D-5(A)(1-3) above and primary uses listed in
11-28D-5(C)(2 and 3) below.
      2.   Grading, extraction, fill and storage of soil, sand, gravel, and
other materials for purposes other than stabilization projects.
      3.   Marinas, boat rentals, permanent docks, piers, wharves, water
control structures, and navigational facilities.
      4.   Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.
      5.   Fences that have the potential to obstruct flood flows.
      6.   Levees or dikes intended to protect agricultural crops for a
frequency flood event equal to or less than the 10-year frequency flood event.
   D.   Standards For Floodway Conditional Uses: In addition to the applicable
standards outlined in Sections
11-28D-4(B) and
11-28D-5(B):
      1.   Fill; Storage of Materials and Equipment:
         a.   Fill, dredge spoil, and other similar materials deposited or
stored in the floodplain must be protected from erosion by the use of mulches
or similar materials, with permanent vegetative cover established as soon as
possible. Permanent sand and gravel operations and similar uses must be covered
by a long-term site development plan.
         b.   Temporary placement of fill, other materials, or equipment that
would cause an increase to the stage of the base flood may only be allowed if
the City of Elko New Market has approved a plan that assures removal of the
materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time available.
      2.   Accessory Structures: Accessory structures, as identified in Section
11-28D-5(C)(1) may be permitted, provided that:
         a.   Structures are not intended for human habitation;
         b.   Structures will have a low flood damage potential;
         c.   Structures will be constructed and placed so as to offer a
minimal obstruction to the flow of flood waters;
         d.   Structures must be elevated on fill or structurally dry
floodproofed and watertight to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
Certifications consistent with Section
11-28D-11(B)(2) shall be required.
         e.   As an alternative, an accessory structure may be floodproofed in
a way to accommodate internal flooding. To allow for the equalization of
hydrostatic pressure, there shall be a minimum of two openings on at least two
sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. The openings shall have a minimum net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding, have a net area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding, and shall allow automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters without human intervention. A floodproofing certification
consistent with Section
11-28D-11(B)(2) shall be required.
      3.   A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway must not
cause an increase to the base flood. The technical analysis must assume equal
conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream. (Ord. 225, 1-28-2021)
11-28D-6: FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF):
   A.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses are those uses of land or structures
allowed in the underlying zoning district(s) that comply with the standards in
Section
11-28D-6(B). If no pre-existing, underlying zoning districts exist, then any
residential or nonresidential structures or use of a structure or land is
permitted provided it does not constitute a public nuisance.
   B.   Standards For Flood Fringe Permitted Uses: In addition to the
applicable standards as outlined in Section
11-28D-4(B):
      1.   All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on
fill so that the lowest floor, as defined, is at or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation (RFPE). The finished fill elevation for structures must be
no lower than one foot (1') below the regulatory flood protection elevation
(RFPE). Fill for residential structures must extend at the same elevation at
least fifteen feet (15') beyond the outside limits of the structure. Elevations
must be certified by a registered professional engineer, land surveyor or other
qualified person designated by the community.
      2.   Accessory Structures: As an alternative to the fill requirements of
Section
11-28D-6 (B)(1), any enclosed structures accessory to the uses identified in
Section
11-28D-6(A) must meet the following provisions:
         a.   Accessory structures shall constitute a minimal investment not to
exceed five hundred seventy six (576) square feet in size, and only be used for
parking and storage.
         b.   Accessory structures must allow for the equalization of
hydrostatic pressure by accommodating for the inundation of floodwaters. There
shall be a minimum of two (2) openings on at least two (2) sides of the
structure and the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade. The openings shall have a minimum net area of not less than one
(1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding, and
shall allow automatic entry and exit of floodwaters without human intervention.
      3.   The cumulative placement of fill or similar material on a parcel
must not exceed one thousand (1,000) cubic yards, unless the fill is
specifically intended to elevate a structure in accordance with Section
11-28D-6(B)(1) of this chapter.
      4.   All fill must be properly compacted and the slopes must be properly
protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method.
      5.   All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above
an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation, or must have a flood warning/emergency evacuation plan acceptable to
the City of Elko New Market.
      6.   Accessory uses such as yards, railroad tracks, and parking lots may
be at an elevation lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation.
However, any facilities used by employees or the general public must be
designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation
if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the depth (in feet)
multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a product of four
upon occurrence of the base flood.
      7.   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles must also meet the
standards of Section
11-28D-10 of this chapter.
   C.   Conditional Uses: The following uses may be allowed as conditional uses
following the standards and procedures set forth in Section
11-28D-11(D) and further subject to the standards set forth in Section
11-28D-6(D), if otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district(s).
      1.   The placement of floodproofed nonresidential basements below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
      2.   The cumulative placement of more than one thousand (1,000) cubic
yards of fill when the fill is not being used to elevate a structure in
accordance with Section
11-28D-6(B)(1).
      3.   The use of methods other than fill to elevate structures above the
regulatory flood protection elevation. This includes the use of: stilts,
pilings, filled stem walls, or above grade, internally flooded enclosed areas
such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages, meeting the standards in Section
11-28D-6(D)(5).
   D.   Standards For Flood Fringe Conditional Uses: In addition to the
applicable standards outlined in
11-28D-4(B),
11-28D-6(B) and
11-28D-11(D):
      1.   The standards for permitted uses in the flood fringe, listed in
Sections
11-28D-6 (B)(4-7), apply to all conditional uses.
      2.   Residential basements, as defined in 2.6, are not allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
      3.   All areas of nonresidential structures, including basements, to be
placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation must be structurally dry
floodproofed, which requires making the structure watertight with the walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy. A floodproofing certification consistent with Section
11-28D-11(B)(2) shall be required.
      4.   The placement of more than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of fill
or other similar material on a parcel (other than for the purpose of elevating
a structure to the regulatory flood protection elevation) must comply with an
approved erosion/sedimentation control plan.
         a.   The plan must clearly specify methods to be used to stabilize the
fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the base flood event.
         b.   The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered
professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the City of
Elko New Market.
         c.   The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of
the material from the floodplain if adequate flood warning time exists.
      5.   Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be
utilized to elevate a structure's lowest floor above the regulatory flood
protection elevation. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be considered
above-grade and not a structure's basement or lowest floor if: 1) the enclosed
area is above-grade on at least one side of the structure; 2) it is designed to
internally flood; and 3) it is used solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage. These alternative elevation methods are subject to the
following additional standards:
         a.   Above-grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck
under garages must be designed to internally flood and include a minimum of two
(2) openings on at least two (2) sides of the structure. The bottom of all
openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade, and have a minimum
net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding unless a registered professional engineer or architect
certifies that a smaller net area would suffice.
         b.   Floodproofing certifications consistent with Section
11-28D-11(B)(2) shall be required. The structure shall be subject to a deed-
restricted nonconversion agreement with the issuance of any permit. (Ord. 225,
1-28-2021)
11-28D-7: GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GF):
   A.   Permitted Uses:
      1.   The uses listed in Section
11-28D-5 of this chapter, Floodway District are allowed with a permit.
      2.   All other uses are subject to the floodway/flood fringe evaluation
criteria specified in Section
11-28D-7(B) below. Section
11-28D-5 applies if the proposed use is determined to be in the Floodway
District. Section
11-28D-6 applies if the proposed use is determined to be in the Flood Fringe
District.
   B.   Procedures For Determining Floodway Boundaries And Base Flood
Elevations:
      1.   Requirements for Detailed Studies: Developments greater than fifty
(50) lots or 5 acres, or as requested by the zoning administrator, shall be
subject to a detailed study to determine the regulatory flood protection
elevation and the limits of the Floodway District. The determination of the
floodway and flood fringe must be consistent with accepted hydrological and
hydraulic engineering standards, and must include the following components, as
applicable:
         a.   Estimate the peak discharge of the base flood.
         b.   Calculate the water surface profile of the base flood based upon
a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas.
         c.   Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the base flood
without increasing flood stages more than one-half (0.5) foot. A lesser stage
increase than 0.5 foot is required if, as a result of the stage increase,
increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of encroachment on both
sides of the stream within the reach must be assumed in computing floodway
boundaries, unless development or geographic features warrant other analysis,
as approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
      2.   Alternative Methods: For areas where a detailed study is not
available or required, the base flood elevation must be determined using best
available data. Until a floodway determination can be completed, the entire
floodplain must be treated as floodway, with allowable activities restricted to
those identified in Sections
11-28D-5(A) and
11-28D-5(C).
         a.   Development allowed in floodways (e.g. bridges, culverts,
grading, filling, stabilization projects) must not cumulatively increase flood
stages more than one-half foot during a base flood event, as determined by a
professional engineer or by using accepted engineering practices approved by
the Department of Natural Resources. A stage increase less than one-half foot
(1/2') must be used if increased flood damages would result.
         b.   Development prohibited in floodways (e.g. buildings) require a
floodway/flood fringe determination to verify the development is within the
flood fringe. The floodway/flood fringe determination must be done by a
professional engineer or utilize other accepted engineering practices approved
by the Department of Natural Resources. Any such proposal must assume a one-
half foot stage increase for the purposes of determining the regulatory flood
protection elevation to accommodate for future cumulative impacts.
         c.   For areas in and along lakes, wetlands, and other basins that are
not affected by velocities, where the floodway has not been determined, an
alternative to (a) and (b) above is:
            (1)   All areas that are at or below the ordinary high-water level
as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 103G.005, Subd. 14 will be considered
floodway, and all areas below the base flood elevation but above the ordinary
high water level will be considered flood fringe, provided that within twenty
five feet (25') of the ordinary high water level, or within the Shore Impact
Zone as identified in the community's Shoreland ordinance, whichever distance
is greater, land alterations shall be restricted to:
               (A)   the minimum required to accommodate beach and access
areas, and accessory structures as permitted, not to exceed a volume greater
than ten (10) cubic yards; projects involving volumes exceeding ten (10) cubic
yards require engineering analysis as provided in (a) and (b) above, whichever
is applicable; and
               (B)   the minimum required to accommodate shoreline
stabilization projects to correct an identified erosion problem as identified
by a qualified resource agency.
      3.   The Zoning Administrator will review the submitted information and
assess the technical evaluation and the recommended Floodway and/or Flood
Fringe District boundary. The assessment must include the cumulative effects of
previous floodway encroachments. The Zoning Administrator may seek technical
assistance from an engineer or other expert person, or agency, including the
Department of Natural Resources.
      4.   Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries have been
determined, the Zoning Administrator must process the permit application
consistent with the applicable provisions of 11-28D-5 and 11-28D-6. (Ord. 225,
1-28-2021)
11-28D-8: SUBDIVISION STANDARDS:
   A.   Subdivisions: No land may be subdivided which is unsuitable for reasons
of flooding or inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment
facilities. Manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds are considered subdivisions under this chapter.
      1.   All lots within the floodplain districts must be able to contain a
building site outside of the Floodway District at or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
      2.   All subdivisions must have road access both to the subdivision and
to the individual building sites no lower than two feet (2') below the
regulatory flood protection elevation, unless a flood warning emergency plan
for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the base flood has
been approved by the City of Elko New Market. The plan must be prepared by a
registered engineer or other qualified individual, and must demonstrate that
adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation.
      3.   For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the Floodway and Flood
Fringe District boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the
required elevation of all access roads must be clearly labeled on all required
subdivision drawings and platting documents.
      4.   In the General Floodplain District, applicants must provide the
information required in Section
11-28D-7(B) to determine the base flood elevation, the Floodway and Flood
Fringe District boundaries and the regulatory flood protection elevation for
the subdivision site. (Ord. 225, 1-28-2021)
11-28D-9: UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS, BRIDGES:
   A.   Utilities: All utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer,
and water supply systems to be located in the floodplain must be elevated to
the regulatory flood protection elevation (RFPE) or located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage.
   B.   Public Transportation Facilities: Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges
to be located within the floodplain must comply with Sections
11-28D-5 and
11-28D-6 of this chapter. These transportation facilities must be elevated to
the regulatory flood protection elevation where failure or interruption of
these facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where
such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or
auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where
failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the
public health or safety.
   C.   On-site Water Supply and Sewage Treatment Systems: Where public
utilities are not provided: 1) On-site water supply systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and are
subject to the provisions in Minnesota Rules, Part 4725.4350, as amended; and
2) New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters, they must not be subject to
impairment or contamination during times of flooding, and are subject to the
provisions in Minnesota Rules, Part 7080.2270, as amended. (Ord. 225, 1-28-
2021)
11-28D-10: MANUFACTURED HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
   A.   Manufactured Homes: Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks are
subject to applicable standards for each floodplain district. In addition:
      1.   New and replacement manufactured homes must be elevated in
compliance with Section
11-28D-6 of this chapter and must be securely anchored to a system that resists
flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but
are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements
for resisting wind forces.
      2.   New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured
home parks must meet the appropriate standards for subdivisions in Section
11-28D-8 of this chapter. New or replacement manufactured homes in existing
manufactured home parks must meet the vehicular access requirements for
subdivisions in Section
11-28D-8(A)(2) of this ordinance.
   B.   Recreational Vehicles: New recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds
and expansions to existing recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds are
prohibited in any floodplain district. Recreational vehicles placed in existing
recreational vehicle parks, campgrounds or lots of record in the floodplain
must either:
      1.   Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in Section
11-28D-10(A), or
      2.   Be travel ready, meeting the following criteria:
         a.   The vehicle must have a current license required for highway use.
         b.   The vehicle must be highway ready, meaning on wheels or the
internal jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks.
         c.   No permanent structural type additions may be attached to the
vehicle.
         d.   Accessory structures may be permitted in the Flood Fringe
District, provided that they constitute a minimal investment, do not hinder the
removal of the vehicle should flooding occur, and meet the standards outlined
in Sections
11-28D-4(B) and
11-28D-6(B)(2). (Ord. 225, 1-28-2021)
11-28D-11: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Duties: A Zoning Administrator or other official must administer and
enforce this chapter.
   B.   Permit Application Requirements:
      1.   Application for Permit: Permit applications must be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator. The permit
application must include the following as applicable:
         a.   A site plan showing all pertinent dimensions, existing or
proposed buildings, structures, and significant natural features having an
influence on the permit.
         b.   Location of fill or storage of materials in relation to the
stream channel.
         c.   Copies of any required municipal, county, state or federal
permits or approvals.
         d.   Other relevant information requested by the Zoning Administrator
as necessary to properly evaluate the permit application.
      2.   Certification: The applicant is required to submit certification by
a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land
surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. Floodproofing measures must
be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect as
being in compliance with applicable floodproofing standards in the State
Building Code. Accessory structures designed in accordance with Section
11-28D-6(B)(2) are exempt from certification, provided sufficient assurances
are documented. A registered professional engineer is required to certify that
any development in established floodways must not cause any increase in flood
elevations, and development in the general floodplain district will not
cumulatively increase flood stages more than one-half foot, or less if
increased damages would result.
      3.   Certification of Zoning Compliance for a New, Altered, or
Nonconforming Use: No building, land or structure may be occupied or used in
any manner until a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by the
Zoning Administrator stating that the use of the building or land conforms to
the requirements of this chapter.
      4.   Recordkeeping of Certifications and As-Built Documentation: The
Zoning Administrator must maintain records in perpetuity documenting:
         a.   All certifications referenced in Section
11-28D-11(B)(2) as applicable.
         b.   Elevations complying with Section
11-28D-6(B)(1). The Zoning Administrator must also maintain a record of the
elevations to which structures and alterations to structures are constructed or
floodproofed.
      5.   Notifications for Watercourse Alterations: Before authorizing any
alteration or relocation of a river or stream, the Zoning Administrator must
notify adjacent communities. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work
in public waters pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section 103G.245, this will
suffice as adequate notice. A copy of the notification must also be submitted
to the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).
      6.   Notification to FEMA When Physical Changes Increase or Decrease Base
Flood Elevations: As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months
after the date such supporting information becomes available, the Zoning
Administrator must notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by
submitting a copy of the relevant technical or scientific data.
   C.   Variances:
      1.   Variance Applications: An application for a variance to the
provisions of this ordinance will be processed and reviewed in accordance with
applicable State Statutes and Section
11-3-7 of this zoning ordinance.
      2.   Adherence to State Floodplain Management Standards: A variance must
not allow a use that is not allowed in that district, permit a lower degree of
flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for the
particular area, or permit standards lower than those required by state law.
      3.   Additional Variance Criteria: The following additional variance
criteria of the Federal Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied:
         a.   Variances must not be issued by a community within any designated
regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
         b.   Variances may only be issued by a community upon (i) a showing of
good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the
variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a
determination that the granting of a variance would not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
         c.   Variances may only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      4.   Flood Insurance Notice: The Zoning Administrator must notify the
applicant for a variance that: 1) the issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;
and 2) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and
property. Such notification must be maintained with a record of all variance
actions.
      5.   General Considerations: The community may consider the following
factors in granting variances and imposing conditions on variances and
conditional uses in floodplains:
         a.   The potential danger to life and property due to increased flood
heights or velocities caused by encroachments;
         b.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others;
         c.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems, if any, and the
ability of these systems to minimize the potential for disease, contamination
and unsanitary conditions;
         d.   The susceptibility of any proposed use and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         e.   The importance of the services to be provided by the proposed use
to the community;
         f.   The requirement of the facility for a waterfront location;
         g.   The availability of viable alternative locations for the proposed
use that are not subject to flooding;
         h.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future;
         i.   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Land
Use Plan and flood plain management program for the area;
         j.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         k.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment associated with transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
      6.   Submittal of Hearing Notice to the Department of Natural Resources:
The Zoning Administrator must submit hearing notices for proposed variances to
the Department of Natural Resources sufficiently in advance to provide at least
ten days' notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or
U.S. Mail to the respective area hydrologist.
      7.   Submittal of Final Decisions to the Department of Natural Resources:
A copy of all decisions granting variances must be forwarded to the Department
of Natural Resources within ten days of such action. The notice may be sent by
electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective area hydrologist.
      8.   Record-Keeping: The Zoning Administrator must maintain a record of
all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and must
report such variances in an annual or biennial report to the Administrator of
the National Flood Insurance Program, when requested by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
   D.   Conditional Uses:
      1.   Administrative Review: An application for a conditional use permit
under the provisions of this ordinance will be processed and reviewed in
accordance with Section
11-3-2 of the zoning ordinance/code.
      2.   Factors Used in Decision-Making: In passing upon conditional use
applications, the City of Elko New Market must consider all relevant factors
specified in other sections of this ordinance, and those factors identified in
Section
11-28D-11(C)(5).
      3.   Conditions Attached to Conditional Use Permits: In addition to the
standards identified in Sections
11-28D-5(D) and
11-28D-6(D), the City of Elko New Market may attach such conditions to the
granting of conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the
purposes of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to,
the following:
         a.   Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.
         b.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions.
         c.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures.
      4.   Submittal of Hearing Notices to the Department of Natural Resources:
The Zoning Administrator must submit hearing notices for proposed conditional
uses to the Department of Natural Resources sufficiently in advance to provide
at least ten days' notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic
mail or U.S. Mail to the respective area hydrologist
      5.   Submittal of Final Decisions to the Department of Natural Resources:
A copy of all decisions granting conditional uses must be forwarded to the
Department of Natural Resources within ten (10) days of such action. The notice
may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective area hydrologist.
(Ord. 225, 1-28-2021)
11-28D-12: NONCONFORMITIES:
   A.   Continuation of Nonconformities: A use, structure, or occupancy of land
which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this ordinance, but which
is not in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance may be continued
subject to the following conditions. Historic structures, as defined in Section
11-2-2, are subject to the provisions below.
      1.   A nonconforming use, structure, or occupancy must not be expanded,
changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases its flood damage
potential or degree of obstruction to flood flows except as provided below.
Expansion or enlargement of uses, structures or occupancies within the Floodway
District is prohibited.
      2.   Any addition or structural alteration to a nonconforming structure
or nonconforming use that would result in increasing its flood damage potential
must be protected to the regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance
with any of the elevation on fill or floodproofing techniques (i.e., FP1 thru
FP4 floodproofing classifications) allowable in the State Building Code, except
as further restricted in
11-28D-11(A)(4) below.
      3.   If any nonconforming use, or any use of a nonconforming structure,
is discontinued for more than one year, any future use of the premises must
conform to this chapter.
      4.   If any structure experiences a substantial improvement as defined in
this chapter, then the entire structure must meet the standards of Section
11-28D-5 or
11-28D-6 for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively. If the proposed development,
including maintenance and repair during the previous 365 days, plus the costs
of any previous alterations and additions since the first Flood Insurance Rate
Map exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of any nonconforming
structure, the entire structure must meet the standards of Section
11-28D-5 or
11-28D-6.
      5.   If any nonconformity is substantially damaged, as defined in this
ordinance, it may not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter. The applicable provisions for establishing new uses or new
structures in Sections
11-28D-5 or
11-28D-6 will apply depending upon whether the use or structure is in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe, respectively.
      6.   If any nonconforming use or structure experiences a repetitive loss,
as defined in Section
11-2-2, it shall be considered substantially damaged and must not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
225, 1-28-2021)
11-28D-13: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Violation Constitutes a Misdemeanor: Violation of the provisions of
this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants
of variances or conditional uses) constitute a misdemeanor and will be
punishable as defined by law.
   B.   Other Lawful Action: Nothing in this chapter restricts the City of Elko
New Market from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation. If the responsible party does not appropriately respond
to the Zoning Administrator within the specified period of time, each
additional day that lapses will constitute an additional violation of this
chapter and will be prosecuted accordingly.
   C.   Enforcement: Violations of the provisions of this chapter will be
investigated and resolved in accordance with the provisions of Section 11-3 of
the zoning ordinance/code. In responding to a suspected ordinance violation,
the City of Elko New Market may utilize the full array of enforcement actions
available to it including but not limited to prosecution and fines,
injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a
request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance
availability to the guilty party. The City of Elko New Market must act in good
faith to enforce these official controls and to correct ordinance violations to
the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National
Flood Insurance Program. (Ord. 225, 1-28-2021)
11-28D-14: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Floodplain Designation - Restrictions on Removal: The floodplain
designation on the Official Zoning Map must not be removed from floodplain
areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or that the area
has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood protection
elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special exceptions
to this rule may be permitted by the Department of Natural Resources if it is
determined that, through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the
intended use.
   B.   Required Approval: All amendments to this chapter must be submitted to
and approved by the Department of Natural Resources prior to adoption.
   C.   Map Revisions Require Ordinance Amendments: The floodplain district
regulations must be amended to incorporate any revisions by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency to the floodplain maps adopted in Section
11-28D-2(B). (Ord. 225, 1-28-2021)
TITLE 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Title; Purpose; Application And Interpretation;
Policy   1
Rules And Definitions   2
Enforcement   3
General Subdivision Provisions   4
Administrative Subdivisions   5
Concept Plan   6
Preliminary Plat   7
Final Plat   8
Design Standards   9
Required Improvements   10
CHAPTER 1
TITLE; PURPOSE; APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION; POLICY
SECTION:
12-1-1: Title
12-1-2: Purpose
12-1-3: Jurisdiction
12-1-4: Platting Authority
12-1-5: Application And Interpretation
12-1-6: Severability
12-1-7: Policy
12-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as the ELKO NEW MARKET SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE and will
be referred to as "this title". (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-1-2: PURPOSE:
The city council, being aware of the responsibility which they have for the
adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations designed for the protection of
the health, safety and general welfare of this community, deems it necessary to
provide regulations for platting and subdividing of property within the city.
Each new subdivision shall become a permanent neighborhood in the community.
Piecemeal planning of the subdivisions, without correlation to the
comprehensive plan, can bring a disconnected patchwork of plats, poor
circulation, and an undesirable atmosphere. In order that new subdivisions will
contribute toward an attractive, orderly, stable and wholesome community
environment, adequate municipal services and efficient movement of traffic, all
subdivisions platted within the jurisdiction of the city after the effective
date hereof shall, in all respects, fully comply with the regulations set forth
in this title. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-1-3: JURISDICTION:
The rules and regulations governing plats and subdivisions of land contained in
this title shall apply to all lands lying within the corporate limits of the
city. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-1-4: PLATTING AUTHORITY:
The city council shall serve as the platting authority of the city in
accordance with Minnesota statutes section 462.358, as may be amended. No plat
or replat shall be filed or accepted for filing by the office of the county
recorder or registrar of titles unless adopted by the affirmative vote of the
majority of the members of the city council approving such plat or replat.
Building permits shall not be issued for any structure on a lot in any proposed
subdivision that has not been approved by the city council. The city council
shall not permit any public improvement to be installed or provide associated
services unless the preliminary plat is approved. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-1-5: APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Relation To Other Laws And Regulations: The provisions of this title
shall not repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with
private restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant or other private
agreements which are equal to or more restrictive, or with restrictive
covenants running with the land to which the city is a party; except, that the
most restrictive shall apply. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this title shall be the minimum requirements adopted for the
protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. (Ord. 29, 10-24-
2008; amd. 2011 Code)
   B.   More Restrictive Provisions Apply: When any condition imposed by a
provision of this title on the use of land or building or on the bulk of
buildings is either more restrictive or less restrictive than similar
conditions imposed by any provision of any other city ordinance or regulation,
the more restrictive conditions shall prevail. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-1-6: SEVERABILITY:
   A.   Every section, provision, or part of this title or any permit issued
pursuant to this title is declared separable from every other section,
provision, or part thereof to the extent that if any section, provision, or
part of this title or any permit issued pursuant to this title shall be held
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not invalidate any other
section, provision, or part thereof.
   B.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall judge invalid the
application of any provision of this title to a particular property, building,
or structure, such judgment shall not affect other properties, buildings or
structures. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-1-7: POLICY:
   A.   The subdivision of land and the subsequent development of a plat is
subject to the control of the city pursuant to the city comprehensive plan for
the orderly, planned, efficient and economical development of the city.
   B.   Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used
safely for building purposes without danger to health from fire, flood, or
other menace. Land shall not be subdivided unless proper provisions have been
made for drainage, stormwater management, wetland protection, potable water,
domestic wastewater, streets, and capital improvements such as parks,
recreation facilities, transportation facilities, stormwater improvements, and
any other necessary improvements.
   C.   The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be
properly related to the comprehensive plan, park and trail plan, stormwater
management plan, water plan, sanitary sewer plan, and the capital improvement
plan of the city.
   D.   The provisions of this title are in addition to and not in replacement
of provisions of all building codes and the zoning ordinance. Any provision of
the building code and zoning ordinance shall remain in full force and effect
except as may be contradictory to the provisions hereof. Where any provision
conflicts with any other provision, the most restrictive provision shall be
applied. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
12-2-1: Rules Of Word Construction
12-2-2: Definitions
12-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
The language contained in this title shall be interpreted in accordance with
the following rules of construction as applicable:
   A.   The singular includes the plural and the plural the singular.
   B.   The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future
tense includes the present tense.
   C.   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
   D.   Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in this title, its
meaning shall be construed as set forth in such definition.
   E.   In the event of conflicting provisions, the more restrictive shall
apply.
   F.   The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary.
   G.   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of health,
safety, and welfare. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given them in this section:
ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION: Any subdivision containing not more than two (2)
lots fronting on an existing public street, not involving the dedication and/or
construction of any new street or road, the extension of municipal facilities,
or the creation of any public improvements.
ALLEY: A public or private right of way which affords a secondary means of
access to abutting property.
APPLICANT: The owner, his or her agent or person having legal control,
ownership and/or interest in land for which the provisions of this title are
being considered or reviewed.
BUILDABLE LAND: Contiguous land area occurring within the property lines of a
parcel or lot excluding wetlands and/or watercourses.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN: A proposed timetable or schedule of all future
capital improvements to be carried out during a specific period and listed in
order of priority, together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of
financing each project.
CERTIFICATE OF SURVEY: A document prepared by a land surveyor that precisely
describes area, dimensions, and location of a parcel or parcels of land and
additional information such as existing and proposed building or structure
locations, existing and proposed elevations, and other site features that may
be required by the city.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The person hired by the Elko New Market city council who is
responsible for supervising governmental operations and implementing city
policies.
CITY ATTORNEY: The person designated by the city council to be the city
attorney for the city of Elko New Market.
CITY BUILDING OFFICIAL: The person designated by the city council to be the
city building official for the city of Elko New Market.
CITY COUNCIL: The governing body for the city of Elko New Market.
CITY ENGINEER: The person designated by the city council to be the city
engineer for the city of Elko New Market.
CLERK: The Elko New Market city clerk.
COMMON INTEREST COMMUNITY (CIC): Contiguous or noncontiguous real estate within
Minnesota that is subject to an instrument which obligates persons owning a
separately described parcel of the real estate, or occupying a part of the real
estate pursuant to a proprietary lease, by reason of their ownership or
occupancy, to pay for: a) real estate taxes levied against; b) insurance
premiums payable with respect to; c) maintenance of; or d) construction,
maintenance, repair or replacement of improvements located on one or more
parcels or parts of the real estate other than the parcel or part that the
person owns or occupies.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The comprehensive development plan made and adopted by the
city of Elko New Market indicating the general locations recommended for major
thoroughfares, streets, parks, public buildings, zoning districts and other
public improvements.
CONTOUR MAP: A map on which shapes of land surfaces are shown by lines
connecting points of equal elevations. The contour interval is the vertical
difference between contour lines.
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE (CRZ): An imaginary circle surrounding the tree trunk with a
radius distance of one foot (1') per one inch (1") of tree diameter, e.g., a
twenty inch (20") diameter tree has a CRZ with a radius of twenty feet (20')
(see also definition of Drip Line).
CUL-DE-SAC: See definition of Street: Cul-De-Sac.
DESIGN STANDARDS/STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: The specifications for the
preparation of concept plans, preliminary plats, and final plats indicating,
among other things, the optimum minimum or maximum dimensions of such features
as rights of way and blocks, as set forth in this title.
DEVELOPER: The legal or beneficial owner(s) of a parcel of any land proposed
for inclusion in a development, including the holder of an option or contract
to purchase.
DEVELOPMENT: The construction, installation or alteration of any structure; the
extraction, clearing or other alteration of terrestrial or aquatic vegetation,
land or the course, current or cross section of any water body or watercourse;
or the division of land into two (2) or more parcels.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT: The diameter of a tree measured at diameter breast
height (4.5 feet from the uphill side of the existing ground level). If a tree
splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half feet (4.5'), then the trunk
is measured at its narrowest point beneath the split.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS: See definition of Lot.
DRAINAGE COURSE: A watercourse or indenture for the transmission of surface
water.
DRIP LINE: The farthest distance away from the trunk that rain or dew will fall
directly to the ground from the leaves or branches of the tree or one foot (1')
per one inch (1") of diameter, whichever is greater.
EASEMENT: A grant by the property owner for temporary or permanent use of a
strip of land by the public, a corporation, or persons for specific purposes.
ESCROW: Deposited funds in an account maintained by the governmental unit
specifically for the purpose of ensuring fulfillment of certain obligations
pursuant to this title.
FINAL PLAT: The final map, drawing or chart on which the developer's plan of
subdivision is presented to the city council for approval and which, if
approved, shall be submitted to the Scott County register of deeds or registrar
of titles.
FINANCIAL GUARANTEE: A financial security consistent with section
12-10-5 of this title, posted with the city with the approval of a final plat,
guaranteeing compliance with the approved final plat, construction plans, and
conditions of approval set forth by the city.
FRONTAGE: The width of a lot or building site measured on the line separating
it from a public street right of way.
GRADE, PERCENTAGE OF: The rise or fall of a street in feet for each one hundred
feet (100') of horizontal distance measured at the centerline of the street.
HIGH WATER LEVEL: The water level in a watercourse which could be predicted to
occur as a result of the critical 100-year or 500-year rainfall event using
U.S. department of agriculture soil conservation service methodology, as
approved by the city.
IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC: Any drainage facility, street, parkway, park, lot
improvement or other facility for which the local government may ultimately
assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an
improvement for which city responsibility is established.
KEY MAP: A map drawn to a comparatively small scale which definitely shows the
area proposed to be platted and the areas surrounding it, to a given distance.
LAND DISTURBANCE: Any area in which movement of earth, alteration in
topography, soil compaction, disruption of vegetation, change in soil
chemistry, or any other change in the natural character of the land occurs as a
result of the site preparation, grading, building construction or any other
construction activity.
LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor licensed in the state of Minnesota.
LOT: A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land, separated
from other parcels or portions by description as on a subdivision or record of
survey map, for the purpose of sale or lease or separate use thereof. Lots may
be classified as follows:
Lot, Base: Lots meeting all specifications in the zoning district prior to
being subdivided into a two-family dwelling, townhouse, or quadraminium
subdivision.
Lot, Butt: Any lot located immediately between two (2) corner lots.
Lot, Corner: A lot situated at the junction of, and abutting on two (2) or more
intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a
continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed one hundred
thirty five degrees (135°).
Lot, Flag: A lot without the required full lot width on a public roadway and
with access to the public roadway provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a
narrow strip or private easement.
Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot, Through (Double Frontage): A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines
abutting two (2) substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot.
On a through lot, both street lines shall be front lot lines for applying this
title.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear
lot line of a lot (the greater frontage of a corner lot shall be deemed its
depth and the lesser frontage its width).
LOT FRONTAGE: That boundary of a lot abutting a public right of way having the
least width.
LOT LINE: The property line bordering a lot, except where any portion of a lot
extends into the public right of way, that shall be the lot line for purposes
of this title.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at
right angles to the lot depth, at the minimum front building setback line.
METES AND BOUNDS: A method of property description whereby properties are
described by means of their directions and distance from an easily identifiable
location.
NATURAL WATERWAY: A natural passageway in the surface of the earth, so situated
and having such a topographical nature that surface water flows through it from
other areas before reaching a ponding area or stream.
OUTLOT: A parcel of land shown on a subdivision plat as an outlot, and
designated alphanumerically (for example - outlot A). Outlots are used to
designate one of the following: land that is part of the subdivision but is to
be subdivided into lots and blocks at a later date; and land that is to be used
for a specific purpose (i.e., parks, trails, stormwater holding, etc.) as
designated in a developer's agreement or other agreement between the city and
the developer.
OWNER: An individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation,
trust or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the
land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide
the land under this title.
PARKWAY: See definition of Street.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, syndicate or partnership,
corporation, trust, or any other legal entity.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): A type of development characterized by a
unified site design for a number of dwelling units or dwelling sites on a
parcel, or a commercial or industrial development which contains two (2) or
more principal buildings. The units or buildings may be for sale, rent, or
lease, and may also involve clustering of the units or sites to provide areas
of common open space, density increases, and a mix of structure types and land
uses. These developments may be organized and operated as condominiums,
cooperatives, full fee ownership, commercial enterprises, or any combination of
these, or cluster subdivisions of dwelling units.
PLANNING COMMISSION: An appointed body that advises the city council on matters
related to growth and development in the city of Elko New Market 1 .
PLAT: The drawing or map of a subdivision prepared for filing of record
pursuant to Minnesota statutes chapter 505, as may be amended, and containing
all elements and requirements set forth in this title adopted pursuant to
Minnesota statutes section 462.358 and chapter 505.
PLAT, FINAL: See definition of Final Plat.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: See definition of Preliminary Plat.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: The preliminary map or drawings and accompanying material
described in section
12-7-2 of this title indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be
submitted to the city for its consideration for compliance with the
comprehensive plan, the zoning ordinance, and this title, along with required
supporting data.
PROTECTIVE COVENANTS: A restriction of the use placed upon the property by a
present or former owner and recorded in the office of the Scott County recorder
or the registrar of titles. Protective covenants are enforced only by the
landowners involved and not by the city or other public agency.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEY: A survey map of registered land designed to simplify a
complicated metes and bounds description, designating the same into a tract or
tracts of a registered land survey number.
RESOURCE INVENTORY: A quantitative summary of existing natural features of a
site or area including topography, soil types, site vegetation, and hydrolic
characteristics.
RESUBDIVISION (REPLAT): A change in an approved or recorded subdivision plat if
such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved for public
use, or any lot line, or if it affects any map or plan legally recorded prior
to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street,
railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main,
sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special use. The use of the term
right of way for land platting purposes shall mean that every right of way
hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct
from the lots or parcels adjoining such right of way and not included within
the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels.
RIGHT OF WAY WIDTH, ROAD: The horizontal distance between the outside edges of
a road right of way.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between the foundation wall of a
structure and the property line, ordinary high water mark of a wetland or
stormwater pond nearest thereto.
SIGNIFICANT TREE: See definition of Tree.
SPECIMEN TREE: See definition of Tree.
STREET: A public roadway, whether improved or unimproved, and whether
designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road,
avenue, boulevard, court, way, or trail, or however otherwise designated.
Private ingress and egress roadways shall not be considered streets. City
streets shall be categorized by functional classification.
Arterial Street: A type of road that is characterized by limited access and a
design capacity to move relatively large volumes of traffic in an expedient
manner. Arterials are divided into principal arterials and minor arterials
based on their access, the traffic volume they carry and the areas they serve.
Collector Street: A type of road that functions to provide connections between
neighborhoods and from neighborhoods to arterial streets and/or areas with
concentrations of business. They typically have lower traffic volumes and
speeds than arterials, but higher than local streets. Collectors are divided
into those roads that are designed to distribute traffic from major generators
or from minor collectors to and from arterial roads (major collectors), and
those roads that are designed to distribute traffic from major collectors or
arterials to and from local streets (minor collectors).
Cul-De-Sac: A short local street having one end open to traffic and being
permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround at the other.
Local Street: A type of road that functions to provide access to adjacent
properties and from properties to collectors and/or arterial streets. Speeds
and traffic volumes are typically lower than collector or arterial streets.
Service Street: A frontage or backage road, marginal access street, or
otherwise designated street which is parallel and adjacent to a thoroughfare
and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through
traffic.
STREET WIDTH: The width of the improved surface of the street as measured at
right angles or radially to the centerline of the street from curb face to curb
face, or on a street without curbs from the outside edge of the improved
shoulder to outside edge of the improved shoulder.
SUBDIVISION: The creation of one or more lots under the provisions of this
title or any division of an existing lot. The term includes resubdivision and,
when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or
to the land subdivided.
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS: The guidelines, principles and specifications for
the preparation of subdivision plans indicating, among other things, the
minimum and maximum dimensions of the various elements set forth in the
preliminary and final plats.
TRAIL: An easement or land dedication given to the city for the purpose of
providing walking and/or bicycling routes to city residents. The trails shall
provide recreational opportunities and access to parks, natural areas, and
public land in accordance with the city's adopted comprehensive plan and parks
and trails plan.
TREE: Any of the following type of trees, as each is defined herein:
Coniferous Tree: A woody plant which, at maturity, is at least twelve feet
(12') or more in height, having foliage on the outermost portion of the
branches year round.
Deciduous Tree: A woody plant which, at maturity, is at least fifteen feet
(15') or more in height, having a defined crown, and which sheds leaves
annually.
Deciduous Tree, Hardwood: A type of deciduous tree including ironwood, catalpa,
oak, maple (hard), walnut, ash, hickory, birch, black cherry, hackberry,
locust, basswood, and American elm.
Deciduous Tree, Softwood: A type of deciduous tree including cottonwood,
poplar/aspen, box elder, willow, silver maple, and Siberian elm.
Significant Tree: A healthy tree measuring a minimum of six inches (6") in
diameter for hardwood deciduous trees, defined herein, or a minimum of twelve
inches (12") in diameter for softwood deciduous trees, as defined herein, or a
minimum of twelve feet (12') in height for coniferous/evergreen trees. (Tree
diameter shall be measured at a point 36 inches above grade.)
Significant Tree Stand: A grouping or cluster of coniferous and/or deciduous
trees with contiguous crown cover, occupying five hundred (500) or more square
feet of property, which are comprised of deciduous trees six inches (6") or
larger in diameter or coniferous trees four inches (4") in diameter. (Tree
diameter shall be measured at a point 36 inches above grade.)
Specimen Tree: A healthy hardwood tree measuring equal to or greater than
thirty inches (30") in diameter and/or a coniferous tree measuring fifty feet
(50') or greater in height. (Tree diameter shall be measured at a point 36
inches above grade.)
TREE CERTIFICATION: A certified inventory of trees on the site before and after
work is complete, listing all trees and their final disposition, which is
signed by a licensed forester or landscape architect.
TREE PRESERVATION PLAN: A plan and inventory certified by a forester or
landscape architect indicating all of the significant trees and their locations
in the proposed development or on the lot. The tree preservation plan shall
include the size, species, tag numbers, and location of all significant trees
proposed to be saved or removed on the area of development, and the measures
proposed to protect the significant trees to be saved.
VARIANCE: A modification or variation of the provisions of this title as
applied to specific properties, where an unusual hardship on the land exists.
WATERCOURSE: Any natural or manmade passageway on the surface of the earth so
situated and having such a topographical nature that surface water stands or
flows through it from other areas. The term includes ponding areas, drainage
channels, swales, waterways, creeks, rivers, lakes, streams, wetland areas, and
any other open surface water flow which is the result of stormwater or
groundwater discharge. This term does not include manmade piping systems
commonly referred to as storm sewers.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The duly appointed officer charged with the
administration and enforcement of the zoning ordinance.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The Elko New Market zoning ordinance, as may be amended,
regulating the use of land within Elko New Market 2 . (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
EL839   12-3
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 1 of this code.
2 1. See title 11 of this code.
CHAPTER 3
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
12-3-1: Violations
12-3-2: Penalties
12-3-3: Application To City Personnel
12-3-4: Additional Remedies
12-3-1: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Generally: The violation of any provision of this title or the
violation of the conditions or provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this
title shall be a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, the violator shall
be subject to fine or imprisonment, or both, as set forth in Minnesota
statutes, plus, in either case, all costs of prosecution.
   B.   Sale Of Lots From Unrecorded Plats: It shall be a misdemeanor to sell,
trade, or otherwise convey any lot or parcel of land as part of, or in
conformity with, any plan, plat or replat of any subdivision or area located
within the jurisdiction of the city, unless said plan, plat or replat shall
have first been recorded in the office of the county register of deeds.
   C.   Receiving Or Recording Unapproved Plats: It shall be unlawful for a
private individual to receive or record in any public office any plans, plats
of land laid out in building lots and streets, alleys or other portions of the
same intended to be dedicated to public or private use, or for the use of
purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent thereto, and located
within the jurisdiction of this title, unless the same shall bear thereon, by
endorsement or otherwise, the approval of the city council.
   D.   Misrepresentations: It shall be a misdemeanor for any person owning an
addition or subdivision of land within the city to represent that any
improvement upon any of the streets, alleys or avenues of said addition or
subdivision or any sewer in said addition or subdivision has been constructed
according to the plans and specifications approved by the city council, or has
been supervised or inspected by the city, when such improvement has not been so
constructed, supervised or inspected. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-3-2: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this title shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day during which compliance is delayed or such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and may be prosecuted
as such. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-3-3: APPLICATION TO CITY PERSONNEL:
The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any official duty
imposed by this title shall not subject the officer or employee to a penalty
imposed for violation unless a penalty is specifically provided for such
failure. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-3-4: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
In the event of a violation or the threatened violation of any provision of
this title, or any provision or condition of a permit issued pursuant to this
title, the city, in addition to other remedies, shall have the authority to
institute appropriate civil action including injunction and other equitable
processes to enforce the provisions of this title and, at the reasonable
discretion of the civil court, shall recover reasonable court costs and
attorney fees that are incurred due to the enforcement of the subject
violation. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
12-4-1: Compliance With City Regulations
12-4-2: Applications And Fees
12-4-3: Registered Land Surveys
12-4-4: Metes And Bounds Conveyances
12-4-5: Building Permits And Certificates Of Occupancy
12-4-6: Variances
12-4-7: Premature Subdivision
12-4-8: Planned Unit Development (PUD)
12-4-9: Common Interest Community (CIC) Plats
12-4-1: COMPLIANCE WITH CITY REGULATIONS:
No subdivision of land shall conflict with the provisions of the comprehensive
plan, zoning ordinance, or official maps. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-4-2: APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
The fees for all applications and for all permits shall be established by the
city council. The acceptance of all applications, issuance of permits, or
recording of any plat shall not occur until a complete application has been
filed and the appropriate fees have been paid. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-4-3: REGISTERED LAND SURVEYS:
All registered land surveys shall be filed subject to the same procedures as
required for the filing of a preliminary plat for platting purposes. The
standards and requirements set forth in these regulations shall apply to all
registered land surveys. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-4-4: METES AND BOUNDS CONVEYANCES:
   A.   Except in highly unique situations as may be allowed by the city
council, conveyances by metes and bounds shall be prohibited where any lot or
lots involved are less than ten (10) acres in area or have a width of less than
three hundred thirty feet (330') at the building setback line.
   B.   No building permit shall be issued for any structure on any parcel of
land described by metes and bounds less than ten (10) acres in area or having a
width of less than three hundred thirty feet (330') on an improved public
street, at a building setback line which is described by metes and bounds until
a plat describing such parcel of land is filed with the county recorder's
office and proof of recording thereof is furnished to the city council.
   C.   When a conveyance by metes and bounds is made for parcels larger than
ten (10) acres in size, a survey of the parcels involved shall be submitted to
the zoning administrator before any building permits will be issued for those
parcels, and a copy of the survey, in a format acceptable to the county
recorder, shall be attached to the deed when it is submitted to the county
recorder's office for recording. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-4-5: BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   No building permit shall be issued by the city for any construction,
enlargement, alteration, repair, demolition or moving of any building or
structure on any lot or parcel until all the requirements of this title have
been fully met or exceptions from this requirement have been formally
established by a development contract.
   B.   Prior to issuance of any building permit on any lot within a
subdivision, the city shall have received a site survey showing proposed
grading, drainage, and building pad elevations along with a certification by a
registered land surveyor or engineer that the survey is in compliance with the
approved subdivision record plans for grading, drainage, stormwater, and
erosion control.
   C.   Prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy for any lot
within the subdivision, the city shall receive a written certification from a
registered land surveyor or registered engineer which states that the grading,
drainage and building pad elevations are in general compliance with the final
certified grading plan for the subdivision.
   D.   Except for approved model homes, building permits shall not be issued
for any new subdivision until such a time as the first lift of bitumen has been
installed and has been accepted by the city. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-4-6: VARIANCES:
   A.   Authority: The city council may approve variances from the minimum
standards of this title when, in its opinion, exceptional and undue hardship
may result from strict compliance.
   B.   Conditions And Grounds For Approval: In approving any variance, the
city council shall prescribe any conditions that it deems necessary to or
desirable to the public interest. In making its approval, the city council
shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing
use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the
proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon
traffic conditions in the vicinity. A variance shall only be approved when the
city council finds that each and every one of the following apply: (Ord. 29,
10-24-2008)
      1.   That there are special circumstances or highly unique conditions
affecting the property such that the strict application of the provisions of
this title would mean that the property cannot be put to a reasonable use if
used under conditions allowed by the official controls.
      2.   That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety and welfare or injurious to other property in the
vicinity in which the development site is situated.
      3.   That the granting of the variance will not increase the flood hazard
or flood damage potential.
      4.   That the proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the congestion of
the public streets, or increase the danger of fire or endanger public safety.
      5.   That the variance is to correct inequities resulting from an extreme
physical hardship such as topography.
      6.   Hardship relating to economic difficulties shall not be considered
for the purpose of granting a variance.
      7.   That the hardship is not a result of an action or actions by the
owner, applicant or any agent thereof.
      8.   That the requested variance is the minimum action required to
eliminate the hardship.
      9.   Does not involve a use which is not allowed within the respective
zoning district. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
   C.   Procedure: The procedures for processing variance applications shall
comply with the applicable provisions of the city zoning ordinance, as may be
amended 1 . (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  11-3-7 of this code.
12-4-7: PREMATURE SUBDIVISION:
Any concept plan, preliminary plat, or final plat deemed premature pursuant to
the following criteria shall be denied by the city council. A subdivision may
be deemed premature should any of the following conditions not be met:
   A.   Consistency With Comprehensive Plan: Consistency with the comprehensive
plan including any of the following:
      1.   Land use plan.
      2.   Transportation plan.
      3.   Utility (sewer and water) plans.
      4.   Stormwater management plan.
      5.   Capital improvement plan.
      6.   Growth management policies.
   B.   Consistency With Infill Policies: A proposed urban subdivision shall be
consistent with the following infill policies of the city:
      1.   The urban subdivision shall be located within the utility service
area or the staged growth area as established by the city comprehensive plan.
      2.   The cost of utilities and street extensions shall be covered by one
or more of the following:
         a.   One hundred percent (100%) of the street and utility costs are
privately financed by the developer.
         b.   The cost of regional and/or oversized trunk utility lines can be
financed by the city when recommended by the city engineer.
         c.   The cost and timing of the expenditure of city funds is
consistent with the city capital improvement plan.
      3.   The developer payments will offset additional costs of utility
installation or future operation and maintenance.
   C.   Roads Or Highways To Serve The Subdivision: A proposed subdivision
shall have adequate roads or highways when:
      1.   Traffic generated by a proposed subdivision will not degrade the
level of service outside the proposed subdivision to a level worse than the
existing level of service.
      2.   The existing level of service shall be "C" (as determined by the
"State Highway Capacity Manual") or better for any street providing access to
the subdivision. If the existing level of service is "D", "E" or "F", the
subdivision developer must provide, as part of the proposed project,
improvements needed to ensure a level of service "C" or better.
      3.   Existing roads providing access to the subdivision have the
structural capacity to accommodate projected traffic from the proposed
subdivision, or the developer agrees to pay for any structural deficiency
corrections.
      4.   The traffic generated from a proposed subdivision shall not require
city street improvements that are inconsistent with the city capital
improvement plan, or the developer agrees to pay for any structural deficiency
corrections.
   D.   Water Supply: A proposed subdivision shall be deemed to have an
adequate water supply when:
      1.   The city water system has adequate wells, storage, or pipe capacity
to serve the subdivision.
      2.   The water utility extension is consistent with city water plans and
offers the opportunity for water main looping to serve the urban subdivision.
      3.   The extension of water mains will provide adequate water pressure
for personal use and fire protection.
   E.   Waste Disposal Systems: A proposed subdivision shall be served with
adequate waste disposal systems when:
      1.   The urban sewered subdivision is located inside the city's utility
service area.
      2.   The city has sufficient utility service area and pipe capacity to
serve the subdivision if developed to its maximum density.
      3.   The subdivision will result in a sewer extension consistent with the
city sewer plan and capital improvement plan. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-4-8: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD):
In recognition of changing trends, techniques and materials in the process of
urban development, the city council and planning commission shall provide
flexible means to permit development flexibilities by a planned unit
development (PUD), as established by the city zoning ordinance. The PUD shall
be reviewed and adjudged in accordance with applicable provisions of the city
zoning ordinance. Each application for a PUD shall be considered as an
individual case and shall be reviewed in terms of its land use, circulation and
traffic patterns, population and marketability, construction design, and
timing. A PUD shall be granted only if:
   A.   Applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance related to PUDs are
satisfied.
   B.   The PUD is designed to be in harmony with the natural features of the
landscape. Steep slopes, wetlands, and natural features are to be preserved to
the maximum extent possible. No disruption of the natural drainage system shall
occur.
   C.   Any PUD flexibility granted shall not violate the intent of the
subdivision design standards.
   D.   Utility lines such as power transmission and telephone lines shall be
placed underground. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-4-9: COMMON INTEREST COMMUNITY (CIC) PLATS:
All common interest community (CIC) plats shall provide a master plan for the
project to include building/unit placement for all units within the project
including future phases. All units shall be required to be numbered
consecutively throughout the development starting with "unit 1". Said numbering
system shall then continue throughout the development utilizing the numbering
system identified by the master plan, even if certain buildings are constructed
out of order. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
CHAPTER 5
ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
12-5-1: Qualification
12-5-2: Application For Subdivision
12-5-3: Submittal Requirements
12-5-4: Procedure
12-5-5: Recording Of Subdivision
12-5-1: QUALIFICATION:
The following circumstances may be considered an administrative subdivision:
   A.   In the case of a request to divide a portion of a lot where the
division is to permit the adding of a parcel of land to an abutting lot so that
no additional lots are created and both new lots conform to minimum area
requirements of the city zoning ordinance.
   B.   In the case of a request to combine two (2) existing platted lots.
   C.   In the case of a request to divide a lot from a larger tract of land
thereby creating no more than two (2) lots. To qualify, the parcel of land
shall not have been a part of an administrative subdivision within the last
five (5) years.
   D.   In the case of a request to divide a base lot which is a part of a
recorded plat upon which has been constructed a two- family dwelling,
townhouse, or quadraminium, where the division is to permit individual private
ownership of a single dwelling unit within such a structure, and the newly
created property lines will not cause any of the unit lots or structures to be
in violation of this chapter, the zoning ordinance, or the state building code.
   E.   The subdivision of multiple-tenant commercial and industrial buildings
in conformance with any applicable provisions of the city zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-5-2: APPLICATION FOR SUBDIVISION:
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any contract is made for
the sale of any part of such subdivision, and before any permit for the
erection of a structure on such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the
subdividing owner or his authorized agent, shall file an application and secure
approval of an administrative subdivision. The administrative subdivision
application shall be considered to be officially filed when the city zoning
administrator or designee has received the application and has determined that
the application is complete. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-5-3: SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
The following shall be submitted with applications for administrative
subdivisions: (2011 Code)
   A.   Complete application form.
   B.   Application fee.
   C.   Acreage calculations for the existing and proposed lots.
   D.   A certificate of survey (full size, 11 inch by 17 inch reduction, and
electronic copy) prepared by a licensed land surveyor identifying the
following:
      1.   Scale (engineering only) of one inch (1") equals no more than one
hundred feet (100').
      2.   Topography with one foot (1') contours.
      3.   Name and address, including all telephone numbers, of the legal
owner and/or the agent of the property.
      4.   North point indication.
      5.   Boundaries, dimensions, and area of existing lots being subdivided
and new lots to be created.
      6.   Legal descriptions of existing parcel and legal description of
proposed new lots.
      7.   Easements of record.
      8.   Watercourses including delineated wetlands; the ordinary high water
level (OHWL) of any DNR protected waters, 100-year flood elevations of all
watercourses (wetlands, ponds, lakes, streams, etc.). The 500-year flood
elevation shall be identified when required by the city engineer.
      9.   All encroachments, easements, or rights of way encumbering the
property.
      10.   Existing buildings, structures, and improvements within the parcel
to be platted and those one hundred feet (100') outside the boundaries of the
subject parcel.
      11.   Locations, widths and names of all public streets, rights of way or
railroad rights of way showing type, width and condition of the improvements,
if any, which pass through and/or are within one hundred feet (100').
      12.   Proposed driveway locations and locations of existing driveways
within one hundred feet (100').
      13.   Location of any abandoned wells and confirmation of their being
sealed.
      14.   The toe and top of any bluffs.
      15.   Additional data determined appropriate by the zoning administrator
or designee to ensure compliance with city requirements.
      16.   Drainage and utility easements, minimum ten feet (10') wide, along
all lot lines. These easements may be centered on a lot line shared between
lots created by the administrative subdivision.
      17.   A copy of percolation tests and soil borings for all lots, if
required by the city engineer.
      18.   The existing and proposed lot corners shall be staked at the site
for review by the zoning administrator or designee. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-5-4: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Application And Fees Required: A development application form with
required fees shall be submitted to the city.
   B.   Review Of Application:
      1.   The zoning administrator shall request input by the city's planning,
engineering, and legal staff, as appropriate, and shall forward copies of the
application to agencies and utility companies responsible for review of the
application.
      2.   Administrative subdivision of land abutting upon any existing or
proposed trunk highway, county road or highway or county state aid highway
shall be subject to review of the Minnesota department of transportation and/or
county highway department. Written notice and a copy of the proposed
administrative subdivision shall be filed with the Minnesota department of
transportation and/or county highway department for review and comment. Final
action on an administrative subdivision shall not be taken until the minimum
thirty (30) day review period has elapsed or until all referenced parties have
signed off, whichever first occurs.
   C.   Supportive Information: The zoning administrator shall have authority
to request supportive information pertinent to the administrative subdivision.
Failure to provide the necessary supportive information may be grounds for
denial of the request.
   D.   Decision And Appeals:
      1.   The zoning administrator shall reach a decision on the requested
administrative subdivision within one hundred twenty (120) days of complete
application, unless the applicant agrees to an extension of the review period.
      2.   The zoning administrator may approve the administrative subdivision
with conditions that shall be met to ensure the administrative subdivision is
compliant with the regulations of this title and the city zoning ordinance, as
may be amended, and other applicable requirements.
      3.   The zoning administrator shall prepare findings and deny a
subdivision if the administrative subdivision is found to be premature as
defined by the criteria of section
 12-4-7 of this title or fails to comply with regulations of the this title and
the city zoning ordinance, as may be amended, or other applicable requirements.
      4.   The applicant may appeal an administrative subdivision denial
following the appeal procedure outlined in the city zoning ordinance 1 .
      5.   Prior to certification by the city of the approval of the
administrative subdivision, the applicant shall supply the deed(s) granting to
the city the easements and/or rights of way required in section
12-5-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  11-3-1F of this code.
12-5-5: RECORDING OF SUBDIVISION:
   A.   If the administrative subdivision is approved by the zoning
administrator, the applicant shall record the deed and the accompanying survey
in the office of the county recorder within sixty (60) days after the date of
approval. Otherwise, the approval of the administrative subdivision shall be
considered void.
   B.   When the land for which the administrative subdivision abuts a state
highway, county road, or county highway, a certificate or other evidence
showing submission of the administrative subdivision to the Minnesota
department of transportation and/or county highway department shall be filed
with county recorder of deeds with the administrative subdivision. (Ord. 29,
10-24-2008)
CHAPTER 6
CONCEPT PLAN
SECTION:
12-6-1: Concept Plan Encouraged
12-6-2: Information Required
12-6-3: Filing And Review Of Application
12-6-4: Determination Of Environmental Review
12-6-1: CONCEPT PLAN ENCOURAGED:
While not a formal requirement, developers are encouraged to prepare a concept
plan depicting the subdivision proposal for informal review prior to filing a
formal preliminary plat application. On the basis of the concept plan, the city
shall informally advise the developer as promptly as possible of the extent to
which the proposed subdivision generally conforms to the design standards of
this title. Concept plan review does not convey any legal development rights to
the applicant. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-6-2: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
The concept plan shall include large scale, reduced scale eleven inches by
seventeen inches (11" x 17"), and electronic copies of the following
information (number of copies to be determined by the zoning administrator):
   A.   Name, address, and all telephone numbers of the developer/owner.
   B.   Date of plan preparation and dates of revision.
   C.   Scale of plan (engineering scale only: 1 inch equals 100 feet).
   D.   North arrow indication.
   E.   Legal description.
   F.   Property location map illustrating the site location relative to
adjoining properties and streets.
   G.   Scaled drawing (engineering scale only) illustrating property
boundaries and approximate boundaries of any significant constraints such as
ponds, wooded areas, wetlands, or bluffs.
   H.   Drawing showing conceptual street and lot layout.
   I.   Proof of ownership or legal interest in the property in order to make
application.
   J.   Current and proposed land use and zoning.
   K.   Evaluation by the applicant that the subdivision would not be
determined to be premature pursuant to the criteria outlined by the
comprehensive plan and this title.
   L.   Additional information, pursuant to this section, as required by the
zoning administrator. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-6-3: FILING AND REVIEW OF APPLICATION:
   A.   An applicant shall meet with city staff to discuss a proposed
development and investigate the city requirements for pursuing a development
application. The preapplication meeting shall be scheduled with the zoning
administrator in advance.
   B.   The city recommends the property owner/applicant hold a neighborhood
meeting for informal comment and feedback prior to submitting a formal concept
application.
   C.   A development application form for the concept plan along with the
associated information and fee established by the city council shall be
submitted to the city.
   D.   The zoning administrator shall submit copies of the concept plan and
associated information to other staff, committees, consultants, or agencies as
appropriate.
   E.   At the applicant's request, the zoning administrator shall forward the
concept plan submittals to the city's advisory boards and city council for
their consideration at regularly scheduled meetings to solicit informal review
and comment on the project's acceptability in relation to the city's
comprehensive plan and development regulations. The applicant or designee shall
be present at all meetings with advisory boards and the city council.
   F.   Concept plan review shall not convey any legal development rights to
the applicant. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-6-4: DETERMINATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW:
   A.   The zoning administrator shall review the concept plan and shall
determine if the project crosses thresholds for a mandatory environmental
assessment worksheet (EAW), environmental impact statement (EIS), or
alternative urban areawide review (AUAR) documents pursuant to Minnesota rules
or shall determine if the city will require elective environmental documents
for the project. If such documents are required, the zoning administrator shall
notify the developer of any applicable environmental review requirements.
   B.   In addition to the standard requirements, an escrow deposit shall be
submitted by the applicant to cover city costs for preparing or reviewing and
administering any necessary EAW, EIS or AUAR or environmental documents the
city chooses to require. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
CHAPTER 7
PRELIMINARY PLAT
SECTION:
12-7-1: General Requirements
12-7-2: Information Required
12-7-3: Additional Information Required
12-7-4: Determination Of Environmental Review
12-7-5: Procedure
12-7-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   After the completion of the concept plan process, the owner or
developer shall file with the city an application for preliminary plat. The
preliminary plat stage is the point in the process that all information
pertinent to the proposed development is furnished by the developer for review
by the city staff, city advisory committees, the city council, any other
applicable agencies, and the public (through the public hearing process). The
information provides a basis for approval or denial of the application. The
information submitted in the application shall address both existing conditions
and changes proposed to occur during and after development. The preliminary
plat is a plan depicting how property is proposed to be subdivided and
developed.
   B.   Additional information or modifications may be required by the city
staff, city advisory committees, or the city council, and additional
information may be requested during the review process. In certain cases, some
information required by these standards may not be appropriate or may need to
be modified in order to provide an adequate basis for making a decision. (Ord.
29, 10-24-2008)
12-7-2: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
Preliminary plat information is typically furnished on plan sheets. However,
some information is more appropriately submitted in other forms. The plat, and
associated information, shall be submitted in a form that is legible, organized
and understandable. The preliminary plat application shall consist of maps and
accompanying documents. An owner or applicant shall submit large scale, reduced
scale eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17"), and electronic copies of
the following information (number of copies to be determined by the zoning
administrator):
   A.   Boundary and topographic survey prepared by a licensed land surveyor
identifying the following:
      1.   Scale (engineering only) one inch (1") equals not more than one
hundred feet (100').
      2.   North point indication.
      3.   Existing parcel boundaries to be platted with dimensions and area.
      4.   Existing legal description.
      5.   Easements of record.
      6.   Delineated wetland boundaries, to include the ordinary high water
level (OHWL) of any lakes or department of natural resources (DNR) waters.
      7.   Floodplain as shown on federal emergency management agency (FEMA)
FIRM map.
      8.   All encroachments.
      9.   Existing topography, buildings, structures and improvements within
the parcel to be platted and those within one hundred feet (100') outside the
boundaries of the subject parcel.
      10.   Location, widths and names of all public streets or rights of way
showing type, width and condition of the improvements, if any, which pass
through and/or are within one hundred feet (100').
      11.   The outside boundary of the subject property is to be clearly
marked with survey monuments and indicated on the drawing.
   B.   Resource inventory identifying the following:
      1.   Topographic contours at one foot (1') intervals including contours
covering a minimum of two hundred feet (200') of adjacent properties and
sufficient to identify tributary areas of watersheds draining onto or through
the site. Spot elevations at the overflow point of basins and for existing
infrastructure on or adjacent to the site such as pipe, inverts, manhole
castings, curbs, etc., shall also be provided.
      2.   Soils report indicating soil type locations and identification of
soil type characteristics such as hydric soils, agricultural capability, depth
to bedrock, and hydraulic conductivity.
      3.   Hydrologic characteristics, including surface watercourses,
floodplains, delineated wetlands, natural swales, and drainageways; ordinary
high water level and 100-year flood elevations of adjoining watercourses,
lakes, wetlands, streams, etc., at the date of the survey and approximate high
and low water elevations. The 500-year flood elevation shall be identified when
required by the city engineer.
      4.   Tree inventory identifying vegetation of the site, according to
general cover type (pasture, woodland, etc.), defining boundaries of woodland
areas and individual significant trees, as defined in section
12-2-2 of this title and a tree preservation plan per section
12-9-9 of this title. Vegetative types shall be classified as generally
deciduous, coniferous or mixed and described by plant community, relative age,
size, and condition.
      5.   General outlines of existing buildings, land use, and natural
features such as water bodies or wooded areas, roads, driveways, and property
boundaries within three hundred feet (300') of the tract. This information
shall be presented on an aerial photograph at a scale of no less than one inch
to two hundred feet (1" = 200') with a project overlay map.
   C.   Preliminary plat identifying the following:
      1.   The proposed name of the plat, which name shall not duplicate the
name of any plat heretofore recorded in the county.
      2.   Date of application, name, address, phone numbers and applicable
license or registration number of the owner, developer, agent, applicant,
engineer, surveyor, planner, attorney or other principal involved in the
development of the plat.
      3.   Proof of ownership or legal interest in the property.
      4.   Existing comprehensive plan land use and zoning designation within
and abutting the proposed plat; any zoning changes needed and reference to any
zoning or similar land use actions that are pertinent to the proposed
development.
      5.   Total acreage of the land to be subdivided and total upland area
(land above the ordinary high water mark of existing wetlands, lakes and
rivers).
      6.   Boundary line survey and legal description.
      7.   North arrow and graphic engineering scale of one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100').
      8.   Existing covenants, liens, or encumbrances.
      9.   Proposed lot lines, dimensions, and the gross and buildable acreage
of all lots; when lots are located on a curve in a road or cul-de-sac, the lot
width at the building setback line shall be shown; proposed lot and block
numbers.
      10.   Building pad, minimum building setbacks shown on each lot
indicating dimensions of the setbacks; location and width of buffer yards where
the subdivision adjoins a collector or arterial street, railroad right of way
or overhead transmission lines.
      11.   Layout of streets, showing right of way widths, centerline street
grades and approximate radii of all curbs, and names of streets. The name of
any street heretofore used in the city or its environs shall not be used,
unless the proposed street is an extension of an already named street, in which
event, the name shall be used.
      12.   Access, right of way widths, driveways, and street classifications
shall be consistent with city standards.
      13.   Parks, trails, or other areas intended for public use or common
ownership.
      14.   Any additional information pursuant to this title as requested by
the zoning administrator.
      15.   Dates of plan preparation and revision dates.
      16.   All delineated wetlands and the ordinary high water level (OHWL) of
DNR protected waters.
   D.   Preliminary grading, drainage and erosion control plan (based upon a
boundary and topographic survey) identifying the following:
      1.   Scale (engineering only) at one inch equals one hundred feet (1" =
100') maximum.
      2.   North point indication.
      3.   Location of natural features including, but not limited to, tree
lines, delineated wetlands, watercourses, ponds, lakes, streams, drainage
channels, ordinary high water level (OHWL) and 100-year storm elevations,
bluffs, steep slopes, etc.
      4.   Existing contours at one foot (1') intervals shown as dashed lines
for the subject property.
      5.   Proposed grade elevations at one foot (1') intervals shown as solid
lines.
      6.   Proposed plan for surface water management, ponding, drainage and
flood control, including the normal water level and high water level of all
ponds and watercourses including those which drain beyond the boundaries of the
subdivision.
      7.   Provision for groundwater management including subsurface drains,
disposals, ponding, and flood controls.
      8.   Location of all existing storm sewer facilities including pipes,
manholes, catch basins, ponds, swales and drainage channels within one hundred
feet (100') of the subject property. Existing pipe sizes, grades, rim and
invert elevations and normal and high water elevations shall be included.
      9.   If the subject property is within or adjacent to a 100-year
floodplain, flood elevation and locations shall be shown.
      10.   Spot elevations at drainage break points and directional arrows
indicating site, swale and lot drainage.
      11.   Lot and block numbers, building style, building pad location and
elevations at the lowest floor and garage slab for each lot.
      12.   Locations, sizes, grades, rim and invert elevations of all proposed
stormwater facilities, including ponds, to serve the subject property.
      13.   Phasing of grading.
      14.   The location and purpose of all oversize, nontypical easements.
      15.   All soil erosion and sediment control measures to be incorporated
during and after construction shall be shown. All erosion and sediment control
plans shall be in accordance with Minnesota pollution control agency's best
management practices. Locations and standard detail plates for each measure
shall be in accordance with city standards and included on the plan.
      16.   All revegetation measures proposed for the subject property shall
be included on the plan, including seed and mulch types and application rates.
      17.   Preliminary drainage plan, including the configuration of drainage
areas and calculations for 1-year, 10-year, and 100-year flood elevations. The
500-year flood elevation shall be identified when required by the city
engineer.
      18.   Layout of proposed streets showing centerline gradients, section
widths, and typical cross sections.
      19.   Date of plan preparation and dates of all revisions.
      20.   Plan preparer (licensed engineer).
   E.   Preliminary utility plan (based upon a boundary and topographic survey)
identifying the following:
      1.   Scale (engineering only) at one inch equals one hundred feet (1" =
100') maximum.
      2.   The location, dimensions, and purpose of all easements.
      3.   Location and size of existing sanitary sewers, water mains,
culverts, or other underground facilities within the subject property and to a
distance of one hundred feet (100') beyond the outside boundary of the proposed
plat. Data such as grades, invert elevations, and location of catch basins,
manholes and hydrants shall also be shown.
      4.   Location and size of proposed sanitary sewers, water mains, culverts
and other stormwater facilities, or other underground facilities within the
subject project and to a distance of one hundred feet (100') beyond the outside
boundary of the proposed plat. Data such as grades, invert elevations, and
location of catch basins, manholes and hydrants shall also be shown.
      5.   Water mains shall be provided to serve the subdivision by extension
of an existing municipal system.
      6.   Municipal sanitary sewer trunk facilities, laterals and service
connections shall be designed and installed in accordance with the design
standards approved by the city engineer.
      7.   The location of hydrants and valves for all proposed water mains.
      8.   All other utilities shall be located and designed in accordance with
the requirements of the city engineer.
      9.   Date of plan preparation and dates of all revisions.
      10.   Plan preparer (licensed engineer). (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-7-3: ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED:
   A.   Evaluation by the applicant that the subdivision would not be
determined to be premature pursuant to the criteria outlined in this title.
   B.   For phased subdivisions, preliminary plats shall include a phasing plan
that includes:
      1.   The sequence of development and approximate areas, number of lots in
each phase, total area and buildable area per phase, serially numbered with a
description of each phase. Information shall be provided regarding the number
of dwelling units, proposed improvements, and common facilities for each.
      2.   Any trail/sidewalks within the approved phase of the preliminary
plat shall be constructed along with streets and utilities and shall be clearly
marked on a site map which shall be an attachment to all sales agreements for
individual lots.
      3.   A site grading plan that is coordinated with the phasing plan to
avoid premature disruption of land or long term storage of excess materials.
      4.   A development agreement that includes a financial security to ensure
completion of common facilities, trails, and landscaping shall be provided.
   C.   Documents outlining the content of proposed conservation easements,
restrictive covenants, deed restrictions, and establishment of homeowners'
associations for review. Where the plat is intended to include common open
spaces, these documents shall address ownership and long term maintenance of
these open space areas.
   D.   Information or easements showing how public utilities, drainage, and
roads can be extended to serve adjacent properties.
   E.   Landscape and screening plans showing landscape plantings for street
boulevards, subdivision entrances, and buffer yards. Such plans shall specify
plant locations, varieties, and sizes, and include elevations of monument signs
and the location, ownership, and maintenance responsibilities of the monument
signs.
   F.   Park, trail, and sidewalk plans.
   G.   If required by the city engineer, a traffic study for the subdivision
including traffic generation, traffic distribution of the existing capacity of
existing streets, and resulting level of service (LOS) of existing streets at
the subdivision build-out.
   H.   Examples of housing product; illustration of building footprint, floor
plans, and building elevations.
   I.   Soil tests for areas where streets are proposed and other soil
information as requested by the city engineer.
   J.   Three (3) copies of a wetland replacement plan shall be provided (if
applicable).
   K.   A build-out plan (ghost plat) illustrating a realistic future urban lot
and block layout and street system. Development represented by this ghost plat
shall be consistent with the future land use as depicted in the comprehensive
plan.
   L.   Other information deemed appropriate by city staff. (Ord. 29, 10-24-
2008)
12-7-4: DETERMINATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW:
   A.   The zoning administrator shall review the preliminary plat and shall
determine if the project crosses thresholds for a mandatory environmental
assessment worksheet (EAW), environmental impact statement (EIS), or
alternative urban areawide review (AUAR) documents pursuant to Minnesota rules
or shall determine if the city will require elective environmental documents
for the project. If such documents are required, the zoning administrator shall
notify the developer of any applicable environmental review requirements.
   B.   An escrow deposit, in addition to the standard requirements, shall be
submitted by the applicant to cover city costs for reviewing and administering
an EAW, EIS or AUAR. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-7-5: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Preapplication Meeting: Prior to submitting a preliminary plat
application (following a concept plan review, if one occurs), the property
owner/applicant shall meet with city staff to discuss the application. Through
this meeting, the zoning administrator or designee may summarize the city's
concept plan review comments and offer suggestions pertaining to additional
information or design changes that may assist in expediting the preliminary
plat review. The developer shall schedule the meeting with the city
administrator in advance.
   B.   Neighborhood Meeting: While not required, the city recommends that the
property owner/applicant hold a neighborhood meeting for informal comment and
feedback prior to preliminary plat application.
   C.   Submission Of Application: The person applying for preliminary plat
approval shall submit to the city a complete application and all other
information required according to the deadline and meeting schedule established
by the city. The application shall address the informational requirements of
section
12-7-2 of this chapter and also any issues identified through the concept plan
review procedure.
   D.   Contents Of Application: A complete preliminary plat application shall
include:
      1.   A graphic and written description of the information requirements
outlined in section
12-7-2 of this title.
      2.   Applications shall be accompanied by a fee and processing escrow
established by the city council.
   E.   Notice Of Incomplete Application: The zoning administrator, upon
receipt of the application, shall notify the applicant in writing within
fifteen (15) city business days if the application is found to be incomplete.
   F.   Review Of Application:
      1.   The zoning administrator shall refer copies of the preliminary plat
to other staff, committees, consultants, or agencies as appropriate. (Ord. 29,
10-24-2008)
      2.   A preliminary plat abutting upon state rail bank or property or upon
any existing or proposed trunk highway, county road or county state aid highway
shall be subject to review of the Minnesota department of transportation and/or
county highway department, as appropriate. Written notice and a copy of the
proposed preliminary plat shall be filed with the Minnesota department of
transportation and/or county highway department for review and comment. Final
action on a preliminary plat shall not be taken until the minimum thirty (30)
day review period has elapsed. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
   G.   Zoning Administrator Report: Upon receipt of a complete application,
the zoning administrator shall prepare a report and refer the application to
the park and recreation commission and the planning commission.
   H.   Planning Commission Hearing; Findings And Recommendations:
      1.   The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
preliminary plat. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the
official newspaper designated by the city council at least ten (10) days prior
to the hearing. The city shall mail written notification of the proposed
preliminary plat to property owners located within three hundred fifty feet
(350') of the subject site. Timing of the mailed notice shall be the same as
that for the published notice. The failure to give mailed notice to individual
property owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings,
provided a bona fide attempt to comply has been made.
      2.   The planning commission shall take public testimony at the public
hearing and evaluate the requested preliminary plat against the premature
subdivision criteria of section
12-4-7 of this title, the performance standards of this title, the performance
standards of the city zoning ordinance, and other city requirements. The
planning commission shall make findings and offer a recommendation for either
preliminary plat approval or denial. The planning commission may offer a
recommendation of approval with conditions necessary to satisfy city
regulations.
      3.   The zoning administrator shall prepare a staff report of the
findings and recommendations of the planning commission. The findings may
include specific conditions of approval or findings related to denial of the
plat.
   I.   Council Action:
      1.   The city council shall take action on the application within one
hundred twenty (120) days following delivery of a complete application in
accordance with the regulations of this title, unless an extension is agreed to
in writing by the applicant. If the city council approves the preliminary plat,
the city council may impose conditions it considers necessary to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.
      2.   The city council shall take action on the application, which shall
include findings of fact, and which shall be entered in the proceedings of the
city council and transmitted to the applicant in writing. The lack of a simple
majority council vote to affirmatively approve a preliminary plat shall be a
denial of the requested application. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
   J.   Grading Activities: If approved by the city engineer, grading of the
site included in the preliminary plat may occur after approval of the
preliminary plat and the approval and recording of a development agreement for
the grading work, including financial securities. The grading development
agreement shall comply with the requirements of subsection
12-10-6D of this title. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
CHAPTER 8
FINAL PLAT
SECTION:
12-8-1: Filing And Requirements For Application
12-8-2: Information Required
12-8-3: Review; Approval Or Denial
12-8-4: Form And Content Of Final Plat
12-8-5: Recording Final Plat
12-8-6: Record Plans And Mapping
12-8-1: FILING AND REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION:
   A.   Approval of a preliminary plat by the city council is an acceptance of
the general layout, as submitted, and indicates that the developer may proceed
toward final plat approval in accordance with the city council approval of the
preliminary plat, including conditions.
   B.   A complete application for the final plat shall be submitted no later
than one year after the date of approval of the preliminary plat, or a time as
provided in the developer's agreement. Otherwise, the preliminary plat approval
shall be considered void, unless an extension is requested in writing and, for
good cause, is granted by the city council.
   C.   The final plat applications for subsequent phases, as described by the
approved phasing plan, shall be submitted within one year of approval of the
final plat for the previous phase. An extension may be requested in writing for
city council approval.
   D.   In considering time extensions for final plat submittals, the city
council shall consider the reasons for the extension. If the developer is
unable to fulfill the schedule of the approved phasing plan, the city council
may consider allocating to a different development project the utility service
area that was committed to the next phase of the plat. The subject plat would
then wait until the following year for final plat or utility service area
approval for its next phase.
   E.   The final plat application shall incorporate all the conditions of city
council approval of the preliminary plat. Formal review of the final plat shall
not occur until such a time as a complete set of preliminary plat documents,
incorporating all city council conditions of approval, is received by the city.
In all other respects, the final plat shall substantially conform to the
preliminary plat. It may constitute only that portion of the approved
preliminary plat which the developer proposes to record and develop at that
time; provided, that such portion conforms with all the requirements of this
title; and further provided, that the remaining phases of the development are
platted as outlots.
   F.   Approval of the engineering specifications required by this title
pertaining to water supply, drainage, domestic wastewater, potable water,
street lighting, gas, electric service, cable and telephone, grading, roadway
standards, widths, and surfacing of streets shall be completed by the city
engineer and appropriate development contracts prepared prior to approval of
the final plat by the city council. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-8-2: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
   A.   A large scale, reduced scale eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x
17"), and electronic copies of the preliminary plat and of supporting documents
illustrating all changes and conditions that were required as part of
preliminary plat approval (number of copies to be determined by the zoning
administrator). This revised preliminary plat will provide the historical
record of the subdivision approval by which subsequent final plats shall be
considered.
   B.   One up to date (within 3 months) title insurance commitment for the
property being subdivided, as may be required by the city attorney.
   C.   One copy of any title declaration, conservation easements, deed
restrictions, restrictive covenants, homeowners' association documents, or
common interest community documents.
   D.   Documents and information necessary to fulfill the conditions of
approval of the preliminary plat.
   E.   Final plat general information, as follows:
      1.   Name of the subdivision. The first phase of a development shall be
called out as the "first addition". Subsequent phases shall be consecutively
numbered.
      2.   Location by section, township, range, county, and state as well as
descriptive boundaries of the subdivision based upon an accurate traverse,
giving angular and linear dimensions.
      3.   Scale (engineering only) not larger than one inch equals one hundred
feet (1" = 100').
      4.   North point indication.
      5.   The location of monuments shall be shown and described. Monuments
shall be at all property corners and at the ordinary high water level of all
wetlands.
      6.   Location and accurate dimensions of all lots, outlots, streets, and
other features. Lots and blocks shall be numbered.
      7.   A listing of the total area of each lot and outlot measured in gross
square feet per lot, area per block and total area of the plat.
      8.   A listing of the lot width of all lots, measured at the front yard
setback line.
      9.   The exact location, widths and names of all proposed streets.
      10.   The locations and widths of all easements to be dedicated.
      11.   Land dedicated as public park shall be labeled as outlot(s) on the
final plat and provide city access. The deed for said outlot(s) shall be given
to the city with the final plat. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
      12.   Name and address of the registered surveyor of the plat with
certification by such surveyor on the form required by Minnesota statutes
section 505.021, as may be amended. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
      13.   Statement dedicating all easements for installation and maintenance
of utilities and drainage facilities over, under, and along the areas
designated as drainage and utility easements, all of which provide city access.
      14.   Statement dedicating all streets or other rights of way to the
public.
      15.   Final grading and construction plans shall be prepared and
submitted in accordance with city standards.
      16.   Copies of permits from the department of natural resources (DNR),
corp of engineers, Minnesota pollution control agency (MPCA), department of
health, and other agencies as applicable. Such permits shall be required as
conditions of final plat approval.
      17.   Final stormwater management plan.
      18.   Final wetland report and mitigation plan.
      19.   Final tree preservation plan.
      20.   Development contracts.
         a.   The city engineer shall have a development financial requirement
worksheet prepared and attached to the development contract.
         b.   The developer shall meet with the city staff to finalize the
terms of the development contract.
         c.   Upon finalization of the development contract, the city
administrator shall have the final copy of the contract signed by all
appropriate parties. The development contract shall be recorded against the
property.
         d.   Financial securities shall be posted with the city as outlined in
the development contract.
         e.   Final grading and utility plans shall be approved by the city
engineer and made a part of the development contract.
            (1)   No grading shall be allowed until after approval of a
preliminary plat and a development contract for the grading.
            (2)   No construction/installation of sanitary sewer or water
facilities or streets shall be allowed until approval of a final plat and a
development contract for the sewer, water, and streets.
   F.   Additional final plat information as follows:
      1.   Accurate angular and linear dimensions for all lines, angles, and
curvatures used to describe boundaries, streets, easements, areas to be
reserved for public use, trees, and other important features; lot lines to show
dimensions in feet and hundredths.
      2.   An identification system for all lots and blocks.
      3.   True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines or
official monuments.
      4.   Municipal, township, county or section lines accurately tied to the
lines of the subdivision by distances and angles.
      5.   Radii, internal angles, points and curvatures, and lengths of all
areas.
      6.   Accurate location of all monuments. Pipes or steel rods shall be
placed at the corners of each lot and at the edge of wetlands.
      7.   Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be
dedicated or reserved for public use, or for the exclusive use of property
owners within the subdivision, with the purposes indicated therein.
      8.   Certification by a registered land surveyor, to the effect that the
plat represents a survey made by him and that monuments and markers shown
thereon exist as located and that all dimensional and geodetic details are
correct.
      9.   Notarized certification by the owner, and by any mortgage holder of
record, of the adoption of the plat, and the dedication of streets and other
public areas.
      10.   Approval by signature of city, township, and county officials
concerned with the approval of the plat.
      11.   Form for approval of the city council as follows:
Approved by the Council of the City of Elko New Market, this          day of
                , 20     .
Signed       (Mayor)
        (City Clerk)
 
(Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-8-3: REVIEW; APPROVAL OR DENIAL:
After the preliminary plat has been approved, a final plat shall be submitted
for review as follows:
   A.   The final plat application shall be considered to be officially filed
when the zoning administrator has received and examined the application and has
determined that the application is complete.
   B.   The following requirements shall be met before consideration of the
final plat by the city council:
      1.   The final plat shall substantially conform to the approved
preliminary plat and phasing plan.
      2.   City attorney approval of the status of title/property ownership
related to the final plat.
      3.   Completed development contract including all required financial
securities and time frame for final plat and final grading completion.
      4.   Conditions attached to approval of the preliminary plat shall be
fulfilled or secured by the development contract, as appropriate.
      5.   All fees, charges, and escrow related to the preliminary or final
plat shall be paid in full.
   C.   The city staff receiving final plat copies shall, as appropriate,
submit reports to the city council within ten (10) working days, documenting
and expressing their recommendation on the final plat.
   D.   The city council shall act on the final plat by motion. The motion
shall include findings of fact supporting the approval or denial, and shall be
entered in the proceedings of the city council. The lack of a simple majority
council vote to affirmatively approve the final plat shall be a denial of the
requested application.
   E.   Sewer, water, and streets shall only be installed in the area included
in the approved final plat. No construction/installation of sanitary sewer or
water facilities or streets shall be allowed until:
      1.   Approval of a final plat.
      2.   Approval of a development contract addressing, among other things,
sewer, water, and streets.
      3.   Recording of the development contract.
   F.   The city council may deny the subdivision if it makes any one or more
of the following findings:
      1.   The proposed subdivision is in direct conflict with adopted
applicable general and specific comprehensive plans of the city.
      2.   That the physical characteristics of the site, including, but not
limited to, topography, existing vegetation, percolation rate, soil conditions,
susceptibility to erosion and siltation, susceptibility to flooding, water
storage, drainage and retention, are such that the site is not suitable for the
type of development, design, or use contemplated.
      3.   That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of
development.
      4.   That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are
likely to cause substantial environmental damage.
      5.   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements are
likely to cause serious public health problems.
      6.   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will
conflict with easements of record or with easements established by judgment of
a court.
      7.   The proposed subdivision is in conflict with city tree preservation
requirements. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-8-4: FORM AND CONTENT OF FINAL PLAT:
The final plat shall be of the form and content as prescribed in the Minnesota
"Land Surveyors Association Plat Manual Of Minnesota Guidelines", as may be
amended, and by state statute. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-8-5: RECORDING FINAL PLAT:
   A.   After approval of the final plat by the city council, the developer
shall submit three (3) full size mylar copies of the final plat, one eleven
inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") reduction of the final plat and dedication
page, and one electronic copy in a format compatible with the city's computer
system.
   B.   After approval and execution of the development contract, the contract
shall be recorded.
   C.   The developer shall record the plat within ninety (90) days after the
date of approval. Otherwise, the approval of the final plat shall be considered
void, unless the developer requests an extension, in writing, and receives
approval from the city council. The subdivider shall, immediately upon
recording, furnish the city clerk with a print and reproducible tracing of the
final plat showing evidence of the recording. No building permits shall be
issued for construction of any structure on any lot in said plat until the city
has received evidence of the plat being recorded by the county.
      1.   When the land for which the final plat abuts a state highway, county
road, or county state aid highway, a certificate or other evidence showing
submission of the preliminary plat to the Minnesota department of
transportation and/or county highway department shall be filed with the county
recorder of deeds, along with the final plat.
      2.   When the final plat includes outlots to be used for drainage or
other city purposes, such outlots shall be dedicated to the city prior to the
issuance of building permits and shall provide city access.
   D.   The recording of final plats of multiphased plats shall be addressed as
part of the development contract. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-8-6: RECORD PLANS AND MAPPING:
Upon completion of construction of roads, sanitary sewer, water mains, storm
sewer facilities, grading, and tree preservation, the developer shall submit to
the city engineer field marked construction plans showing changes in the work,
and one electronic copy of the original plans in a format compatible with the
city's computer system. The city engineer shall prepare record drawings at the
developer's expense using the data provided as well as supplemental survey
information to be gathered by the city engineer. The city engineer will also
update city base and utility maps to include the new subdivision and
infrastructure improvements at the developer's expense. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
CHAPTER 9
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
12-9-1: Compliance With City Regulations
12-9-2: Land Requirements
12-9-3: Blocks
12-9-4: Lots
12-9-5: Streets And Alleys
12-9-5-1: Street Standards
12-9-6: Easements
12-9-7: Public Utilities
12-9-8: Land Dedication For Public Sites And Open Spaces Or Fee In Lieu
12-9-9: Tree Inventory, Preservation And Replacement
12-9-10: Environmental Protection
12-9-1: COMPLIANCE WITH CITY REGULATIONS:
A proposed subdivision shall conform to the comprehensive plan, to related
policies adopted by the city, and to the city zoning ordinance, as may be
amended. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-9-2: LAND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided.
No plan shall be approved if the site is not suitable for the purposes proposed
by reason of potential flooding, topography, adverse soil conditions, rock
formations, or wetlands.
   B.   Proposed subdivisions shall be coordinated with surrounding properties
and/or neighborhoods so that the city, as a whole, may develop efficiently and
harmoniously. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-9-3: BLOCKS:
   A.   Length, Width And Acreage:
      1.   The length, width, and acreage of blocks shall be sufficient to
accommodate the size of lots required for the area by the zoning ordinance and
to provide for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street
design.
      2.   The maximum length of blocks shall be one thousand two hundred feet
(1,200') and the minimum length six hundred feet (600'). Blocks over nine
hundred feet (900') long may require pedestrianways at least twenty feet (20')
wide at their approximate center. The use of additional pedestrianways to
schools, parks, and other destinations may be required.
      3.   The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to allow two (2)
tiers of lots of appropriate depth, except where topography or other conditions
render the block depth unreasonable.
   B.   Arrangement: A block shall be so designed as to provide two (2) tiers
of lots unless it adjoins a major collector street, arterial street, railroad,
thoroughfare, watercourse or park, or where topographic or other conditions
render the block arrangement unreasonable. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-9-4: LOTS:
   A.   Area, Width And Depth:
      1.   The minimum lot area, width and depth shall not be less than that
established by the city zoning ordinance in effect at the time of the
preliminary plat application.
      2.   Minimum lot area shall consist of buildable land exclusive of
wetlands, utility transmission easements and pipeline easements that encumber
lot development.
      3.   All lots shall have the minimum width measured at the minimum front
yard setback.
   B.   Public Street Frontage: All lots shall have frontage on a public street
that provides the required lot width at the minimum front yard setback.
   C.   Side Lot Lines: Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right
angles to street lines or radial to curved street lines.
   D.   Lot Access:
      1.   Single- And Two-Family Lot Access: All new single- and two- family
urban lots shall be designed to receive access from a local street. Access to
minor collectors is discouraged, but may be allowed if access to a local street
is impractical. Direct lot access from an arterial or major collector street is
prohibited.
      2.   Commercial, Industrial And Multiple-Family Lot Access: New
commercial, industrial, and multiple-family lots fronting on an arterial or
major collector street shall be designed to minimize the number of direct
access points through the following methods listed in preferential order. If
the highest preference is not possible, the next preference shall be utilized
until an access method is possible.
         a.   Access from a local street.
         b.   Frontage road serving multiple properties.
         c.   Frontage driveway or connected parking lot with cross easements
serving multiple properties.
         d.   Shared driveways.
         e.   One driveway access, no closer than two hundred feet (200') to
another driveway, that meets the city's minimum spacing standards from a street
intersection. All driveways shall be reviewed for consistency with the city
access management guidelines.
   E.   Setback Lines: Setback or building lines shall be shown on all lots
intended for residential use and shall not be less than the setback required by
the city zoning ordinance.
   F.   Watercourses And Buffers: Watercourses and buffers shall be contained
within outlots.
   G.   Grading For Drainage: Lots shall be graded so as to provide drainage
away from building locations and shall conform to the approved final grading
plan. Stormwater drainage from an improved lot shall not be directed at an
adjoining property at a rate above a predevelopment condition except where
drainage is directed to a designed drainage easement or stormwater management
system.
   H.   Natural Features: In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be
shown for all natural features such as tree growth, watercourses, historic
places or similar conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and
stability to the proposed development.
   I.   Butt Lots: Butt lots within subdivisions shall be discouraged. Where
such lots must be used to fit particular design, they shall be platted at least
twenty percent (20%) wider than the average width of interior lots in the
block.
   J.   Flag Lots: Flag lots are prohibited.
   K.   Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage, or lots with frontage on two (2)
parallel streets, shall not be permitted except where lots back on major
collector or arterial streets, city or state highways, or where topographic or
other conditions render subdividing otherwise unreasonable. Additional lot
depth and a minimum twenty foot (20') wide landscaped buffer yard shall be
provided where a lot backs onto a major collector or arterial street.
   L.   Irregular Shaped Lots: On single-family residential lots determined to
be irregular in shape (e.g., triangular), the developer shall demonstrate to
the city an ability to properly place principal buildings and accessory
structures upon the site which are compatible in size and character to the
surrounding area.
   M.   Building Expansion: All single-family residential lots shall be
designed in consideration of potentials for buildings accommodating garages,
porches and decks, etc., without need for setback variance. Said buildings and
structures are to be compatible in size and character with the surrounding
area.
   N.   Lot Remnants/Outlots: All remnants of lots below minimum lot size left
over after subdividing a larger tract shall be added to adjacent lots rather
than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. Outlots may be platted within a
subdivision to delineate future development phases, commonly owned open spaces
or land to be dedicated to the public for park, drainage and utility or other
public purpose. The outlot shall be sized in a manner to accommodate its
intended use. An outlot shall be platted into a lot and block prior to issuance
of a building permit. No building permits shall be issued for an outlot except
for city structures allowed as a recreational or utility component in an open
space area. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-9-5: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
The arrangement, character, extension, width, grade, and location of all
streets and alleys shall conform to the City Engineering Manual and
Comprehensive Plan. Such streets and alleys shall be considered in their
relation to existing and planned streets, to reasonable circulation of traffic,
to topographical conditions, to runoff of stormwater, to public convenience and
safety, and in relation to proposed uses of land served by the streets. (Ord.
29, 10-24-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
12-9-5-1: STREET STANDARDS:
   A.   Street Connections:
      1.   Except for cul-de-sacs, streets shall connect with streets already
dedicated in adjoining subdivisions, or provide for future connections to
adjoining unsubdivided tracts, or shall be a reasonable projection of streets
in the nearest subdivided tracts. The arrangement of thoroughfares and
collector streets shall be considered in their relation to the reasonable
circulation of traffic, topographic conditions, runoff of stormwater, public
convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses
of the area to be served.
      2.   The arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make
provisions for the proper projection of streets into adjoining areas by
carrying the new streets to the boundaries of the new subdivision at
appropriate locations approved by the City Engineer.
   B.   Temporary Cul-De-Sacs: In those instances where a street is terminated
pending future extension in conjunction with future subdivision and more than
one hundred fifty feet (150') between the dead end and the nearest
intersection, a temporary turnaround facility shall be provided at the closed
end, in conformance with cul-de-sac and applicable Fire Code requirements. The
temporary cul-de-sac shall be placed inside a temporary roadway easement if it
is located outside the street right-of-way. At such time as such a street is
extended, the acreage covered by the turnaround outside the boundaries of the
extended street shall revert in ownership to the property owner fronting on the
temporary turnaround. The temporary cul-de-sac shall be surfaced in bitumen and
signed as a future through street to alert the public that the road is planned
to continue into the next development upon future subdivision. Financial
security shall be required for removal or restoration as determined by the City
Engineer.
   C.   Resubdivision Of Large Lots And Parcels: When a tract is subdivided
into larger than normal building lots or parcels, such lots or parcels shall be
so arranged as to permit the logical location and openings of future streets
and appropriate resubdivision, with provision for adequate utility connections
for such resubdivision.
   D.   Subdivisions Abutting Major Rights-Of-Way: Wherever the proposed
subdivision contains or is adjacent to the right-of- way of a U.S. or State
highway, County road, or local collector street, provision may be made for a
service street approximately parallel and adjacent to the boundary of such
right-of-way; provided, that due consideration is given to proper circulation
design, setbacks from an intersection on the major rights-of-way, or for a
street at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of land between such
street and right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due
consideration of the minimum distance required for approach connections to
future grade separations, and for lot depths. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
   E.   Widths: Right-of-way widths and pavement widths (face to face) of curb
shall be as follows:
Classification          Right-Of-Way Width Pavement Width
Major collector/parkway 100 feet           Determined by the City Engineer
Classification                 Right-Of-Way Width Pavement Width
Major collector/parkway        100 feet           Determined by the City
                                                  Engineer
Minor collector                80 feet            38 feet
Local street (residential zone 60 feet            28 feet
areas)
Local street (commercial zoned 60 feet            32 feet
areas)
Service road                   50 feet            28 feet
Cul-de-sac street              60 feet            28 feet
Cul-de-sac radius              60 feet            45 feet
 
      1.   For local streets lying on the border between residentially zoned
areas and commercially zoned areas, the local street width requirement shall be
made by the City Engineer. (Ord. 160, 8-24-2017)
   F.   Street Intersections: Insofar as practical, streets shall intersect at
right angles, and in no case shall the angle formed by the intersection of two
(2) streets be less than sixty degrees (60°). Intersections having more than
four (4) corners shall be prohibited. Adequate land for future intersections
and interchange construction needs shall be dedicated.
   G.   Deflections: When connecting street lines deflect from each other, or
when a single street deflects at one point by more than ten degrees (10°), they
shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to ensure a sight distance
of not less than five hundred feet (500') for arterials, three hundred feet
(300') for collectors, and two hundred feet (200') for all other streets. The
city council may allow greater or lesser sight distances and of such radii as
the city engineer shall determine for special cases.
   H.   Street Intersection Offsets: Street intersection jogs shall have a
centerline offset of one hundred fifty feet (150') or more when applied to
minor streets and service streets. In all other cases, they shall be avoided.
   I.   Tangents: A tangent of at least one hundred feet (100') shall be
introduced between points of reverse curves of arterial and collector streets.
   J.   Cul-De-Sacs: The maximum length of a street terminating in a cul-de-sac
shall be five hundred feet (500') measured from the centerline of the street of
origin to the end of the right of way.
   K.   Centerline Gradients: All centerline gradients shall be at least five-
tenths percent (0.5%) and shall not exceed eight percent (8%) unless approved
by the city engineer.
   L.   Vertical Curves: Changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves
and shall meet the requirements for the design speed of the roadway.
   M.   Marginal Access Streets: Marginal access streets shall be so aligned
that their use by through traffic is discouraged.
   N.   Service Streets: Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or
planned major thoroughfare or a railroad right of way, the city council may
require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of the right of way
for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of
through and local traffic. The service streets shall be located at a distance
from the major thoroughfare or railroad right of way suitable for the
appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential
districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts.
The distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of
approach grades and future grade separations.
   O.   Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential
to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of this title, and except where the city council finds it
practicable to require dedication of the other half when adjoining property is
subdivided. In such cases, the developer shall provide an escrow in an amount
determined necessary to construct the full street. Wherever there is a half
street adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall
be platted within the tract prior to the granting of access.
   P.   Private Streets: Except as may be allowed through planned unit
development, private streets shall not be approved nor shall public
improvements be approved for any private streets.
   Q.   Reserve Strips: Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be
prohibited except under conditions approved by the city council.
   R.   Platting Of Small Tracts: In the platting of small tracts of land
fronting on a limited access highway where there is no convenient access to
existing entrances and where access from such plat would be closer than one-
half (1/2) mile from an existing access point, a temporary entrance permit for
a period not exceeding two (2) years may be granted. Provision shall be made in
such plats for the connection of roads to neighboring land. As the neighboring
land is platted and developed, and access becomes possible at a preferred
location, such temporary entrance permits shall become void at the discretion
of the city.
   S.   Access To Arterial And Collector Streets: Access of local streets onto
arterial and collector streets shall be in accordance with the engineering
manual.
   T.   Right Of Way Dedication:
      1.   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of
inadequate width, sufficient additional right of way width and street
reconstruction shall be provided within the subdivision to meet the standards
of this title.
      2.   Additional rights of way and roadway widths may be required by the
council to promote public safety and convenience when special conditions
require it.
      3.   All proposed streets shown on the plat shall be in conformity with
city, county and state plans and standards and be offered for dedication as
public streets unless otherwise determined by the city council.
   U.   Grading: The full width of the right of way of all streets and alleys
dedicated in the plat shall be graded to the lines and cross sections as shown
on the grading plan submitted to and approved by the city engineer. Exceptions
to the width of grading may be granted where topography or tree cover warrant.
   V.   Soil Investigation: To determine subgrade soils classification and
bearing capacity of the soils in the proposed development, a soil investigation
report shall be prepared under the supervision of a soils engineer associated
with a qualified soils testing service and be provided to the city engineer.
The report shall contain the design recommendation for the street section based
on seven (7) ton design. In proposed streets, soils investigation shall be
performed at intervals not to exceed five hundred (500) linear feet. The soil
borings completed during the investigation shall be at least ten feet (10') in
depth below the proposed finished grade and five feet (5') below the proposed
elevations of utilities. Groundwater levels shall be reported at each boring.
Elevations shall be in mean sea level datum. Locations of borings shall be
measured in the field and accurately shown on the plans.
   W.   Base And Surfacing: All streets shall be improved with a concrete or
bituminous surface. Pavement sections shall be in accordance with city standard
detail plates. Except in the case of model homes, as may be approved by the
city, no building permit shall be issued for any lot or parcel in a subdivision
prior to the installation of the base course of bitumen. The wear course of
bitumen shall be placed following the construction season or, if so designated
by the city council, up to two (2) years from the date of final plat approval.
Exceptions to this subsection may be granted by the city council at their
discretion as part of a development contract.
   X.   Curb And Gutter: All curb shall be concrete with integral gutter. The
standard curb shall be type B618 in accordance with city standards.
   Y.   Boulevards: All boulevards shall be sodded.
   Z.   Sidewalks: Concrete sidewalks are required on one side of residential
streets and may be required on both sides of the streets with the outside edge
located one foot (1') from the property line, and on pedestrianways as directed
by the city council. Sidewalks shall be installed prior to the installation of
the bituminous wear course. The developer shall notify all lot purchasers of
sidewalk construction plans.
   AA.   Driveways: Concrete driveways shall be constructed from the curb to
the property line. In cases where driveways are constructed after curbing and
sidewalks are in place, the sidewalk for the width of the driveway shall be
reconstructed to driveway specifications. Where driveways shall be permitted to
access onto thoroughfare or collector streets, provisions shall be made for an
on site turnaround area which would provide access to the thoroughfare or
collector street in a forward direction. All driveway aprons between the back
of the curb and the sidewalk shall be concrete.
   BB.   Lighting: Streetlights conforming to city specifications shall be
installed at the locations approved by the city engineer. Easements may be
required along property lines from utility easements on rear lot lines to
rights of way so as to provide for streetlight intervals not to exceed three
hundred fifty feet (350'). The engineering manual provides specific
requirements.
   CC.   Signs: All signs shall be installed by the developer in accordance
with the Minnesota "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" and the "City Of
Elko New Market Engineering Manual".
   DD.   Street Trees: In all subdivisions, street and yard trees shall be
planted in accordance with applicable landscaping and screening requirements of
the zoning ordinance, rights of way ordinances and engineering manual. (Ord.
29, 10-24-2008)
12-9-6: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Lot Lines: Drainage and utility easements at least ten feet (10') wide
shall be provided on all lot lines (see diagram below). These easements may be
centered on common rear and side lot lines. At a minimum, these easements shall
be ten feet (10') wide along all lot lines on streets and along all boundaries
with land not being developed. The easements shall provide continuity of
alignment from block to block. At deflection points, an easement for a pole
line anchor shall be provided where necessary.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c319d9474cf3d6d21aee248db1bb8796c21e98fc/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1761.gif]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   B.   Drainage Channels: Easements shall be provided along each side of the
centerline of any waterway or drainage channel. The easements shall be of a
sufficient width to provide for proper maintenance and protection of the
waterway or channel, stormwater runoff, and the installation and maintenance of
drainage systems. Such easements for drainage purposes shall be of a width
determined by the city engineer and shall be provided city access.
   C.   Utilities: Easements shall be provided for all sanitary sewer, water
main, and stormwater facilities. The easements shall be of a sufficient width
to provide for city access and proper maintenance, replacement, and protection
of the facilities. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-9-7: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
   A.   Water Mains:
      1.   Water mains shall be a minimum of eight inches (8") in diameter.
Water mains shall be ductile iron pipe and shall meet all the requirements of
the City Engineers Association Of Minnesota standard utility specification for
water main and service line installation and American Water Works Association
standard.
      2.   Mains shall be valved at intervals not to exceed eight hundred feet
(800'). Valve type shall be in accordance with city standard specifications.
      3.   "Dead end" mains shall be looped if exceeding the allowed length of
a cul-de-sac. The distribution system may require installing a larger main to
benefit the entire water service in the city. The city engineer shall determine
location and size of mains larger than eight inches (8") in residential areas.
In commercial/industrial areas, water mains up to twelve inches (12") may be
required to meet the normal distribution required in the development. The cost
of normal distribution size and appurtenances shall be the responsibility of
the developer. Size of pipe over and above the normal shall be installed and
financed in accordance with city policy.
   B.   Water Supply: New individual wells are not permitted. Water flowing
through the meter will not result in any sanitary sewer user fees.
   C.   Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrant installation shall be pursuant to plans
approved by the city engineer and the city fire department and shall be located
in accordance with insurance service office (ISO) and international fire code
standards. Hydrants shall be placed at the end of all "dead ends" and cul-de-
sacs and at street intersections. Hydrant type and installation shall be in
accordance with city standard specifications.
   D.   Sanitary Sewer: Sanitary sewer shall be a minimum of eight inch (8")
pipe and shall be of a material approved for use in the city by the city
engineer. Main size will be determined by the sewage flow and grade in
accordance with the city sanitary sewer plan.
      1.   Size of pipe shall be determined by lateral service and/or trunk
service. Lateral service shall be the responsibility of, and cost shall be
borne by, the serviced property. The incremental cost to install trunk sewer in
lieu of lateral sewer will be borne by the city for developments not deemed
premature and provided sufficient funds are available in the trunk sewer fund.
      2.   All house services shall be installed in accordance with the city's
standard specifications.
      3.   Electronic final design plans shall be submitted to the city to
allow the completion of record plans by the city engineer.
   E.   Sanitation: Water and sewer lines shall be installed and connected to
the public system to serve all lots within the proposed subdivision under the
provisions of applicable statutes and ordinances. The city council shall
require the installation of water and sewer mains at the applicant's expense or
under the provisions of applicable statutes and ordinances.
   F.   Underground Utilities: Telephone, electric, cable, and gas service
lines and/or other public utilities are to be placed underground in accordance
with the city's rights of way ordinance.
   G.   Installation Of Road Crossing Conduits: Conduits shall be installed for
all road crossings by the developer in cooperation with the utilities prior to
street construction. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-9-8: LAND DEDICATION FOR PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES OR FEE IN LIEU:
   A.   Required: As a prerequisite to final plat approval, and at the sole
determination by the city, applicants and/or developers shall dedicate land for
parks, recreational facilities as defined and outlined in Minnesota statutes
section 471.191, playgrounds, public open spaces, wetlands, or trails and/or
shall make a cash contribution to the city's park and trail fund roughly
related to the anticipated effect of the plat on the park and trail system and
based on the average fair market value of the unplatted land for which park
fees have not already been paid. The amounts listed in this section are the
city's best estimate of the dedication or cash contribution needed to offset
the effect on those systems. The requirement may also be satisfied with a
combination of land and cash if approved by the city council.
   B.   Land Eligibility:
      1.   The land dedicated for parks and trails shall be in addition to
property dedicated for streets, alleys, roads, sewers, and water facilities,
storm water drainage and holding areas or ponds and similar utilities and
improvements. Land to be dedicated shall be reasonably suitable for its
intended use as determined by the city and shall be at a location convenient to
the public to be served. Factors used in evaluating the adequacy of proposed
park and recreation areas shall include size, shape, topography, geology,
hydrology, tree cover, access, and location.
      2.   To be eligible for park dedication credit, land dedicated is to be
located outside of drainageways, wetlands, floodplains or ponding areas. Grades
exceeding twelve percent (12%) or areas unsuitable for park development shall
not be considered for dedication as defined by the city engineer. Park land to
be dedicated shall be above the ordinary high water level as approved by the
city engineer. Land with trash, junk, pollutants and unwanted structures is not
acceptable.
      3.   Land area conveyed or dedicated to the city shall not be used in
calculating density requirements of the city zoning ordinance and shall be in
addition to and not in lieu of open space requirements.
      4.   Where private open space for park and recreation purposes is
provided in a proposed subdivision, such areas shall not be used for credit
against the requirement of dedication for park and recreation purposes, unless
the city council finds it is in the public interest to do so.
      5.   The park and/or trail dedication requirements of this section shall
be in addition to, and not in lieu of, sidewalk installation requirements of
the city.
   C.   Applicant Conference: The applicant shall confer with city staff and
the park and recreation commission at the time the preliminary plat is under
consideration to secure a recommendation as to the location of any property
that should be dedicated to the public, such as parks, playgrounds or other
public property for recreational use. The preliminary plat shall show the
location and dimensions of all areas to be dedicated in this manner. Such
contribution requirement recommendation(s) will be sent to the planning
commission for review and comment and subsequently to the city council for
their approval.
   D.   Consistency With Plans:
      1.   When a proposed park, playground, recreational area, or other public
ground has been indicated in the city's official map, comprehensive plan, or
parks and trails plan, and is located in whole or in part within a proposed
plat, it shall be dedicated to the city. If the applicant elects not to
dedicate an area in excess of the land required hereunder for a proposed public
site that the city feels is in the public interest to acquire, the city may
consider acquiring the excess land through purchase or condemnation.
      2.   All land proposed for trail dedication shall be subject to
recommendations of the park and recreation commission and approval by the city
council. Such lands shall also correspond and conform with the city's parks and
trails plan.
   E.   Dedication And Cash Contribution Requirements: The city, upon
consideration of the particular type of development, may require that a lesser
parcel of land should be dedicated due to particular features of the
development. In such cases, a cash contribution shall be required above the
land dedication to ensure that compensation is received for the full amount of
the impact on the city's park and trail system.
      1.   Land Dedications: In all new subdivisions where land dedication is
to be required, eight percent (8%) of the net area subdivided, or a different
percentage as the city council determines necessary as a result of the
subdivision approval, shall be dedicated for public parks, trails, or open
space.
      2.   Cash Contributions: When a subdivision is proposed, the developer
shall make a land dedication for public park use, or the city may require a fee
in lieu of such land dedication consistent with the city's fee schedule adopted
by ordinance.
      3.   Combined Land Dedication/Cash Contributions: The city may elect, at
its sole discretion, to receive a combination of cash, land, and development of
the land for park and/or trail use. The city shall determine the cash
contribution that would be required under subsection E2 of this section, as if
no land dedication were to be made. From this amount, the city shall subtract
the fair market value of the buildable land that the city requires as a
dedication and the value of the development of the land.
      4.   Fair Market Value: Fair market value shall be determined as of the
time of final subdivision approval in accordance with the following:
         a.   The city and the developer may agree as to the fair market value,
or the fair market value may be based upon a correct appraisal submitted to the
city by the subdivider at the subdivider's expense. If the city disputes such
appraisal, the city may, at the subdivider's expense, obtain an appraisal of
the property by a qualified real estate appraiser, which appraisal shall be
conclusive evidence of the fair market value of the land.
      5.   Planned Unit Developments: Planned unit developments with mixed land
uses shall make cash and/or land contributions in accordance with this section
based upon the percentages of land devoted to the various uses.
      6.   Cash Payment Requirements:
         a.   Park cash contributions shall be calculated and established at
the time of final plat approval. The city council may require the payment at
the time of final plat approval or at a later time under terms agreed upon in
the development agreement. Delayed payment shall include interest at a rate set
by the city.
         b.   Cash contributions for parks and trails shall be deposited in the
city's park fund and or trail fund and shall only be used for park acquisition
or development and trail acquisition or development as determined by the city.
Additionally, said funds may be utilized anywhere within the city park and
trail systems.
      7.   Replatted Property: Property being replatted with the same number of
lots and same number of dwelling units shall be exempt from all park land
dedication requirements. If the number of lots or the number of dwelling units
is increased, or if land outside the previously recorded plat is added, then
the park land dedication and/or cash contribution shall be based on the
additional lots or on the additional land being added to the plat.
      8.   Park Maintenance: When land is dedicated and deeded to the city for
park purposes, it shall be the responsibility of the city to maintain such
dedicated property. Park dedication payments shall not be used for ongoing or
maintenance of parks, recreational facilities, playgrounds, trails, or
wetlands.
      9.   Platting Requirements: Land dedication to the city shall be in the
form of outlots and shall provide adequate public access (as determined by the
city). Such outlots shall be deeded to the city by warranty deed and shall be
free and clear of all liens and encumbrances including special assessments.
      10.   If the developer or applicant disputes the cash fee in lieu of land
dedication imposed by the city, a plat application may proceed as if the fee
had been paid, pending a decision on the appeal of dispute over the proposed
fee in lieu of dedication if:
         a.    The applicant puts the City on written notice of the proposed
fee in lieu of dedication.
         b.    Prior to the City's final decision on the application, the fee
in lieu of dedication is deposited in escrow, and
         c.    The applicant appeals under Minnesota State Statute 462.361
within 60 days of approval of the application.
      If such appeal is not filed by the deadline, or the applicant does not
prevail on the appeal, then the funds paid into the escrow must be transferred
to the City. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008; amd. Ord. 234, 7-22-2021)
12-9-9: TREE INVENTORY, PRESERVATION AND REPLACEMENT:
The following requirements for protecting significant trees, as defined in
section
12-2-2 of this title, shall be imposed upon all new subdivisions:
   A.   Tree Protection: Subdividers are required to protect a minimum of forty
percent (40%) of the existing significant trees on the property. If two (2) or
more trees are preserved on any lot in the front yard, the landscape plan
requirements of two (2) 21/2-inch caliper trees is waived for that specific
lot.
   B.   Tree Inventory/Preservation Plan: All subdividers are required to
submit a tree inventory and plan for review and approval as part of the
development process. All tree inventories shall be prepared by a licensed land
surveyor and a forester or a landscape architect and include the following:
      1.   The location of all existing significant trees on the property. Each
tree shall be identified by a unique identification number.
      2.   The significant trees (40 percent or greater) proposed to be
protected as part of the development. Significant trees intended for removal
shall be clearly distinguishable from those intended for preservation. Proposed
lot lines, building pads, driveways, streets, easements, and any areas in which
tree disruption is anticipated shall be shown.
      3.   All required plantings, including:
         a.   All trees for landscaping, screening, or other requirements.
Identify areas where existing trees are being proposed to meet requirements;
and
         b.   If the developer intends to remove greater than sixty percent
(60%) of the existing trees, the location and size of replacement trees shall
be required.
      4.   The final tree design of all lots showing the significant trees
intended for preservation and any required plantings.
      5.   A matrix listing the unique identification number for the
significant tree, the species or common name, the proposed lot and block on
which the tree resides, the size in caliper inches, and an indicator as to
whether the tree is intended for removal or preservation. The matrix shall be
sorted by lot and block number and conclude with a tabulation of the following:
         a.   Total number of significant trees on the site.
         b.   Total number of significant trees proposed for removal.
         c.   Total number of significant trees proposed for preservation.
         d.   Calculation of the percentage proposed for removal.
         e.   If the percentage for removal exceeds sixty percent (60%), the
number of trees which exceed the allowed removal.
   C.   Tree Preservation Plan Updates: Tree preservation plans may need to be
updated throughout the construction of developments due to changes in the
grading plans and other construction related events. Additionally, a finalized
inventory shall be submitted by the developer upon completion of a development
to verify all requirements have been met. Inventory updates shall be subject to
the following requirements:
      1.   Updated inventories shall require that all significant trees on the
site are examined by a forestry specialist, and that all impacted trees are
identified. Impacted trees shall be identified as removed on the updated
inventory.
      2.   Updated inventories shall be subject to the same requirements and
submitted in the same format as the original inventory called for by this
section.
      3.   For lots that have obtained a certificate of occupancy, the updated
inventory shall reflect the trees on the lots as identified on a final tree
survey or other approved method.
      4.   If an updated inventory indicates the actual removal exceeded the
planned removal as approved with the development, the developer shall be
required to provide additional replacement trees as outlined by this section.
      5.   If the revised inventory indicates fewer trees have been removed
than planned, the developer shall receive a credit for the additional caliper
inches preserved. Said credit may only be used towards planned future removal
of trees. Under no circumstances shall this credit be used to eliminate
required plantings as part of the development, nor can said credits be used to
avoid existing obligations to ongoing or completed construction.
   D.   Protection During Development: The subdivider is responsible for all
trees on a site until a certificate of occupancy is granted, and for trees on
the remainder of the property until all improvements are accepted. A tree
protection plan shall be provided, as follows:
      1.   Installation of snow fencing or polyethylene laminar safety netting
at the drip line or critical root zones of groups of trees to be saved.
      2.   Installation of signage at all tree protection areas that instruct
workers to stay out.
      3.   Installation of erosion control measures.
      4.   Tree protection measures shall be kept in place and in good
condition until all grading and construction activity has stopped.
      5.   Prevention of soil chemistry change due to concrete washout and
leakage or spillage of toxic materials such as fuels or paints.
   E.   Protection Time Line: Trees identified on the tree preservation plan
shall be protected throughout the development process. The city's enforcement
of the tree preservation plan shall cease upon the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
   F.   Replacement Rate Requirements: Planned and unplanned tree removal shall
be subject to the following requirements:
      1.   Planned Removal Authorized By City: Trees planned for removal beyond
the allowed sixty percent (60%) shall be subject to a required replacement as
defined by this section. For every tree planned to be lost beyond the allowed
sixty percent (60%), a replacement tree shall be required at a rate of one inch
(1") for every one inch (1") of tree loss.
      2.   Unplanned Removal Authorized By City: In the event a tree tagged for
preservation is identified for removal in conjunction with a permitted
activity, the required replacement shall be one caliper inch for every one
caliper inch of tree loss.
      3.   Unauthorized Removal: In the event a tree identified for
preservation is removed without authorization, the required replacement shall
be two (2) caliper inches for every one caliper inch of tree loss.
   G.   Replacement Type Requirements: Replacement trees shall be subject to
the following requirements:
      1.   Deciduous trees: Diameter not less than two and one-half (2.5)
caliper inches (measured at 36 inches from grade).
      2.   Coniferous trees: Not less than six feet (6') in height.
      3.   Replacement trees shall be species similar to the trees which were
destroyed or damaged or shall be the species identified in title 11, chapter
10, "Landscaping Requirements", of this code. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
      4.   The trees listed in subsection
11-10-3A5 of this code are unacceptable because of structural instability,
susceptibility to disease, or because they are invasive species. (Ord. 29, 10-
24-2008; Ord. 45, 9-24-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
      5.   Replacement trees shall not be placed on easements or street rights
of way. Prior to planting replacement trees, the applicant shall submit, for
city review and approval, the locations of the replacement trees.
   H.   Prohibited Actions:
      1.   No soil disturbance shall occur within the subdivision until the
tree protection, preservation, replacement, and/or reforestation plan(s) is
approved, financial securities have been submitted and development agreement
approved, and tree protection measures are in place on site.
      2.   Construction staging areas and areas for the storage of equipment
and stockpiling of materials shall not be within tree protection areas.
      3.   Fill shall not be placed against tree trunks, under the drip line,
or in critical root zones of trees to be saved.
      4.   Pruning of oak trees shall take place from September 15 through
December 31. If wounding of oak trees occurs, a nontoxic tree wound dressing
shall be applied immediately. Excavators shall have a nontoxic tree wound
dressing with them on the development site.
   I.   Security For Tree Preservation And Replacement: To ensure tree
preservation efforts are successful, the following shall be required:
      1.   Subdividers subject to this section shall be required to provide the
city with a letter of credit, cash, or escrow, in favor of the city, in an
amount of one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the tree replacement/
planting estimate.
      2.   All replacement, reforestation, and other required plantings shall
be planted during an ideal planting season for a particular species, unless
otherwise authorized by the city. The developer shall submit a usable inventory
of trees planted during an applicable planting season.
      3.   All trees planted during a specified planting season shall be
warranted through two (2) complete growing seasons. The city shall inspect the
trees listed in the developer's inventory from the previous year to ensure the
health of the tree.
      4.   As trees are declared healthy by the city upon inspection, the
developer may request reductions to the security amount, provided adequate
funds remain equal to one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the cost to
complete the remaining work. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-9-10: ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION:
All applications for subdivision shall comply with the applicable environmental
protection provisions of title 11, chapter 11 of this code. (Ord. 29, 10-24-
2008)
CHAPTER 10
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
12-10-1: Required Public Improvements
12-10-2: Monuments
12-10-3: Installation Of Improvements
12-10-4: Utility Area And Unit Charges
12-10-5: Financial Guarantee
12-10-6: Development Contract
12-10-7: Improvements Completed Prior To Approval Of Final Plat
12-10-8: Trunk Facilities
12-10-9: Alternate Installation
12-10-10: Construction Plans, Inspection And Warranty
12-10-11: Certificate Of Occupancy
12-10-12: Maintenance Of Improvements
12-10-1: REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   No final plat shall be approved by the city council until improvements
of the land and construction of streets, sidewalks and trails, together with
all other necessary facilities in the plat, have been designed and
satisfactorily arranged in accordance with regulations outlined for land
improvement and construction and conditions of subdivision approval. The
developer shall be required to provide the improvements listed in this chapter
installed in accordance with the engineering policy, standards and
specifications, as may be amended. All improvements shall be subject to
inspection and approval by, and accomplished in such sequence as is determined
by, the city, via the city engineer.
   B.   In addition to construction on land, streets, and trails, the
developer, as part of the final plat, shall install and pay for light poles,
fixtures and street name signs as approved by the city and the utility company
serving the location. Such installations shall be completed before the street
is surfaced. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-10-2: MONUMENTS:
   A.   Durable iron monuments shall be set pursuant to the requirements of
state law. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
   B.   All lot corners and survey control monuments shall be set in accordance
with state statutes and shall be in place within one year of the time the plat
is recorded.
   C.   Stakes showing the locations of easements shall be provided by the
applicant upon request of the city. The stakes shall be wood laths and will be
used only to ensure the proper location of utilities on the easements. The
stakes shall not be intended to be permanent survey monuments.
   D.   All federal, state, city, or other official bench marks, monuments, or
triangular stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in
precise position and shall be recorded on the plat.
   E.   To ensure that all irons and monuments are correctly in place following
the final grading of a plat and construction of utilities, financial security
will be required as determined by the city engineer. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-10-3: INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   All public improvements for new subdivisions shall be furnished and
installed at the sole expense of the developer. If any improvement installed
within the subdivision will be of substantial benefit to lands beyond the
boundaries of the subdivision, provision may be made for causing a portion of
the cost of the improvement (representing the benefit to such lands) to be
allocated in accordance with city policies and shall be outlined in the
development agreement.
   B.   Prior to installation of any required improvements by the developer and
prior to approval of the final plat, the developer shall enter into a
development contract and provide cash escrow, letter of credit, or similar
guarantees to the city related to performance, and/or for installation of
public improvements, and/or developer to install improvements.
   C.   The developer shall furnish and construct improvements at the
developer's sole cost and in accordance with plans and specifications and usual
development contract conditions. This shall include provision for supervision
of details of construction by the city engineer and shall grant to the city
engineer authority to coordinate the work and improvements to be done under
said development contract by any subcontractor authorized to proceed thereunder
and with any other work being done or contracted by the city in the vicinity.
The agreement shall require all public and private utility material standards
and installation requirements to be met and shall be approved by the city
engineer.
   D.   On request of the applicant, but at the sole discretion of the city,
the contract may provide for completion of part or all of the improvements
covered thereby prior to acceptance of the plat. In such event, and if evidence
is presented that the described work and improvements have been paid for, the
amount of the deposit may be reduced in a sum equal to the estimated cost of
the improvements so completed prior to the acceptance of the plat. (Ord. 29,
10-24-2008)
   E.   Required improvements shall be completed by the developer within the
time specified within the approved development contract; provided that the city
council for good cause may extend the period of time in which the improvements
must be installed. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
   F.   If the required improvements are not completed within the specified
time period or a period approved by the city council as hereinabove provided,
all financial securities shall be turned over to the city and applied toward
the cost of the required improvements. Any balance after the improvements have
been made shall be returned to the developer upon written request.
   G.   No developer shall be permitted to start work on any other subdivision
improvements without special written approval of the city council. (Ord. 29,
10-24-2008; amd. Ord. 250, 6-23-2022; Ord. 252, 7-28-2022)
12-10-4: UTILITY AREA AND UNIT CHARGES:
The following utility area and unit connection charges shall be collected with
any new subdivisions and housing units in accordance with the public
improvement financing policy of the city, as may be amended:
   A.   Trunk sanitary sewer area and connection charges.
   B.   Trunk water main area and unit connection charges.
   C.   Storm sewer trunk area and unit connection charges. (Ord. 29, 10-24-
2008)
12-10-5: FINANCIAL GUARANTEE:
The development agreement requires the developer to make an escrow deposit or
provide a certified check or irrevocable letter of credit as determined by the
city. The escrow deposit, certified check or irrevocable letter of credit shall
conform to the requirements of this section.
   A.   Escrow Deposit Or Certified Check:
      1.   If an escrow deposit or certified check is required, the escrow
deposit or certified check shall be made with the city clerk in a sum equal to
the total costs for all improvements to be furnished and installed by the
developer, pursuant to the contract, which have not been completed prior to
approval of the plat. The total costs shall include costs of inspection by the
city.
      2.   The city shall be entitled to reimburse itself out of said escrow
deposit or for any cost and expense incurred by the city for completion of the
work in case of default of the developer under said contract, and for any
damages sustained on account of any breach thereof.
      3.   Upon completion of the work and termination of any liability, the
balance remaining in said escrow deposit shall be refunded to the applicant.
   B.   Irrevocable Letter Of Credit:
      1.   If the applicant is required to furnish an irrevocable letter of
credit, the sum shall be payable to the order of the city and delivered to the
city in an amount as estimated by the city engineer of all the improvements to
be furnished and installed by the applicant, pursuant to the contract, which
have not been completed prior to the approval of the plat. The total costs
shall include costs of inspection by the city.
      2.   The irrevocable letter of credit shall be approved as to form by the
city attorney and filed with the city administrator.
      3.   The city shall be entitled to reimburse itself out of said letter of
credit for any cost and expense incurred by the city for completion of work
(including legal fees) in case of default of the applicant under said contract,
and for any damages sustained on account of any breach thereof. (Ord. 29, 10-
24-2008)
12-10-6: DEVELOPMENT CONTRACT:
   A.   Prior to commencing grading or the installation of any required
improvements and prior to approval of the final plat, the developer shall enter
into a written development contract with the city requiring the developer to
furnish, construct, and complete said grading and improvements in accordance
with plans and specifications and usual agreement conditions and/or pay
appropriate costs for improvements or other costs associated with the plat.
Further, the contract shall provide for the development of any restrictions,
covenants, easements, signage, park or open space requirements, or other
conditions of the approved preliminary plat, and provide for proper execution,
recording, and other action required. Approval of the development contract
shall be by city council resolution.
   B.   For a project involving a phasing plan, the initial development
contract shall allow for grading, wetland mitigation, and installation of
stormwater management facilities on the entire site included in the approved
preliminary plat. Such work may begin after approval of the preliminary plat
but only after approval, execution, and recording of the development contract
and payment of financial securities. Such work shall comply with the approved
grading plan.
   C.   The construction of streets, facilities for sanitary sewer and water,
and other improvements beyond grading, wetland, and stormwater facilities shall
not begin until approval of a final plat. Each subsequent phase shall require a
separate development contract for improvements beyond those covered in previous
contracts. Improvements in each phase shall not begin until the final plat for
that phase is approved and the development contract for the phase is approved,
executed, and recorded.
   D.   The initial development contract (for grading) may address construction
of streets and facilities for sanitary sewer and water for the first phase and
list the financial securities and other requirements. However, the contract
shall stipulate that the work on these improvements shall not begin until
approval of the final plat for the first phase and the provision of all
financial securities by the developer.
   E.   Each approved and executed development contract shall be recorded. Each
contract shall state that it is binding upon the developer, his/her or their
heirs, personal representative, and assigns. It shall stipulate that:
      1.   All improvements called for in the plat, or in any supplementary
contracts, shall be complete within the time specified by the city.
      2.   No private construction shall be conducted on any lots in the plat
or filing of applications for building permits for construction on said lots
until all improvements required under city regulations for the proposed
subdivision have been made or arranged in a manner provided in this section.
   F.   The development contract shall include provisions for construction work
inspection by the city and assurance that the developer will conform with
current testing requirements and quality control procedures of the city. The
developer shall provide documentation from a qualified testing laboratory and/
or registered professional engineer that all improvements have been constructed
in accordance with the requirements of the approved plans and specifications.
   G.   The development contract shall require the developer to provide a
certification from a land surveyor or engineer that the land included in the
plat has been graded in conformance with the approved grading plan prior to the
issuance of building permits.
   H.   The development contract shall require the developer to provide a
financial security to ensure payment of fees related to the subdivision and
completion of all improvements.
   I.   A time schedule for completion of the work shall be determined by the
city upon recommendation of the city engineer after consultation with the
developer and shall be reasonable in relation to the work to be done, the
seasons of the year, and proper coordination with construction activity in the
subdivision.
   J.   The development contract shall include action remedies in the event of
default including:
      1.   The city may complete the improvements by contract or force and
obtain reimbursement of its costs from the posted security deposit.
      2.   The city reserves the right to withhold building permits for
violation of any terms of the development contract. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-10-7: IMPROVEMENTS COMPLETED PRIOR TO APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:
Improvements within a subdivision which have been completed prior to
application for approval of the final plat, or execution of the contract for
installation of the required improvements, shall be accepted as equivalent
improvements in compliance with these requirements only if the city engineer
certifies that the existing improvements conform to applicable standards and is
evidence of payment for the work that has been completed and has been presented
in such form(s) reasonably required by the city. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-10-8: TRUNK FACILITIES:
Where a larger size water main, sanitary sewer, storm drain or similar facility
is required to serve areas outside the subdivision, the larger facility
required shall be constructed. Additional costs shall be allocated as outlined
in the development agreement. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-10-9: ALTERNATE INSTALLATION:
The city may elect to install any or all of the required improvements pursuant
to a cash escrow agreement or other financial arrangements with the applicant.
(Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-10-10: CONSTRUCTION PLANS, INSPECTION AND WARRANTY:
   A.   Construction Plans: A minimum of four (4) full size copies, one 11-inch
by 17-inch copy, and one electronic copy of the construction plans shall be
furnished to the city engineer for review and approval. Additional copies may
be required by the city. Construction plans for the required improvements shall
conform in all respects with all applicable ordinances and standards of the
city. Construction documents shall be prepared, at the expense of the
developer, by a professional engineer who is registered in the state of
Minnesota, and said plans shall contain professional certification. Such plans,
together with the quantities of construction items, shall be submitted to the
city engineer for approval and for an estimate of the total cost of the
required improvements. Upon approval, they shall become a part of the
development contract.
   B.   Inspection: All required improvements on the site that are to be
installed under the provisions of these regulations shall be inspected during
the course of construction by the city engineer at the applicant's expense, and
acceptance by the city shall be subject to the city engineer's certificate of
compliance with the contract.
   C.   Warranty: The developer shall provide to the city a written warranty
that all required improvements on the site meet or exceed all city standards
and that such improvements have been inspected and tested in regard to the city
standards. The developer is responsible for having all such inspections and
testing completed at the developer's expense. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-10-11: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the building official
for any building in the subdivision prior to all improvements outlined in the
development contract having been installed. Exceptions to this provision may be
granted by the city council at their discretion as part of the development
contract.
   B.   Prior to issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy, the property
owner and prospective buyer, under a purchase agreement for the property, shall
execute a right of access for city erosion control maintenance in a form
provided by the city. (Ord. 29, 10-24-2008)
12-10-12: MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The developer shall be required to maintain all improvements in the subdivision
or on the individual subdivided lots and provide for snow removal and
maintenance of streets, if required, until acceptance of said improvements by
the city council in coordination with the development contract. (Ord. 29, 10-
24-2008)
 
