CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2010 S-1 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 308, passed 3-3-2009
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING CORPORATION
432 Walnut Street Cincinnati, Ohio 45202-3909 (800) 445-5588
EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
10. General Provisions
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
30. City Government
31. Departments, Boards and Commissions
32. City Policies
33. Finance and Taxation
34. Emergency Management
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
50. Utilities Generally
51. Garbage and Refuse
52. Water Service
53. Sewer Regulations
54. Storm Water Drainage Utility
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
70. General Provisions
71. Traffic Regulations
72. Parking Regulations
73. Snowmobile Traffic Control and Regulations
74. All-Terrain Vehicles
75. Bicycles
76. Traffic Schedules
77. Special Use Vehicles
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
90. Public Parks
91. Fair Housing
92. Public Cemetery
1
2010 S-1
2 East Grand Forks - Table of Contents
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS (Cont’d)
93. Fire Prevention and Protection
94. Abandoned Motor Vehicles, Excess Property and Unclaimed Property
95. Animals
96. Streets and Sidewalks
97. Shade Tree Disease Control and Prevention
98. General Nuisances
99. Background Check; Municipal Employees and Appointees
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
110. General Business Licensing and Regulations
111. Amusement Centers and Machines
112. Peddlers and Solicitors
113. Taxicabs
114. Massage Parlors
115. Alarm Systems
116. Tobacco Products
117. Alcoholic Beverages
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
130. General Offenses
131. Drug-Related Offenses
132. Dangerous Weapons
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
150. Building Regulations
151. Subdivision Regulations
152. Zoning Code
153. Storm Water Management
2010 S-1
Table of Contents 3
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
I. Franchises
II. Naming Streets
III. Annexations
IV. Zoning Map Amendments
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to 1981 Code
References to Ordinances
INDEX
2010 S-1
4 East Grand Forks - Table of Contents
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
10. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1
2 East Grand Forks - General Provisions
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
10.01 Title of code
10.02 Rules of interpretation
10.03 Application to future ordinances
10.04 Captions
10.05 Definitions
10.06 Severability
10.07 Reference to other sections
10.08 Reference to offices
10.09 Errors and omissions
10.10 Official time
10.11 Reasonable time
10.12 Ordinances repealed
10.13 Ordinances unaffected
10.14 Effective date of ordinances
10.15 Repeal or modification of ordinance
10.16 Ordinances which amend or supplement code
10.17 Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
10.18 Copies of code
10.19 Adoption of statutes and rules by reference
10.20 Enforcement
10.98 Supplemental administrative penalties
10.99 General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
(A) All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as revised, codified, rearranged,
renumbered, and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and
designated as the “city code” or “East Grand Forks Code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,”
“codified ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter, and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
3
4 East Grand Forks - General Provisions
(B) All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to the components of the code unless
otherwise specified. Any component code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic
Code.” Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as
“§ 10.01.” Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and section numbers
are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
(A) Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules
of construction, definition, and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.
(B) Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of
the context of the same ordinance:
(1) AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written “and/or,” whenever
the context requires.
(2) Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance requires an act to be done
which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by
the performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.
(3) Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed
to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in
the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
(4) General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited
to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter
adopted which amend or supplement this code unless otherwise specifically provided.
General Provisions 5
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are
employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
(A) General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or ordinary and usual sense.
However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be
understood according to their technical import.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CITY. The City of East Grand Forks, Minnesota, consisting of the area within the corporate
boundaries of the city as presently established or as amended by ordinance, annexation or other legal
actions at a future time. The term CITY when used in this code may also be used to refer to the City
Council and its authorized representatives.
CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified by
amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
COUNTY. Polk County, Minnesota.
MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
MONTH. A calendar month.
OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an
oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and
AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an individual
authorized by state law.
OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
6 East Grand Forks - General Provisions
SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
STATE. The State of Minnesota.
SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in the chapter
analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by
the subject matter of the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.
WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect
without the invalid provision or application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
Whenever in 1 section reference is made to another section hereof, that reference shall extend and
apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the
subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee
of this city exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any
word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words
to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied,
General Provisions 7
omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the
same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws, shall be the official time within
this city for the transaction of all city business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
(A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires
reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is
necessary for a prompt performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
(B) The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding
the first day and including the last. If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature
pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the
subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not
embraced in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall take effect from and after
the due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided.
8 East Grand Forks - General Provisions
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
(A) Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent
ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until
the publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect to
it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(B) No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted, created, given, secured, or
accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged,
but may be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless
it is otherwise expressly provided.
(C) When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision shall be itself repealed,
the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is
expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
(A) If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of this code, the chapter
or section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.
(B) Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or section shall
indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the proper number of the chapter or section.
In addition to this indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall
be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of this code shall be prosecuted
and remain punishable as provided by those laws. This code does not affect any rights or liabilities
accrued, penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced and
imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize
highway right-of-ways, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if
this code had not been enacted.
General Provisions 9
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City Administrator for public
inspection. The Administrator shall provide a copy for sale for a reasonable charge.
§ 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE.
It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code, all future amendments to any
state or federal rules and statutes adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby
adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this code was adopted,
unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the contrary.
§ 10.20 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Any Licensed Peace Officer of the city’s Police Department, or the County Sheriff, or any
Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to enforce any provision of this code.
(B) As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time to time, the City
Administrator shall have the authority to administer and enforce this code. In addition, under that
statutory authority, certain individuals designated within the code or by the City Administrator or City
Council shall have the authority to administer and enforce the provisions specified. All and any person
or persons designated may issue a citation in lieu of arrest or continued detention to enforce any
provision of the code.
(C) The City Administrator and any city official or employee designated by this code who has the
responsibility to perform a duty under this code may with the permission of a licensee of a business or
owner of any property or resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect or
otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.
(D) If the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of a premises objects to the
inspection of or entrance to the property, the City Administrator, Peace Officer, or any employee or
official charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable
cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction, petition
and obtain a search warrant before conducting the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This
warrant shall be only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these provisions only, and no
criminal charges shall be made as a result of the warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be
probable cause to issue the warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause
does not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular property.
10 East Grand Forks - General Provisions
(E) Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property within the city shall
permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance to the property by the City Administrator or any
other authorized city officer or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these
provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds
for termination of any and all permits, licenses or city service to the property. Mailed notice shall be
given to the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property, stating the grounds for
the termination, and the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property shall be
given an opportunity to appear before the City Administrator to object to the termination before it
occurs, subject to appeal of the Administrator's decision to the City Council at a regularly scheduled or
special meeting.
(F) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the City to enter private
property in urgent emergency situations where there is an imminent danger in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
§ 10.98 SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
(A) In addition to those administrative penalties established in this code and the enforcement powers
granted in § 10.20, the City Council is authorized to create by resolution, adopted by a majority of the
members of the Council, supplemental administrative penalties.
(B) These administrative penalty procedures in this section are intended to provide the public and
the city with an informal, cost effective and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for
violations of certain provisions of this code. The procedures are intended to be voluntary on the part of
those who have been charged with those offenses.
(C) Administrative penalties for violations of various provisions of the code, other than those
penalties established in the code or in statutes that are adopted by reference, may be established from
time to time by resolution of a majority of the members of the City Council. In order to be effective, an
administrative penalty for a particular violation must be established before the violation occurred.
(D) In the discretion of the peace officer, City Administrator, or other person giving notice of an
alleged violation of a provision of this code, in a written notice of an alleged violation, sent by first class
mail to the person who is alleged to have violated the code, the person giving notice may request the
payment of a voluntary administrative penalty for the violation directly to the City Treasurer within 14
days of the notice of the violation. In the sole discretion of the person giving the notice of the alleged
violation, the time for payment may be extended an additional 14 days, whether or not requested by the
person to whom the notice has been given. In addition to the administrative penalty, the person giving
General Provisions 11
notice may request in the notice to the alleged violator to adopt a compliance plan to correct the situation
resulting in the alleged violation and may provide that if the alleged violator corrects the situation
resulting in the alleged violation within the time specified in the notice, that the payment of the
administrative penalty will be waived.
(E) At any time before the payment of the administrative penalty is due, the person who has been
given notice of an alleged violation may request to appear before the City Council to contest the request
for payment of the penalty. After a hearing before the Council, the Council may determine to withdraw
the request for payment or to renew the request for payment. Because the payment of the administrative
penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision of the Council.
(F) At any time after the date the payment of the administrative penalty is due, if the administrative
penalty remains unpaid or the situation creating the alleged violation remains uncorrected, the City,
through its Attorney, may bring criminal charges in accordance with state law and this code. Likewise,
the City, in its discretion, may bring criminal charges in the first instance, rather than requesting the
payment of an administrative penalty, even if a penalty for the particular violation has been established
by Council resolution. If the administrative penalty is paid, or if any requested correction of the situation
resulting in the violation is completed, no criminal charges shall be initiated by the City for the alleged
violation.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
(A) Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this code for which another
penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty
which may be imposed for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days or a fine of not
more than $1,000, or both.
(B) Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon
conviction be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense
which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
(C) In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of prosecution may be
added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs
or continues.
(D) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any official duty imposed by this
code shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.
(E) In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or in § 10.98, if any person, firm or
corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code, the Council or any city official designated
by it, may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation.
12 East Grand Forks - General Provisions
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
30. CITY GOVERNMENT
31. DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
32. CITY POLICIES
33. FINANCE AND TAXATION
34. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
1
2 East Grand Forks - Administration
CHAPTER 30: CITY GOVERNMENT
Section
30.01 Organizational Council meetings; rules and procedures
30.02 Regular Council meeting; rules and procedures
30.03 Special Council meeting; rules and procedures
30.04 Robert’s Rules of Order to govern meetings
30.05 Interim emergency succession
30.06 Right to administrative appeal
30.07 Rules of procedure for meetings, appeals and other hearings
30.08 City Attorney
30.09 Clerk and Treasurer offices combined
30.10 City Administrator/Clerk Treasurer position description
30.11 Salaries of certain board and commission members
30.12 Salaries of Mayor and Council Members
30.13 Personnel policies
§ 30.01 ORGANIZATIONAL COUNCIL MEETINGS; RULES AND PROCEDURES.
(A) Time and place. The organizational meeting of the Council shall be held on the first Tuesday
after the first Monday in January next following the city election in the Council Chamber of the City Hall
at 5:00 p.m.
(B) Order of business. The order of business at organizational meetings shall be as follows:
(1) Call to order;
(2) Roll call;
(3) Determination of a quorum;
(4) Election of a President and Vice-President of the Council;
(5) Other appointments and elections;
(6) Adjournment.
3
2010 S-1 Repl.
4 East Grand Forks - Administration
(C) Temporary Chairperson. The City Attorney, or in his absence the Assistant City Attorney, shall
serve as temporary chairperson until the President and Vice-President of the Council have been elected
and qualified. If either the President or Vice-President is present at the meeting, and qualifies, the
temporary officer shall vacate the chair and the permanent officers shall take charge of the meeting. If
neither the President nor Vice-President is present at the meeting, the temporary officer shall serve
through adjournment.
(1981Code, § 2.01) (Ord. 172, 3rd Series, eff. 4-20-1995)
§ 30.02 REGULAR COUNCIL MEETING; RULES AND PROCEDURES.
(A) Regular meetings. The first regular meeting in January of each even-numbered year shall be
held immediately following the organizational meeting. All regular meetings thereafter shall be held on
the first Tuesday and the third Tuesday of each month. All regular meetings shall be held in the Council
chambers of the City Hall at the hour set by the regular Council at the organizational meeting.
(B) Preparation and procedure.
(1) The City Administrator shall prepare the following items:
(a) An agenda for the forthcoming meeting; and
(b) A copy of all minutes to be considered.
(2) The City Administrator shall forthwith cause to be mailed to the Mayor and each Council
Member copies of all said documents. The order of business at regular meetings shall be as follows:
(a) Call to order;
(b) Roll call;
(c) Determination of a quorum;
(d) Approval of minutes (actual reading may be waived if each member of the Council was
furnished with a copy thereof as hereinbefore set forth);
(e) Scheduled bid lettings;
2010 S-1 Repl.
City Government 5
(f) Scheduled public hearings;
(g) Licenses and permits;
(h) Reports of officers, boards and commissions;
(i) Communications;
(j) Old business;
(k) New business;
(l) Claims;
(m) Adjournment.
(3) Matters inappropriate for consideration at a meeting, or not in the order specified, shall not
be considered except upon a showing of good cause and unanimous consent by the Council to suspend
the rules.
(C) Temporary President. In the absence of the President and Vice-President, the provisions of this
chapter relating to a temporary chairperson shall be followed to elect a Temporary President until such
time as the absent officials return to their positions or their positions.
(1981 Code, § 2.02) (Ord. 172, 3 Series, eff. rd 4-20-1995; Am. Ord. 277-1, 3rd Series, passed 2-3-2004)
§ 30.03 SPECIAL COUNCIL MEETING; RULES AND PROCEDURES.
(A) Place. Special Council meetings shall be held in the Council Chambers of the City Hall or such
other place as may be specified in the notice thereof.
(B) Call and notice. Special meetings of the Council may be called by the President or by any 2
other members of the Council by writing filed with the City Administrator stating the time, place and
purpose of the meeting. Notice of a special meeting shall be given by the City Administrator to each
member of the Council by mailing a copy of such filing to all members who did not sign or issue the call
at least 3 days prior to the time stated therein or by personal service at least 72 hours prior to the
projected time of meeting. Special meetings may be held without prior written notice to the Council when
all Council members are present at the meeting or consent thereto in writing. Any such consent shall
be filed with the City Administrator prior to the beginning of the meeting. Any special meeting attended
by all Council members shall be a valid meeting for the transaction of any business that may come before
the meeting. Meetings of the Council which are adjourned from time-to-time shall not be subject to the
6 East Grand Forks - Administration
foregoing notice requirements; nor shall special meetings which, in the judgment of the Council, require
immediate consideration to meet an emergency require such notice, but may be called by telephone
communication or any other expeditious means. Notice to the public and to news media shall be given
as required by statute.
(Ord. 143, 3rd Series, eff. 12-4-1992)
(C) Order of business. The order of business at a special meeting shall be as follows:
(1) Call to order;
(2) Roll call;
(3) Determination of a quorum;
(4) Business or purpose stated in call or waiver;
(5) Adjournment.
(1981 Code, § 2.03)
§ 30.04 ROBERT’S RULES OF ORDER TO GOVERN MEETINGS.
Robert’s Rules of Order (Revised) shall govern all Council meetings as to procedural matters not
otherwise set forth herein.
(1981 Code, § 2.04)
§ 30.05 INTERIM EMERGENCY SUCCESSION.
(A) Purpose. Due to the existing possibility of a nuclear attack or a natural disaster requiring a
declaration of a state of emergency, it is found urgent and necessary to insure the continuity of duly
elected and lawful leadership of the city to provide for the continuity of the government and the
emergency interim succession of key governmental officials by providing a method for temporary
emergency appointments to their offices.
(B) Succession to local offices. In the event of a nuclear attack upon the United States or a natural
disaster affecting the vicinity of the city, the Mayor, Council and City Administrator shall be forthwith
notified by any one of the persons and by any means available to gather at the City Hall. In the event that
safety or convenience dictate, an alternative place of meeting may be designated. Those gathered shall
proceed as follows:
(1) By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number, they shall elect a
Chairperson and Secretary to preside and keep minutes, respectively;
City Government 7
(2) They shall review and record the specific facts relating to the nuclear attack or natural
disaster and injuries to persons or damage to property already done or the imminence thereof;
(3) They may, based on such facts, declare a state of emergency;
(4) By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number, they shall fill all positions
on the Council (including the office of Mayor) of those persons upon whom notice could not be served
or who are unable to be present;
(5) Such interim successors shall serve until such time as the duly elected official is again
available and returns to his position, or the state of emergency has passed and a successor is designated
and qualifies as required by law, whichever shall occur first.
(C) Duties of the Interim Emergency Council. The Interim Emergency Council shall exercise the
powers and duties of their offices and appoint other key government officials to serve during the
emergency.
(1981 Code, § 2.05)
§ 30.06 RIGHT TO ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL.
If any person shall be aggrieved by any administrative decision of the City Administrator or any
other city official or any board or commission not having within its structure an appellate procedure, the
aggrieved person is entitled to a full hearing before the Council upon serving a written request therefor
upon the Mayor and City Administrator at least 5 days prior to any regular Council meeting. The
request shall contain a general statement setting forth the administrative decision to be challenged by the
appellant. At the hearing the appellant may present any evidence he deems pertinent to the appeal, but
the city shall not be required to keep a verbatim record of the proceedings. The Mayor, or other officer
presiding at the hearing, may, in the interest of justice or to comply with time requirements and on his
own motion or the motion of the appellant, the City Administrator, or a member of the Council, adjourn
the hearing to a more convenient time or place, but the time or place shall be fixed and determined
before adjournment so as to avoid the necessity for formal notice of reconvening.
(1981 Code, § 2.06)
§ 30.07 RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR MEETINGS, APPEALS AND OTHER HEARINGS.
The Council may adopt by resolution certain written rules of procedure to be followed in all
meetings, administrative appeals, and other hearings of the Council or other deliberative bodies. The
rules of procedure shall be effective 30 days after adoption and shall be for the purpose of establishing
and maintaining order and decorum in the proceedings.
(1981 Code, § 2.07) (Ord. 2, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
8 East Grand Forks - Administration
§ 30.08 CITY ATTORNEY.
The City Attorney shall perform such duties as are required of him by law or referred to him or her
by the Council or its agent. In addition thereto, it shall be the official duty of the City Attorney to act
as Revisor of Ordinances.
(1981 Code, § 2.81)
§ 30.09 CLERK AND TREASURER OFFICES COMBINED.
Pursuant to the authority of M.S. § 412.591, as it may be amended from time to time, the offices
of the City Clerk and City Treasurer shall be and hereby are combined in the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer, and thereafter the duties of the Treasurer and the Clerk shall be performed by the
Clerk-Treasurer.
(1981 Code, § 2.82) (Ord. 225, eff. 10-30-1969)
§ 30.10 CITY ADMINISTRATOR/CLERK TREASURER POSITION DESCRIPTION.
(A) The City Administrator is appointed by the City Council and as the chief administrative officer
of the city is responsible for the proper administration of all affairs of the city.
(B) The City Administrator is empowered and required to carry out the following duties:
(1) Administration direction. Direct the administration of the city as provided by Council
action, home rule charter, city code, and state and federal states. Coordinate with the City Council in
developing administrative policies and procedures to administer city affairs;
(2) Operational. Develop operational plans for all departments. Establish guidelines for
evaluating the effectiveness of operations;
(3) Local improvements and city projects. Direct planning and community development
programs. Act as or appoint staff to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Recommend, administer,
and coordinate the different projects with the respective engineers, architects or consultants;
(4) Planning. Recommend course of action regarding development planning. Direct staff
preparation of materials for the development of capital improvement programs and long range planning;
(5) Budgets. Submit monthly budget reports and prepare a recommended budget for
presentation and consideration by the City Council;
(6) Meetings. Direct and coordinate City Council meeting preparation, including research,
reports, and correspondence;
City Government 9
(7) Financial reports. Submit any Council requested reports on the financial condition of the
city and provide an annual financial statement to the Council per City Charter. Recommend
improvements in the financial systems to the City Council;
(8) Elections. Oversee supervision of local elections in accordance with prescribed laws and
regulations;
(9) Supervision. Supervise and have day-to-day oversight of the activities of all city department
heads and the administrative staff, including coordinating the activities of the City Attorney. Direct the
implementation of City Council actions by all city department;
(10) Employment. Make recommendations to the City Council regarding the employment and
removal of city staff. Recommend salary changes based on position requirements and employee
performance;
(11) Personnel. Establish personnel policies, direct employee benefit programs, and recommend
new programs or changes to existing programs. Direct the implementation of federal, state, and local
laws and regulations regarding personnel. Conduct or oversee labor negotiations. Perform disciplinary
action as prescribed in labor agreements and personnel rules and regulations;
(12) Purchasing. Authorize all purchases and expenditures with budget limitations;
(13) Communication. Deliver presentations on behalf of the city, testify at legal proceedings,
manage public information and media, and citizen inquiries regarding city services;
(14) Additional duties. The City Administrator is the City Clerk-Treasurer and is responsible
for statutory, Home Rule Charter, and job description duties of the City Clerk-Treasurer position;
(15) Government liaison. Serve as liaison between the city and other governmental and
non-governmental entities.
(Am. Ord. 253, 3rd Series, passed 4-3-2001)
§ 30.11 SALARIES OF CERTAIN BOARD AND COMMISSION MEMBERS.
The Council shall, by resolution, fix salaries of the members of the Water, Light, Power and
Buildings Commission, Cemetery Commission, and the Civil Service Commission.
(1981 Code, § 2.85)
10 East Grand Forks - Administration
§ 30.12 SALARIES OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.
The compensation of Mayor and the compensation of each Council Member shall be established
from time to time by City Council ordinance pursuant to M.S. § 415.11, as it may be amended from time
to time.
(Am. Ord. 305, 3rd Series, passed 10-16-2007)
§ 30.13 PERSONNEL POLICIES.
The Council may, by resolution, establish personnel rules setting forth the rights, duties and
responsibilities of employees. The rules may from time to time be amended.
(1981 Code, § 2.32) (Ord. 2, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
2010 S-1
CHAPTER 31: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
General Provisions
31.01 Boards and commissions generally
31.02 Absentee Ballot Counting Board
Planning Commission
31.20 Establishment of Commission
31.21 Composition
31.22 Organization meetings and the like
31.23 Adoption of program of work
31.24 Preparation of city plan
31.25 Procedure of adopting of plan
31.26 Means of executing plan
31.27 Zoning plan
31.28 Official map of street extensions
31.29 Plats
31.30 Procedure for changes
31.31 List of recommended public works
Library Board
31.45 Establishment of library
31.46 Library Board
31.47 Funding
31.48 Illegal acts
Senior Citizens Center Board of Commissioners
31.60 Establishment
31.61 Board of Commissioners
31.62 Officers and employees
31.63 By-laws
31.64 Financial controls
11
12 East Grand Forks - Administration
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY.
This section shall apply to, and regulate, all boards and commissions, however created, except
where provisions hereof are in conflict with a statute or another provision of the City Code. All board
and commission appointments shall be made by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council at the
organizational meeting in even numbered years or the first meeting in January of odd numbered years,
except as otherwise provided in specific City Code provisions. The term of each appointee shall be
established and stated at the time of his appointment, and terms of present board and commission
members shall remain unchanged. New appointees shall assume their positions upon being appointed
and qualified. When a vacancy occurs during a term it shall be filled in the same manner, but only for
the unexpired term. No appointed board or commission member shall be an employee of the city except
those who are members by reason of their office. Except as otherwise provided by statute or the City
Code, all appointed board and commission members shall serve without remuneration, but may be
reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses incurred in performance of their duties when such expenses are
authorized by the Council before they are incurred. The Chairperson and Secretary shall be chosen from
and by the board or commission membership at its first regular meeting in December of each year to
serve for the ensuing year. Any board or commission member may be removed by the Council for
misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office and his position filled as any other vacancy. All
members shall be residents of the city, except that 1 member of each board may be a resident of Polk
County and non-resident of the city, if the Council deems such arrangement advantageous and more
representative. Outgoing members of all boards and commissions shall continue in office until new
appointments have been made and confirmed, and the appointees duly qualified.
(1981 Code, § 2.54)
§ 31.02 ABSENTEE BALLOT COUNTING BOARD.
Pursuant to the provisions of M.S. § 203B.13, as amended from time to time, the City Council
authorizes the Polk County Commissioners to establish an Absentee Ballot Precinct and ratifies the
ordinance of the Polk County Board of Commissioners adopted on August 20, 1986. The Absentee
Ballot Precinct to be located in the Polk County Courthouse, for the purpose of receiving all absentee
ballots for any statewide primary or general election (or special referendum) held within the city. The
Absentee Ballot Precinct shall be under the direct charge and supervision of the Polk County Auditor
and shall be administered pursuant to the Minnesota election laws without cost to the city.
(1981 Code, § 2.56) (Ord. 75, 3rd Series, eff. 9-12-1986)
Departments, Boards and Commissions 13
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 31.20 ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION.
A City Planning Commission for the city is established.
(1981 Code, § 2.50, Subd. 1) (Ord. 181, eff. 11-30-1961)
§ 31.21 COMPOSITION.
The Planning Commission shall consist of 9 members. Six members shall be appointed by the
Mayor and approved by a majority of the Council and may be removed by a 4/5 vote of the Council.
The City Engineer or any engineer appointed by the Mayor and approved by the majority of the Council
and the City Attorney or Assistant City Attorney shall be advisory members, the advisory members shall
be non-voting members of the Planning Commission and shall serve in an advisory capacity; and the
Council shall select 1 member of the Commission from its own members. Of the members of the
Commission first appointed, 1 shall be appointed for the term of 1 year, 1 for the term of 2 years, 1 for
the term of 3 years, and 1 for the term of 4 years. Of the 2 additional members appointed by the Mayor
and approved by the majority of the Council, as provided in this amendment, at the time of their
appointment, 1 shall be appointed to a term to expire December 5, 1980, and 1 shall be appointed to a
term to expire December 5, 1981; thereafter all appointments shall be for a term of 4 years. Both
original and successive appointees shall hold their offices until their successors are appointed and
qualified. The terms of advisory members shall correspond to their respective tenures. Vacancies during
the term shall be filled by the Council for the unexpired portion of the term. Every appointed member
shall before entering upon the discharge of his duties take an oath that he will faithfully discharge the
duties of his office. All members shall serve without compensation. If any person serving on the
Planning Commission shall find that his private or personal interests are involved in any matter coming
before the Commission, the member shall disqualify himself from taking part in any action on the matter,
or the member may be disqualified by the Planning Commission.
(1981 Code, § 2.50, Subd. 2) (Ord. 2, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
§ 31.22 ORGANIZATION MEETINGS AND THE LIKE.
The Commission shall elect a chairperson from among its appointed members for a term of 1 year;
and the Commission may create and fill such other offices as it may determine. The Commission shall
hold at least 1 regular meeting each month. It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall
keep a record of its resolutions, transactions and findings, which record shall be a public record. On or
before January 1 of each year, the Commission shall submit to the Council a report of its work during
the preceding year. Expenditures of the Commission shall be within amounts appropriated for the
purpose by the Council.
(1981 Code, § 2.50, Subd. 3)
14 East Grand Forks - Administration
§ 31.23 ADOPTION OF PROGRAM OF WORK.
(A) Upon the appointment and organization of the Commission, it shall proceed with the preparation
and adoption of resolution of a program of work, outlining activities proposed to be undertaken in the
exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties.
(B) Such a program will include:
(1) An outline of data and information to be assembled as a basis for the city plan;
(2) An outline of subjects to be covered by the city plan;
(3) An outline of types of procedure necessary to make the city plan effective.
(C) The Planning Commission may, by resolution, revise its program of work from time to time.
(1981 Code, § 2.50, Subd. 4)
§ 31.24 PREPARATION OF CITY PLAN.
It shall be the function and duty of the Planning Commission to prepare and adopt a comprehensive
city plan for the physical development of the city, including proposed public buildings, street
arrangements and improvements, public utility services, parks, playgrounds, and other similar
developments, the use of property, the density of population, and other matters relating to the physical
development of the city. The plan may be prepared in sections, each of which shall relate to a major
subject of the plan, as outlined in the Commission’s program of work.
(1981 Code, § 2.50, Subd. 5)
§ 31.25 PROCEDURE OF ADOPTING OF PLAN.
Before adopting the city plan or any section of it or any substantial amendment thereof, the
Commission shall hold at least 1 public hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be
given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation at least 10 days before the day of the hearing.
The adoption of the city plan or of any section or amendment thereof shall be by resolution of the
Commission, approved by the affirmative vote of not less than 5/7 of its total membership. The
Commission may from time to time amend or add to the city plan or section thereof as herein provided
for the adoption of the original plan whenever changed conditions or further studies by the Commission
indicate that such amendment or addition is necessary. An attested copy of the plan or of any section,
amendment, or addition to the city plan adopted by the Planning Commission shall be certified to the
Council.
(1981 Code, § 2.50, Subd. 6)
Departments, Boards and Commissions 15
§ 31.26 MEANS OF EXECUTING PLAN.
Upon the adoption of the city plan or any section thereof, it shall be the duty of the Planning
Commission to recommend to the Council reasonable and practicable means for putting into effect such
plan or section thereof in order that the same will serve as a pattern and guide for the orderly physical
development of the city and as a basis for the efficient expenditure of the funds thereof relating to the
subjects of such city plans. The means shall consist of a zoning plan, the control of subdivision plats,
a plan of future streets, coordination of the normal public improvements of the city, a long term program
of capital expenditures and such other matters as will accomplish the purposes of this section.
(1981 Code, § 2.50, Subd. 7)
§ 31.27 ZONING PLAN.
The Planning Commission upon its own motion may and upon instructions by the Council shall
prepare a revised zoning plan for the city. Before recommending the plan to the Council, the Planning
Commission shall hold at least 1 public hearing thereon after a notice similar to that required by § 31.25.
The same procedure shall apply for the preparation of any plan of proposed rights-of-way for future
streets or highways, or the future widening of existing streets or highways, or for the reservation of lands
for other public purposes.
(1981 Code, § 2.50, Subd. 8)
§ 31.28 OFFICIAL MAP OF STREET EXTENSIONS.
The Planning Commission, with the assistance of the City Engineer or any engineer appointed by
the Mayor and approved by a majority of the Council, may and upon instruction by the Council shall
prepare an official map of the platted and unplatted portions of the city and adjoining territory, or
portions thereof, indicating upon the map the proposed future extension or widening of streets of the city
within the existing platted and developed territory or across the unplatted territory. After the map has
been prepared and a hearing on it has been held as provided in § 31.27, it shall be submitted to the
Council, which shall thereupon consider the map and may adopt it or any part of it with such
amendments as it deems advisable. Before such adoption by the Council, a public hearing shall be held
upon the proposal at least 10 days after a notice therefor has been published in the official newspaper
of the city. After the map has been adopted by the Council and filed with the Register of Deeds,
whenever any existing street or highway is widened or improved, or any new street is opened, or lands
for other public purposes are acquired by action of the city, it shall not be required in the proceedings
to pay for any building or structure placed without a permit or in violation of conditions of a permit after
the filing of the map within the limits of the mapped street, or outside any building line that may have
been established upon the existing street, or within any area thus reserved for public purposes.
(1981 Code, § 2.50, Subd. 9)
16 East Grand Forks - Administration
§ 31.29 PLATS.
(A) Every proposed plat of land within the city or within 2 miles of the limits of the city and not
within a town which itself requires the approval of plats shall be submitted to the Council before being
filed, and no plat of land shall be filed unless and until the same shall first have been approved by the
Council. Any person who violates this provision or who sells land or offers land for sale or contracts
for the sale of land by reference to or by other use of any plat before such plat has been approved by the
Planning Commission and the Council in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by as set forth in § 10.99. Before
acting on the plat the Council shall submit the same to the Planning Commission for its
recommendations. The Planning Commission, within 40 days after any such plat has been referred to
it by the Council, shall act on the same and shall make its recommendations with respect thereto.
(B) The recommendations may consist of:
(1) Recommendation that the Council approve such plat; or
(2) Recommendation that the Council disapprove the plat, in which case the recommendation
shall include a statement of the specific reasons for such recommendation; or
(3) Recommendation that the Council approve the plat after specified changes or revisions are
made therein, which recommendations may include the condition that a revised plat, containing the
changes or revisions be submitted to the Planning Commission, in which case the revised plat shall be
so submitted to the Planning Commission for its further consideration and recommendations before
action thereon by the Council.
(1981 Code, § 2.50, Subd. 10)
§ 31.30 PROCEDURE FOR CHANGES.
No change shall be made in the zoning plan, future street and public lands plan, or regulations
governing the platting of land after the plans or regulations have been adopted by the Council, until the
proposed change has been referred to the Planning Commission for report thereon and an attested copy
of the report has been filed with the Council; and no ordinance or resolution establishing any of such
plans or specifications shall be adopted by the Council until the ordinance or resolution has been referred
to the Planning Commission for a report thereon and an attested copy of the report has been filed with
the Council. Failure of the Planning Commission so to report within 40 days or such longer period as
may be designated by the Council after the reference shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed
change.
(1981 Code, § 2.50, Subd. 11)
Departments, Boards and Commissions 17
§ 31.31 LIST OF RECOMMENDED PUBLIC WORKS.
Each officer, department, board, or commission of, or in the city whose functions include
recommending, preparing plans for, or constructing public works shall, at least 3 months before the end
of each fiscal year, submit to the Council a list of the proposed public works recommended by such
officer, department, board, or commission for planning, initiation or construction during the ensuing
fiscal year. The Council shall request from the local school district a similar list of its proposed public
works. The lists, reports, or recommendations shall be referred by the Council to the Planning
Commission, which Commission shall list and classify all such proposed public works for the ensuing
fiscal year. The program shall be recommended by the Commission to the Council and to such other
officer, departments, boards, or public bodies as have jurisdiction over the recommending, planning or
constructing of the public works. A copy of the recommended program of public works shall be
included in the annual report of the Planning Commission provided for in § 31.22.
(1981 Code, § 2.50, Subd. 12) (Ord. 181, eff. 11-30-1961)
LIBRARY BOARD
§ 31.45 ESTABLISHMENT OF LIBRARY.
There is established a public library in the city pursuant to the provisions of M.S. §§ 134.07 to
134.15, both inclusive, as amended from time to time.
(1981 Code, § 2.51, Subd. 1) (Ord. 203, eff. 1-27-1966)
§ 31.46 LIBRARY BOARD.
The public library shall be under the jurisdiction of a Board of 7 directors, known as The Library
Board of the City of East Grand Forks. M.S. §§ 134.07 to 134.15, both inclusive, as amended from
time to time, shall govern the appointment of the Board members, their tenure in office, and their powers
and duties.
(1981 Code, § 2.51, Subd. 2) (Ord. 203, eff. 1-27-1966; Am. Ord. 229, 3rd Series, passed 6-2-1998)
§ 31.47 FUNDING.
For the purpose of maintaining the library, the Council shall annually levy a tax upon all the taxable
property of the city not exceeding 8 mills on the dollar. The proceeds of the tax, together with all other
moneys received, for the library shall be paid into the City Treasury and credited to a special fund to be
known as The Library Fund.
(1981 Code, § 2.51, Subd. 3) (Ord. 203, eff. 1-27-1966)
18 East Grand Forks - Administration
§ 31.48 ILLEGAL ACTS.
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to commit any injury to any property of the public
library or willfully to damage or mutilate any book or periodical belonging to the library or willfully to
fail to return any book or periodical belonging to the library after the expiration of the time for which
such book or periodical may be kept according to the rules and regulations duly adopted by the Board
of the public library.
(1981 Code, § 2.51, Subd. 4) (Ord. 203, eff. 1-27-1966) Penalty, see § 10.99
SENIOR CITIZENS CENTER BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
§ 31.60 ESTABLISHMENT.
Pursuant to M.S. § 471.191, as amended from time to time, a recreational facility known as the East
Grand Forks Senior Citizens Center is hereby established.
(1981 Code, § 2.55, Subd. 1) (Ord. 80, 3rd Series, eff. 1-16-1987)
§ 31.61 BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.
The Senior Citizens Center shall be under the jurisdiction of a Board of Commissioners who shall
serve without compensation. The Board of Commissioners shall consist of 7 members, all of whom shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. One of the Commissioners must be a
member of the Council. Two of the 7 persons initially appointed as Commissioners shall be appointed
for terms of 1 year, 2 of the 7 persons initially appointed as Commissioners shall be appointed for terms
of 2 years, and the remaining 3 persons initially appointed as Commissioners shall be appointed for terms
of 3 years. Thereafter, all Commissioners shall be appointed for terms of 3 years. Both original and
successive appointees shall hold their offices until their successors are appointed and qualified. A
vacancy is created on the Board of Commissioners when the Council member of the Board of
Commissioners ends Council membership. A vacancy for this or any other reason must be filled for
the balance of the unexpired term in the manner in which the original appointment was made. A
Commissioner may be removed by the Mayor, with the approval of a majority of the Council, for cause
after a hearing.
(1981 Code, § 2.55, Subd. 2) (Ord. 80, 3rd Series, eff. 1-16-1987)
§ 31.62 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
Immediately after appointment, the Board of Commissioners shall elect 1 of its members President
and 1 of its members as Vice-President. The Board of Commissioners shall appoint a Secretary who
need not be a member of the Commission, who shall be responsible for the records of the Commission,
Departments, Boards and Commissions 19
and such other duties as the Commission may determine. The Board of Commissioners may hire a
Director for the Senior Citizens Center, pursuant to M.S. Ch. 44, as it may be amended from time to
time, or may enter into a contract with an individual or an agency willing to provide the services
expected of a Director. The Director may also serve as the Secretary. The compensation paid to the
Director shall be determined by the Board of Commissioners and shall be paid out of the Board of
Commissioners’ budget.
(1981 Code, § 2.55, Subd. 3) (Ord. 80, 3rd Series, eff. 1-16-1987)
§ 31.63 BY-LAWS.
The Board of Commissioners shall submit proposed by-laws to the Council for its consideration.
The by-laws shall not take effect until approved by the Council. Thereafter, the Board of Commissioners
shall amend its by-laws only with the Council approval.
(1981 Code, § 2.55, Subd. 4) (Ord. 80, 3rd Series, eff. 1-16-1987)
§ 31.64 FINANCIAL CONTROLS.
Expenses, charges and other expenditures authorized by the Board of Commissioners shall be
presented to the City Administrator for payment from a separate fund designated as the Senior Citizens
Fund. An annual budget for the Senior Citizens Fund shall be prepared by the Board of Commissioners
and shall be presented to the City Administrator by August 15 of each year for the following year.
(1981 Code, § 2.55, Subd. 5) (Ord. 80, 3rd Series, eff. 1-16-1987)
20 East Grand Forks - Administration
CHAPTER 32: CITY POLICIES
Section
32.01 Worker’s compensation
32.02 Claims and disbursements
32.03 Facsimile signatures
32.04 City seal
32.05 Civil service system
§ 32.01 WORKER’S COMPENSATION.
(A) Contractors. The city shall not enter into any contract for doing public work before receiving
from all other contracting parties acceptable evidence of compliance with the worker’s compensation
insurance coverage requirement of Minnesota Statutes.
(B) City officers. All officers of the city elected or appointed for a regular term of office or to
complete the unexpired portion of any such regular term shall be included in the definition of
EMPLOYEE as defined in Minnesota Statutes relating to coverage for purposes of workers compensation
entitlement.
(C) Permittees and licensees. No permit or license to engage in a business shall be issued by the
city until the applicant presents acceptable evidence of compliance with the worker’s compensation
insurance coverage requirement of Minnesota Statutes by providing a current certificate thereof or the
permit to self-insure.
(1981 Code, § 2.08) (Ord. 112, 3rd Series, eff. 5-4-1990)
§ 32.02 CLAIMS AND DISBURSEMENTS.
(A) Claims. All claims shall be made in writing, itemized, contain a declaration by the claimant
that it is a just and correct account and that no part of it has been paid, and be signed by the claimant.
The claim shall be in proper form before it is considered by the Council. The form of declaration shall
be such as is required by state law, and if no such requirement exists, then as adopted by the Council.
21
22 East Grand Forks - Administration
(B) Waiver of claim. The verified account may, if so directed by the Council, be waived if, on the
reverse side of the check, above the space for endorsement by the payee, the following statement is
printed.
The undersigned payee, in endorsing this check, declares that the same is received in
payment of a just and correct claim against the city, and that no part of it has heretofore
been paid.
(C) Time of filing claim. In order to have his claim considered by the Council at a regular meeting,
the claimant must have filed the same in proper form with the City Administrator at least 2 days prior
to the time scheduled for the meeting.
(D) Disbursements. All disbursements shall be made by check signed by the proper officers after
being duly authorized by the Council, and every such check shall specify the purpose for which the
disbursement is made and indicate that it is to be paid out of the proper fund. But no such order shall
be paid until there is money to the credit of the fund out of which it is to be paid sufficient to pay the
same, together with all then outstanding encumbrances upon such fund. No claim against the city shall
be allowed, except as otherwise provided in this title, unless accompanied by an itemized account and
voucher, pay- roll or time sheet signed by a responsible officer who has personal knowledge of the facts
in the case and certifies to the correctness and reasonableness of the claim and that it is a proper claim
against the city; provided, however, that the Council may provide for a regular payment without specific
individual authorization or filing of an itemized account and voucher, payroll or time sheet of the salaries
and wages of regular employees or laborers, and any other fixed charges which have been previously
duly and regularly authorized.
(1981 Code, § 2.30)
(E) Delegation of authority. The city delegates its authority to pay certain claims against the city,
with exception of litigation claims, to the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer; and, in his absence, to
the Finance Director and to the Deputy Clerk-Treasurer. The city shall disburse payments on a regular
basis to meet its obligations to vendors as part of the ongoing business of the city. The city is also
authorized to make payments to meet its payroll obligations. The delegated payment authority will be
reviewed monthly by the City Council and the City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer shall provide to the
City Council a report of all disbursements for each payment period at the next regularly scheduled
Council meeting. Payment obligations to vendors must conform to the city purchasing policy as follows:
(1) Purchases under $2,000. Department heads may approve purchases under $2,000.
(2) Purchases from $2,000 to $10,000. Require signature of Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer.
(3) Purchases over $10,000. Require City Council approval.
2010 S-1
City Policies 23
(4) Purchases between $10,000 and $100,000. Require competitive quotes from at least 2
vendors and City Council approval.
(5) Purchases over $100,000. Require competitive advertised bids and City Council approval.
(6) Special assessment projects over $50,000. Local improvements projects financed in part
or in whole by special assessments require advertised bids and City Council approval.
(7) Requests denied by the Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer can seek City Council approval to
override.
(Ord. 307, 3rd Series, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 32.03 FACSIMILE SIGNATURES.
The City Administrator is authorized to request a depository of city funds to honor an order for
payment when the instrument bears a facsimile of his signature and other duly designated officials and
to charge the same to the account designated thereon or upon which it is drawn, as effectively as though
it were his manually written signature. The authority is granted only for the purpose of permitting the
officers an economy of time and effort.
(1981 Code, § 2.31)
§ 32.04 CITY SEAL.
All contracts to which the city is a party, in addition to being signed by the Mayor and City
Administrator, shall be sealed with the city’s seal. The seal shall be kept in the custody of the City
Administrator and affixed by him. The official seal shall be in a circular form, have engraved thereupon
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS and such other words, figures or emblems as the Council may,
by resolution, designate.
(1981 Code, § 2.80)
§ 32.05 CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM.
(A) Establishment. Subject to the approval of the voters, there is established for the city the Civil
Service Personnel System authorized by M.S. Chapter 44, as it may be amended from time to time.
(B) Classified service. Every employee, as defined by M.S. Chapter 44, as it may be amended from
time to time, shall be in the classified service except those excluded from the classified service by that
law and the following employees, who are expressly excluded:
2010 S-1
24 East Grand Forks - Administration
(1) Assessor and assistants;
(2) City Attorney;
(3) Volunteer firefighters;
(4) City physician and health officer;
(5) Every employee hired by the day or week to perform unskilled or semi-skilled labor;
(6) Seasonal employees hired for less than 6 months in any calendar year;
(7) Any person employed in a professional or scientific capacity to make or conduct a
temporary and special inquiry, investigation, or examination on behalf of the Council or any agency of
the city.
(C) Personnel Board. There is created a Personnel Board for the city consisting of 3 members who
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council. The provisions of M.S. Chapter 44,
as it may be amended from time to time shall apply to the composition, terms, appointment, qualification
and removal of members of the Personnel Board.
(D) Powers and duties. The Personnel Board shall have control and supervision over the
employment, promotion, discharge and suspension of all employees in the classified service as provided
in M.S. Chapter 44, as it may be amended from time to time.
(1981 Code, § 2.52) (Ord. 152, eff. 11-6-1956)
2010 S-1
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
33.01 Revenue from sanitary sewerage service
33.02 Lodging tax
§ 33.01 REVENUE FROM SANITARY SEWERAGE SERVICE.
The revenue received from the charges and rates for the sanitary sewerage service shall be paid into
a separate fund and used, first, to meet costs of operating and maintaining the sewerage service facilities,
including maintenance equipment. When these costs are met and paid, the remaining balance shall be
applied to pay capital charges represented by bonds and the interest thereon and to the reasonable
requirements for replacements or obsolescence.
(1981 Code, § 2.84) (Ord. 170, eff. 5-23-1959)
§ 33.02 LODGING TAX.
(A) The city imposes a tax of 3% on the gross receipts from the furnishing for consideration of
lodging at a motel, hotel, tourist court or other use of space by a transient within the city, other than the
renting or leasing of such space for a continuous period of 30 days or more.
(B) The tax authorized herewith shall be the personal obligation of the operator of any such motel,
hotel, or other space used by a transient and shall constitute a debt owed to the city by the operator
extinguishable only by payment to the city. The operator is defined to be the person who is the
proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, licensee, or any other
capacity.
(C) The tax shall be collected by the operator at the time the payment for the lodging is made and
shall be remitted to the city on or before the twenty-fifth day of the month following the month within
which the tax is collected.
(D) The City Administrator is herewith authorized to establish administrative regulations to effect
the collection of the tax and any interest and penalties thereon.
25
26 East Grand Forks - Administration
(E) Any operator failing to make payment by the twenty-fifth day of the month as specified in
division (C) of this section shall be required to pay a penalty of 5% of the tax amount remaining unpaid,
and thereafter an additional penalty of 10% if the tax is not paid within 30 days thereafter; in addition,
interest at the rate of 8% per annum shall be paid in addition to such penalties on the amount of tax
remaining unpaid until the tax shall have been paid in full. The City Attorney is authorized to commence
such legal action as is necessary to collect all taxes, interest, and penalties due hereunder.
(Ord. 99, 3rd Series, eff. 8-1-1989)
(F) The Council may, by resolution, designate the recipient of 95% of the gross proceeds derived
from the tax imposed by this section, with the balance of the gross proceeds to be used to provide
reimbursement for administrative costs of collection and administration of the tax by the city.
(Ord. 122, 3rd Series, eff. 10-12-1990)
(G) This section shall be effective August 1, 1989, for all lodging furnished after 12:01 a.m. on
such date.
(Ord. 99, 3rd Series, eff. 8-1-1989)
(1981 Code, § 5.63) (Am. Ord. 156, 3rd Series, passed 5-26-1993; Am. Ord. 266, 3rd Series, passed
1-7-2003)
CHAPTER 34: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
34.01 Policy and purpose
34.02 Definitions
34.03 Establishment of emergency management organization
34.04 Powers and duties of Director
34.05 Local emergencies
34.06 Emergency regulations
34.07 Emergency management a government function
34.08 Participation in labor disputes or politics
34.99 Penalty
§ 34.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and
destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado, blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes, or
from sabotage, hostile action, or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure; and in order
to insure that preparations of this city will be adequate to deal with those disasters, and generally, to
provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the
lives and property of the people of this city, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary:
(A) To establish a city emergency management organization responsible for city planning and
preparation for emergency government operations in time of disasters.
(B) To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and disasters.
(C) To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city and other political subdivisions of
this state and of other states with respect to the carrying out of emergency-preparedness functions.
(D) To comply with the provisions of M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time, which
requires that each political subdivision of the state shall establish a local organization for emergency
management.
27
28 East Grand Forks - Administration
§ 34.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
DISASTER. A situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to the health and safety
of any person, or a situation which has resulted in or is likely to result in catastrophic loss to property,
and for which traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area are unable to repair or
prevent the injury or loss.
EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for immediate action to
prevent from developing or occurring.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency
functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize,
and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado, and other acts of
nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from industrial hazardous material mishaps. These functions
include, without limitation, fire-fighting services, police services, emergency medical services,
engineering, warning services, communications, radiological, and chemical, evacuation, congregate care,
emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant protection, temporary
restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civil protection, together with all other
activities necessary or incidental for carrying out the foregoing functions. Emergency management
includes those activities sometimes referred to as CIVIL DEFENSE functions.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES. The total personnel resources engaged in city-level
emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any rule or order
thereunder. This includes personnel from city departments, authorized volunteers, and private
organizations and agencies.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION. The staff responsible for coordinating
city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. This organization provides city liaison and
coordination with federal, state, and local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and
assures implementation of federal and state program requirements.
§ 34.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.
There is hereby created within the city government an emergency management organization which
shall be under the supervision and control of the City Emergency Management Director, called the
Director. The Director shall be appointed by the City Council for an indefinite term and may be
removed by the Council at any time. The Director shall serve with a salary as established by the City
Emergency Management 29
Council and shall be paid his or her necessary expenses. The Director shall have direct responsibility
for the organization, administration and operation of the emergency preparedness organization, subject
to the direction and control of the Council.
§ 34.04 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
(A) The Director shall represent the city on any regional or state conference for emergency
management. The Director shall develop proposed mutual aid agreements with other political
subdivisions of the state for reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in an emergency too
great to be dealt with unassisted, and shall present these agreements to the Council for its action. These
arrangements shall be consistent with the State Emergency Plan.
(B) The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human resources, industries, resources, and
facilities of the city as deemed necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management and
to plan for their most efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster. The Director shall establish the
economic stabilization systems and measures, service staffs, boards, and sub-boards required, in
accordance with state and federal plans and directions subject to the approval of the Mayor.
(C) The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the emergency preparedness
of the city and shall present the plan to the Council for its approval. When the Council has approved
the plan, it shall be the duty of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the city to
perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in like
manner from time to time. The Director shall coordinate the emergency management activities of the
city to the end that they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plans of the federal
government and the state and correlated with emergency plans of the county and other political
subdivisions within the state.
(D) In accordance with the State and City Emergency Plan, the Director shall institute training
programs, public information programs and conduct practice warning alerts and emergency exercises
as may be necessary to assure prompt and effective operation of the City Emergency Plan when a disaster
occurs.
(E) The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment, supplies, and facilities of existing
departments and agencies of the city to the maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of
all city departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and extend
services and facilities to the city's emergency management organization and to the Governor upon
request. The head of each department or agency in cooperation with the Director shall be responsible
for the planning and programming of those emergency activities as will involve the utilization of the
facilities of the department or agency.
30 East Grand Forks - Administration
(F) The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments and agencies affected, assist in
the organizing, recruiting, and training of emergency management personnel, which may be required
on a volunteer basis to carry out the emergency plans of the city and state. To the extent that emergency
personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or agency for emergencies, they shall be
assigned to the departments or agencies and shall be under the administration and control of the
department or agency.
(G) Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director shall coordinate the activity of
municipal emergency management organizations within the city and assist in establishing and conducting
training programs as required to assure emergency operational capability in the several services as
provided by M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time.
(H) The Director shall carry out all orders, rules, and regulations issued by the Governor with
reference to emergency management.
(I) The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency preparedness activities when
requested by the Mayor.
§ 34.05 LOCAL EMERGENCIES.
(A) A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or her legal successor. It shall
not be continued for a period in excess of 3 days except by or with the consent of the Council. Any
order, or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be given prompt
and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the City Administrator.
(B) A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of the response and recovery
aspects of applicable local or inter-jurisdictional disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance
thereunder.
(C) No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local emergency unless expressly authorized
by the agreement under which the agency functions. However, an inter-jurisdictional disaster agency
shall provide aid and services in accordance with the agreement under which it functions.
Penalty, see § 34.99
§ 34.06 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
(A) Whenever necessary, to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for an emergency for which
adequate regulations have not been adopted by the Governor or the Council, the Council may by
resolution promulgate regulations, consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation,
respecting: the conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies; the repair, maintenance,
Emergency Management 31
and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health, fire, and safety regulations, drills or
practice periods required for preliminary training, and all other matters which are required to protect
public safety, health, and welfare in declared emergencies.
(B) Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing; shall be dated; shall refer to the
particular emergency to which it pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City
Administrator. A copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business hours.
Notice of the existence of these regulations and their availability for inspection at the City
Administrator's Office shall be conspicuously posted at the front of the city hall or other headquarters
of the city or at other places in the affected area as the Council shall designate in the resolution. By
resolution, the Council may modify or rescind a regulation.
(C) The Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any time. If not sooner rescinded,
every regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency
to which it relates, whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule, or regulation inconsistent with an
emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be suspended during the period of time and to
the extent conflict exists.
(D) During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions of M.S. § 12.31, as it may be
amended from time to time and notwithstanding any statutory or Charter provision to the contrary,
empowered, through its Council, acting within or without the corporate limits of the city, to enter into
contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat the disaster by protecting the health and safety of
persons and property and providing emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster. The city may
exercise these powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster without compliance with the
time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public
work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and materials, limitations upon tax
levies, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds, including, but not limited to, publication
of resolutions, publication of calls for bids, provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions relating
to low bids, and requirement for bids.
Penalty, see § 34.99
§ 34.07 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.
All functions and activities relating to emergency management are hereby declared to be
governmental functions. The provisions of this section shall not affect the right of any person to receive
benefits to which he would otherwise be entitled under this resolution or under the worker's
compensation law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any person to receive any benefits or
compensation under any act of Congress.
32 East Grand Forks - Administration
§ 34.08 PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.
The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form of political activity, nor
shall it be employed directly or indirectly for political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor
dispute.
§ 34.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation adopted thereunder relating
to acts, omissions, or conduct other than official acts of city employees or officers is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
50. UTILITIES GENERALLY
51. GARBAGE AND REFUSE
52. WATER SERVICE
53. SEWER REGULATIONS
54. STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY
1
2010 S-1
2 East Grand Forks - Public Works
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES GENERALLY
Section
General Provisions
50.01 Definitions
50.02 Fixing rates and charges
50.03 Contractual contents
50.04 Electric energy franchise
50.05 Toilet installation required
Rules and Regulations Relating to City Utilities
50.20 Disconnection for late payment
50.21 Application, connection and sale of service
50.22 Discontinuance of service
50.23 Ownership of city utilities
50.24 Right of entry
50.25 Meter test
50.26 Unlawful acts
50.27 City utility services and charges a lien
50.28 Damage to city utility plant, fixture, equipment or appurtenance
50.29 City utility service outside the city
50.30 Limitation of liability for interruption of electric service
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
BUSINESS USE and INDUSTRIAL USE. The use of premises, or a portion thereof, for a purpose
other than residential.
3
4 East Grand Forks - Public Works
COMPANY, GRANTEE and FRANCHISEE. Any private utility system to which a franchise has
been granted by the city.
CONSUMER and CUSTOMER. Any user of a utility.
MUNICIPAL UTILITY. Any municipally owned utility system or service, including electric,
water, sewerage and rubbish collection.
RESIDENTIAL SERVICE and RESIDENTIAL USE. Furnishing a utility for residential
occupancy, including 1-family and 2-family dwellings, but not including hotels, motels, boarding houses
or apartment houses, unless each unit or apartment is metered separately.
SERVICE. Providing a particular utility to a customer or consumer.
UTILITY. All utility services, whether the same be public municipally owned facilities or furnished
by private utility companies, except those the regulation of which has been placed under the exclusive
authority of the state or federal government.
(1981 Code, § 12.01)
§ 50.02 FIXING RATES AND CHARGES.
All utility rates and charges shall be fixed and determined as set forth in this section.
(A) Water and electric services. Water and electric rates and charges shall be fixed and determined
by the Water, Light, Power and Building Commission and kept on file in the office of such Commission
together with the effective dates thereof.
(B) Sewage and refuse collection services. All rates and charges for sewage and refuse collection,
including, but not by way of limitation, rates for service, permit fees, connection and meter reading fees,
disconnection fees, reconnection fees, including penalties for non payment if any, and interest rates shall
be fixed, determined and amended by the Council and adopted by resolution. This authority shall also
extend to establishing and classifying service connection and service fees based upon property usage.
The resolution, containing the effective date thereof, shall be kept on file and open to inspection in the
office of the City Administrator and shall be uniformly enforced.
(C) Franchise services. All rates and charges for public utility franchisees, not regulated by an
agency of the state, shall be fixed and determined by the Council and adopted by resolution. The rates
and charges shall be available in the office of the City Administrator. Public utility company rates and
Utilities Generally 5
charges may be fixed and determined by the respective franchisees in compliance with this section, as
follows:
(1) No such rate or charge involving an increase thereof shall become effective until approved
by the Council. To request such increase the franchisee shall prepare its written petition setting forth
the then current and proposed rates and charges, the effective date of the proposed increases (which may
not be within 90 days of filing the petition), and the reason or reasons necessitating the proposed increase
or increases. The petition shall be filed with the Council by serving the same on the City Administrator
in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested;
(2) Within 30 days of such filing the Council shall adopt a resolution and serve the same upon
the resident superintendent of the franchisee in like manner as the petition may be served either
approving the proposed increases or ordering a hearing thereon to be held within 60 days thereof. If no
such action is taken by the Council, the increase or increases shall take effect on the date stated in the
franchisee’s petition as though approved by the Council;
(3) Prior to the hearing date, the franchisee shall, without delay, comply with the city’s
reasonable requests for examination and copying of all books, records, documents, and other information
relating to the subject matter of the petition. Should the franchisee unreasonably delay, fail or refuse such
requests, the same shall be grounds for a continuance of the hearing date;
(4) Notice of hearing shall be in the form and manner stated in the resolution. At the hearing
all persons wishing to be heard thereon shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity. Findings and a
decision shall be made by the Council within 15 days after the hearing and served upon the franchisee.
(1981 Code, § 12.02) (Ord. 10, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
§ 50.03 CONTRACTUAL CONTENTS.
Provisions of this chapter relating to municipal utilities shall constitute portions of the contract
between the city and all consumers of municipal utility services, and every such consumer shall be
deemed to assent to the same.
(1981 Code, § 12.03)
§ 50.04 ELECTRIC ENERGY FRANCHISE.
(A) Franchise required. Except as otherwise provided by law, no person, sole proprietorship,
partnership, corporation or other business entity, profit or non-profit, shall transmit, furnish, deliver or
receive, or cause to be transmitted, furnished, delivered, or received electric energy consumed within
the city limits for light, power, heat and/or other purposes for public and/or private use within and
through the limits of the city, or place or maintain any permanent or semi-permanent fixtures in, over,
upon, or under any street or public place for the purpose of operating a public utility or transmitting,
6 East Grand Forks - Public Works
furnishing, delivering or receiving, or causing to be transmitted, furnished, delivered, or received
electric energy or for any other purpose, except pursuant to a franchise from the city. A franchise may
be granted only by ordinance. Every ordinance granting a franchise shall contain all the terms and
conditions of the franchise. The grantee shall bear the costs of publication of the franchise ordinance and
shall make a sufficient deposit with the City Administrator to guarantee publication before the ordinance
is passed.
(B) Term. No perpetual franchise or privilege shall ever be created, nor shall any exclusive
franchise or privilege be granted.
(C) Franchise fee. As a part of any franchise ordinance adopted, the city may impose upon the
grantee a franchise fee set by resolution of the City Council. The franchise fee shall be expressed as a
specified charge per kilowatt hour of electric energy transmitted, furnished, delivered, or received,
which fee shall be set by the City Council and imposed upon each kilowatt hour of electric energy
transmitted, furnished, delivered or received within the city. The franchise fee may be amended by
resolution from time to time; however, no amendment shall be adopted until after at least 30-days’
written notice enclosing such proposed amendment has been served upon the grantee by certified mail.
The franchise fee may not be changed more often than once in each calendar year.
(1981 Code, § 12.05) (Ord. 181, 3rd Series, eff. 6-29-1995)
§ 50.05 TOILET INSTALLATION REQUIRED.
It is the duty of every owner or occupant of any property within the city having a dwelling house
or business building situated thereon, which property is within 200 feet of any municipal water and sewer
mains, to install a toilet in such dwelling or business building and make connection thereof with such
water and sewer mains. The city shall serve written notice upon the owner or occupant requiring the
installation of toilet facilities upon premises described in the notice and connection thereof with the sewer
and water mains, all of which shall be done within 30 days after service of the written notice. Whenever
any owner or occupant shall default in compliance with such written notice the Council may by
resolution direct that a toilet be installed and connection made with the water and sewer mains and that
the actual cost of such installation be paid in the first instance out of the General Revenue Fund and
assessed against the property so benefitted. After such installation and connection is completed by order
of the Council, the city shall serve a written notice of intention to make an assessment therefor. If such
assessment is not paid within 10 days the city shall certify the amount thereof to the County Auditor in
the same manner as with other special assessments, provided that the Council may by resolution provide
that the assessment be spread over a term of 3 years upon written request by the owner of the property.
(1981 Code, § 9.08) (Ord. 68, 3rd Series, eff. 5-16-1986)
Utilities Generally 7
RULES AND REGULATIONS RELATING TO CITY UTILITIES
§ 50.20 DISCONNECTION FOR LATE PAYMENT.
(A) It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to customers by reason of nonpayment
of bills only after notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city's form for
application for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address, room number,
and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions
to the effect:
(1) That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on the bill; and
(2) That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill will be mailed containing
a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within 10 days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be
discontinued for nonpayment; and
(3) That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill shall have a right to a hearing
at which time he or she may be represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his or her
choosing and may present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the city official
in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to order that the customer's service not be
discontinued and shall have the authority to make a final determination of the customer's complaint.
(B) Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only questions of proper and
correct billing will be considered. In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing
procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event until the
charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
(C) When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility service to a customer for
nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only after all bills for service then due have been paid,
along with a turn-on charge in an amount set by City Council.
§ 50.21 APPLICATION, CONNECTION AND SALE OF SERVICE.
Application for municipal utility services shall be made upon forms supplied by the city and strictly
in accordance therewith. No connection shall be made until consent has been received from the city to
make the same. All municipal utilities shall be sold and delivered to consumers under the then applicable
rate applied to the amount of such utilities taken as metered or ascertained in connection with such rates.
(1981 Code, § 12.04, Subd. 2) (Ord. 164, 3rd Series, eff. 2-18-1994)
8 East Grand Forks - Public Works
§ 50.22 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
All municipal utilities may be shut off in conformance with § 50.20 whenever it is found that:
(A) The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any person working on any connection with
the municipal utility systems, has violated any requirement of the City Code relative thereto, or any
connection therewith; or
(B) Any charge for a municipal utility service, or any other financial obligation imposed on the
present owner or occupant of the premises served, is unpaid after due notice thereof; or
(C) There is fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant in connection with any application
for service or delivery or charges therefor.
(1981 Code, § 12.04, Subd. 3) (Ord. 164, 3rd Series, eff. 2-18-1994)
§ 50.23 OWNERSHIP OF CITY UTILITIES.
Ownership of all municipal utilities, plants, lines, mains, extensions and appurtenances thereto shall
be and remain in the city, and no person shall own any part or portion thereof; provided, however, that
private facilities and appurtenances constructed on private property are not intended to be included in
municipal ownership.
(1981 Code, § 12.04, Subd. 4) (Ord. 164, 3rd Series, eff. 2-18-1994)
§ 50.24 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
The city has the right to enter, in conformance with § 10.20, in and upon private property, including
buildings and dwelling houses, in or upon which is installed a municipal utility, or connection therewith,
at all times reasonable under the circumstances for the purpose of reading utility meters, for the purpose
of inspection and repair of meters or a utility system, or any part thereof, and for the purpose of
connecting and disconnecting service.
(1981 Code, § 12.04, Subd. 5) (Ord. 164, 3rd Series, eff. 2-18-1994)
§ 50.25 METER TEST.
Whenever a consumer shall request the city to test any utility meter in use by him, such a request
shall be accompanied by a cash deposit in an amount set by City Council from time to time if required
by the Superintendent of Utilities for each meter to be tested. If any such meter is found to be inaccurate
the same shall be replaced with an accurate meter and the deposit thereon refunded. If the meter shall
be found to be accurate in its recordings or calculations it shall be reinstalled and the deposit in an
amount set by City Council from time to time shall be retained by the city to defray the cost of such test.
(1981 Code, § 12.04, Subd. 6) (Ord. 164, 3rd Series, eff. 2-18-1994)
Utilities Generally 9
§ 50.26 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure, mar, deface, disturb, or
in any way interfere with any buildings, attachments, machinery, apparatus, equipment, fixture, or
appurtenance of any municipal utility or municipal utility system or commit any act tending to obstruct
or impair the use of any municipal utility.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to make any connection with any municipal utility system without
first having applied for and received permission from the city to make the same.
(C) It is unlawful for any person to turn on or connect a utility when the same has been turned off
or disconnected by the city for non-payment of a bill, or for any other reason, without first having
obtained a permit to do so from the city.
(D) It is unlawful for any person to jumper or by any means or device fully or partially circumvent
a municipal utility meter or to knowingly use or consume unmetered utilities or use the services of any
utility system, the use of which the proper billing authorities have no knowledge.
(1981 Code, § 12.04, Subd. 7) (Ord. 164, 3rd Series, eff. 2-18-1994) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.27 CITY UTILITY SERVICES AND CHARGES A LIEN.
(A) Payment for all municipal utility (as that term is defined in § 50.01) service and charges shall
be the primary responsibility of the owner of the premises served and shall be billed to him unless
otherwise contracted for and authorized in writing by the owner and the tenant, as agent for the owner,
and consented to by the city. The city may collect the same in a civil action or, in the alternative and at
the option of the city, as otherwise provided in this section.
(B) Each such account is hereby made a lien upon the premises served. All such accounts which
are more than 45 days past due may, when authorized by resolution of the Council, be certified by the
City Administrator to the County Auditor, and the City Administrator in so certifying shall specify the
amount thereof, the description of the premises served, and the name of the owner thereof. The amount
so certified shall be extended by the Auditor on the tax rolls against such premises in the same manner
as other taxes and collected by the County Treasurer and paid to the city along with other taxes.
(1981 Code, § 12.04, Subd. 8) (Ord. 69, 3rd Series, eff. 5-16-1986; Ord. 164, 3rd Series, eff.
2-18-1994)
10 East Grand Forks - Public Works
§ 50.28 DAMAGE TO A CITY UTILITY PLANT, FIXTURE, EQUIPMENT OR
APPURTENANCE.
Anyone causing damage to any municipal utility plant, fixture, equipment or appurtenance, including
but not limited to, meters, street lights, water hydrants and curb cocks shall pay the reasonable value
thereof, including labor for renewal and installation of any equipment, including excavation, if
necessary, and shall, in effect, be an insurer of any equipment in his possession or with which he comes
in contact.
(1981 Code, § 12.04, Subd. 9) (Ord. 164, 3rd Series, eff. 2-18-1994)
§ 50.29 CITY UTILITY SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY.
Premises located outside the city shall not be connected to or served by any municipal utility (except
electric) except such premises as are publicly owned or presently served. Persons needing municipal
utility service whose property is located outside the corporate limits must initiate and complete
annexation proceedings in advance prior to being provided with such service or services.
(1981 Code, § 12.04, Subd. 10) (Ord. 164, 3rd Series, eff. 2-18-1994)
§ 50.30 LIMITATION OF LIABILITY FOR INTERRUPTION OF ELECTRIC SERVICE.
The city will endeavor to provide continuous but does not guarantee an uninterrupted or undisturbed
supply of electric service. The city will not be held responsible for any loss or damage resulting from
the interruption or disturbance of service for any cause other than gross negligence of the city. The city
will not be liable for any loss of profits or other consequential damages resulting from the use of service
or any interruption or disturbance of service.
(1981 Code, § 12.04, Subd. 11) (Ord. 164, 3rd Series, eff. 2-18-1994)
CHAPTER 51: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
51.01 Definitions
51.02 Sanitation collection service required
51.03 Container required; placement
51.04 Meddling with trash receptacles prohibited
51.05 Containers to be kept sanitary and secure
51.06 Unauthorized private collections prohibited
51.07 Sanitation service: city options
51.08 [Reserved]
51.09 Removal of building materials
51.10 Prohibited acts
51.11 Nonresidential customers; container types; collection schedules
51.12 Manner of collection and transportation
51.13 Licensing for collection
51.14 Collection of leaves, trees or tree limbs
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
GARBAGE. Organic refuse resulting from the preparation of food, and decayed and spoiled food
from any source.
RUBBISH. All inorganic refuse matter such as tin cans, glass, paper, ashes and the like.
§ 51.02 SANITATION COLLECTION SERVICE REQUIRED.
Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any premises or any place where
garbage or rubbish accumulates shall subscribe to a sanitation collection service.
Penalty, see § 10.99
11
12 East Grand Forks - Public Works
§ 51.03 CONTAINER REQUIRED; PLACEMENT.
(A) It shall be the duty of every person whose garbage and refuse is collected by the sanitation
collection service to provide a container or containers for garbage and refuse, sufficient in size and
number to accommodate and securely keep all garbage and refuse that may accumulate between
collections. Garbage containers shall be watertight and constructed of a solid and durable grade of
metal, plastic, or paper material.
(B) It shall be the duty of every person whose garbage and refuse is collected by the sanitation
collection service to place their garbage containers directly behind the curbline of the street abutting their
property or in the absence of a curb directly behind the ditch line abutting their property. In no event
shall containers be placed in the street or on the sidewalk or in any manner placed where the containers
will interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. It shall be the responsibility of the subscriber to place
the containers no earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the afternoon preceding the collection day, and to remove the
container within 24 hours of collection of the garbage and refuse.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.04 MEDDLING WITH TRASH RECEPTACLES PROHIBITED.
(A) It shall be unlawful to meddle with garbage cans, trash or rubbish receptacles or in any way
pilfer, search or scatter contents of garbage cans or rubbish receptacles in or upon any street or alley
within the city limits.
(B) This section shall not apply to persons authorized by the city or persons authorized by state or
federal law to search or otherwise meddle with trash receptacles.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.05 CONTAINERS TO BE KEPT SANITARY AND SECURE.
All containers shall be kept clean and free from accumulation of any substance remaining attached
to the inside of the container which would attract or breed flies, mosquitoes, or other insects. The area
surrounding garbage containers shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. The contents of
all receptacles shall be protected so that the wind cannot scatter the contents over the streets, alleys or
other property within the city. All containers shall be securely closed in a manner as to prevent the
scattering of the contents and to make them inaccessible to insects, rodents and other animals.
Penalty, see § 10.99
2010 S-1 Repl.
Garbage and Refuse 13
§ 51.06 UNAUTHORIZED PRIVATE COLLECTIONS PROHIBITED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to transport garbage or refuse for hire which has been
collected from any premises within the city over any public street within the city.
(B) This section shall not apply to any person who at the time of the activity is operating under a
valid contract or franchise granted by the city which authorizes that person to use the public streets to
conduct that activity.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.07 SANITATION SERVICE: CITY OPTIONS.
The City Council may provide for sanitation collection services within the city by use of city
employees and vehicles, or it may grant licenses under the terms and conditions of § 51.13, or it may
contract with 1 or more contractors for the provision of these services under the terms and conditions
negotiated with the contractors, except that the provisions for insurance under § 51.13(E) shall always
apply.
§ 51.08 [RESERVED]
§ 51.09 REMOVAL OF BUILDING MATERIALS.
Waste from building operations, rock waste, building materials or other refuse resulting from
building or remodeling operations or resulting from a general cleanup of vacant or improved property
shall be removed by the building contractor, owner or occupant of the building at his or her own
expense. It shall be unlawful for any person to place those materials in any dumpster or other trash
receptacle for disposal by the city or any agent or contractor of the city.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.10 PROHIBITED ACTS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw or deposit any garbage, trash, debris,
stagnant water or dead animal into, upon or along any public property or private property of another,
except as may be specifically provided by this chapter.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person owning or otherwise in control of any premises within the
city to permit any of the conditions described in division (A) to exist upon property owned or controlled
by him or her after having actual or constructive notice thereof.
14 East Grand Forks - Public Works
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person to place in any container any material other than as
specifically provided in this chapter.
(D) It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or maintain garbage or trash except as provided
for by this chapter.
(E) It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any burning match, charcoal, ember, or other
material in any container used for the disposal of garbage.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.11 NONRESIDENTIAL CUSTOMERS; CONTAINER TYPES; COLLECTION
SCHEDULES.
(A) It shall be the duty of the owner or person otherwise in charge of multi-family, institutional or
industrial premises within the city to cause all garbage and trash accumulated on the premises to be
placed in disposable containers, or commercial-type containers. Commercial-type containers may be
used and may be placed at a location on the premises as arranged between the customer and the collector,
but subject to review by the city at any time.
(B) Disposable containers shall be placed at a location on the premises which is readily accessible
to the collector.
(C) The amount and character of garbage shall be considered in establishing size of commercial
containers and frequency of pickup. The city shall have final authority to establish the size and
frequency based on the history of amount and type of garbage generated by the customer. The collection
and removal of garbage and trash from premises used for commercial, institutional, or industrial
purposes shall be made as often as necessary in order to maintain the premises free of accumulations.
Garbage, except dry trash in contractor-supplied containers, shall be collected not less than 1 time each
week, except for roll-off containers which shall not be subject to this provision so long as they are used
solely for brush and dry trash.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.12 MANNER OF COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION.
(A) The collection, removal and disposal of all garbage, trash and brush shall be carried on in a
systematic, efficient manner to keep the city in a clean and sanitary condition.
(B) All vehicles used for the collection and transportation of garbage and trash shall be equipped
with suitable covers which shall be used to prevent blowing or scattering of refuse while garbage and
trash are being transported for disposal.
Penalty, see § 10.99
Garbage and Refuse 15
§ 51.13 LICENSING FOR COLLECTION.
(A) Purpose. In order to provide for a continuous system of refuse collection and disposal in a
manner which meets the needs and conveniences of the residents of the city and in order to protect the
area from the problems of uncoordinated, unsanitary and improper solid waste disposal, the City Council
may determine that it is in the best interests of the residents of the city to require licenses of persons
collecting or hauling garbage and rubbish for hire, reserving to the city the right and authority to contract
with 1 or more operators to provide these services.
(B) Licensing. No person may collect or haul garbage or rubbish within the city without first
obtaining a written license from the City Council. An application for a license shall be submitted in
writing to the City Clerk, and shall contain the following information:
(1) Name and address of the applicant;
(2) Description of the equipment which will be used within the city by the applicant;
(3) A schedule of the rate that will be charged by the applicant for the various categories of
customers within the city;
(4) Evidence of compliance with the other applicable sections of this chapter.
(C) Franchise. The City Council may exercise its reserved right to contract with 1 or more
operators for the collection of garbage and rubbish within the city.
(D) Suspension of license or contract. A contract or license issued under the provisions of this
section may be revoked or suspended for a violation of this chapter or other applicable regulations of law
upon a showing that the contractor or licensee has failed to comply with that regulation.
(E) Financial responsibility. The licensee or contractor shall show financial responsibility or a
certificate of insurance coverage prior to obtaining the license or franchise whereby each vehicle to be
used by the licensee or contractor shall be covered against loss or injury in the following amounts:
$300,000 when the claim is one for death by wrongful act or omission and $300,000 to any claimant in
any other case; $1,000,000 for any number of claims arising out of a single occurrence. The licensee
or contractor shall hold the city harmless and agrees to defend and indemnify the city, and the city's
employees and agents, for any claims, damages, losses, and expenses related to the work under the
license or contract. The city shall be named as an additional insured under that insurance for the services
provided under the license or contract. The licensee's or contractor's insurance shall be the primary
insurance for the city and the licensee or contractor shall provide a certificate of insurance on the city's
approved form which verifies the existence of the insurance required, including provisions to hold the
city harmless and defend and indemnify the city. The licensee or contractor shall also provide evidence
of workers compensation insurance for employees. These insurance policies shall be for the full term
16 East Grand Forks - Public Works
of the license or franchise and shall provide for the giving of 10-days’ prior notice to the city of the
termination or cancellation of these policies. In case any policies are terminated or cancelled, the license
or contract shall be automatically revoked upon receipt by the City Clerk of the termination or
cancellation.
(F) Design of equipment. All trucks or motor vehicles used by the licensee or contractor shall be
water-tight so as not to allow the leakage of liquids or refuse while hauling the same and shall be covered
with a covering to prevent the scattering of its contents upon the public streets or private properties in
the city.
(G) Inspections. All vehicles used for garbage or rubbish shall be made available for inspection
within the city at the times and places as the City Council may designate.
(H) Bond. The contractor or licensee may be required to furnish a surety bond in an amount as the
City Council deems necessary running to and approved by the City Council, guaranteeing the
franchisee's or licensee's faithful and continuous performance of the terms of the franchise, license or
contract and of this chapter.
§ 51.14 COLLECTION OF LEAVES, TREES OR TREE LIMBS.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the collection for hire by other persons of
leaves, trees or tree limbs.
CHAPTER 52: WATER SERVICE
Section
52.01 Deficiency of water and shutting off water
52.02 Repair of leaks
52.03 Abandonment of service lines
52.04 Service pipes
52.05 Private water supplies
52.06 Restricted hours for sprinkling
52.07 Private fire hose connections
52.08 Opening hydrants
§ 52.01 DEFICIENCY OF WATER AND SHUTTING OFF WATER.
The city is not liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of water to customers whether
occasioned by shutting the water off for the purpose of making repairs or connections or by any other
cause whatever. In case of fire, or alarm of fire, water may be shut off to insure a supply for fire
fighting. In making repairs or construction of new works, water may be shut off at any time and kept
off so long as may be necessary.
(1981 Code, § 12.20, Subd. 1)
§ 52.02 REPAIR OF LEAKS.
It is the responsibility of the consumer or owner to maintain the service pipe from the curbstop into
the premises. In case of failure upon the part of any consumer or owner to repair any leak occurring in
the service pipe between the curbstop and the premises within 24 hours after oral or written notice has
been given the owner or occupant of the premises, the water may be shut off and will not be turned on
until a reconnection charge has been paid and the water service has been repaired. When the waste of
water is great or when damage is likely to result from the leak, the water will be turned off if they repair
is not proceeded with immediately.
(1981 Code, § 12.20, Subd. 2) (Ord. 10, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981; Am. Ord. 209, 3rd Series, passed
- - )
17
18 East Grand Forks - Public Works
§ 52.03 ABANDONMENT OF SERVICE LINES.
(A) All service installations connected to the water system that have been abandoned or, for any
reason, have become useless for further service shall be disconnected at the main. The owner of the
premises served by this service shall pay the cost of the excavation and disconnection with city
inspection. The owner or the person performing the disconnection shall have the disconnected service
inspected by the city and approved in writing prior to back filling the excavation. Failure to do so may
result in the requirement for the owner to re-expose the service for proper inspection. It is unlawful for
any person to cause or allow any service pipe to be hammered or squeezed together at the ends to stop
the flow of water, or to save expense in improperly removing such pipe from the main. The improper
disposition thereof shall be corrected by the city or its agent and the cost incurred shall be borne by the
person causing or allowing such work to be done.
(B) Before a permit to move or raze a building is issued by the Building Official, money sufficient
to ensure that the service line will be properly shut off and disconnected shall be deposited with the City
Administrator in an amount set by the Council by resolution. If the work is not properly done within
60 days of making the deposit, the deposit may be used to pay the cost of having the service line shut
off and disconnected with any remainder of the money returned to the depositor.
(C) When a new building is to be erected at the site of an old one and the original service line is
to be reused, the service may be temporarily disconnected at the curb stop, provided that the owner
makes a deposit with the City Administrator in an amount sufficient to ensure that the service line will
be properly shut off and disconnected at the main if the service is not reused, such an amount to be set
by the Council by resolution. If the owner does not utilize the old service within 24 months, the deposit
will revert to the city and be applied to the cost of disconnecting the service at the main, with any
remaining money to be returned to the depositor. If the old service is re used, the deposit will be
refunded when the service has been reconnected, inspected and approved by the Building Official. If
the owner decides to abandon the old service, has it disconnected at the main, and inspected and
approved by the city the deposit will also be refunded.
(D) When a new building is erected on the site of an old one, and it is desired to increase the size
of the water service, a new permit shall be taken out and the regular tapping charge shall be made as if
this were a new service. The old service shall be disconnected at the main by the owner with city
inspection as required above.
(1981 Code, § 12.20, Subd. 3) (Ord. 141, 3rd Series, passed 12-4-1992)
§ 52.04 SERVICE PIPES.
Every service pipe must be laid in such manner as to prevent rupture by settlement. The service
pipe shall be placed not less than 8 feet below the surface in all cases so arranged as to prevent rupture
and stoppage by freezing. Frozen service pipes between the main and the building shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Service pipes must extend from the curb stops to the inside of the building
Water Service 19
or, if not taken into a building, then to the hydrant or other fixtures which they are intended to supply.
A valve, the same size as the service pipe, shall be placed close to the inside wall of the building ahead
of the meter and well protected from freezing. All service pipe between the main and the curb stop must
be copper. Type “K” copper tubing shall be used up to and including 2-inch service. Joints on copper
tubing shall be flared and kept to a minimum. Not more than 1 joint shall be used for a service up to
70 feet in length. All joints shall be left uncovered until inspected. All services of more than 2 inches
in diameter shall be composed of cast iron mechanical joint pipe or PVC pipe. If PVC pipe is used, all
material used to produce the PVC pipe, couplings and fittings shall conform to ASTM 1784, Type 1,
Grade 1, 2000 p.s.i. design strength. Standard dimensional ratio for the pipe shall be SDR 21 (class
200). Minimum size connection with the water mains shall be 3/4 inch in diameter for single occupancy
residences and 1 inch in diameter for all other establishments.
(1981 Code, § 12.20, Subd. 4) (Ord. 81, 3rd Series, eff. 4-17-1987)
§ 52.05 PRIVATE WATER SUPPLIES.
No water pipe of the city water system shall be connected with any pump, well, pipe, tank or any
device that is connected with any other source of water supply and, when such are found, the city shall
notify the owner or occupant to disconnect the same and, if not immediately done, the city water shall
be turned off. Before any new connections to the city system are permitted, the city shall ascertain that
no cross connections will exist when the new connection is made. When a building is connected to city
water the private water supply may be used to serve air conditioning where 10-ton or more capacity has
been installed, provided the piping serving such units is color coded.
(1981 Code, § 12.20, Subd. 5)
§ 52.06 RESTRICTED HOURS FOR SPRINKLING.
Whenever the city shall determine that a shortage of water threatens the city, it may limit the times
and hours during which water may be used from the city water system for lawn and garden sprinkling,
irrigation, car washing, air conditioning, and other uses, or either or any of them. It is unlawful for any
water consumer to cause or permit water to be used in violation of the determination after public
announcement thereof has been made through the news media specifically indicating the restrictions
thereof.
(1981 Code, § 12.20, Subd. 6)
§ 52.07 PRIVATE FIRE HOSE CONNECTIONS.
Owners of lumber yards, factories, stores, elevators, warehouses, hotels, and other buildings, if they
are regular municipal water consumers, may apply for and obtain permission to connect the street mains
with hydrants, large pipes, and hose couplings for use in case of fire only and free of charge for such
use, but at their own installation expense.
(1981 Code, § 12.20, Subd. 7)
20 East Grand Forks - Public Works
§ 52.08 OPENING HYDRANTS.
It is unlawful for any person, other than members of the Fire Department or other person duly
authorized by the city, in pursuance of lawful purpose, to open any fire hydrant or attempt to draw water
from the same or in any manner interfere therewith. It is also unlawful for any person so authorized to
deliver or suffer to be delivered to any other person any hydrant key or wrench, except for the purposes
strictly pertaining to their lawful use.
(1981 Code, § 12.20, Subd. 8) Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 53: SEWER REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
53.001 Definitions
53.002 Control of sewers; administration of chapter
53.003 Building sewers; general requirements
53.004 Tampering with wastewater facilities
53.005 Cost of repairing or restoring sewers
General Regulations
53.015 Deposits of unsanitary manner prohibited
53.016 Discharge of wastewater or other polluted waters
53.017 Restrictions on wastewater disposal facilities
53.018 Installation of service connection to public sewer
Private Wastewater Disposal
53.035 Public sewer not available
53.036 Permits
53.037 Type, capacities, location and layout
53.038 Direct connection required
53.039 Operation and maintenance by owner
53.040 Application of subchapter
Building Sewers and Connections
53.055 Restrictions on new connections
53.056 Building sewer permits
53.057 Costs and expenses
53.058 Separate building sewers required
53.059 Old building sewers; restrictions on use
53.060 Conformance to State Building and Plumbing Code requirements
53.061 Elevation below basement floor
21
22 East Grand Forks - Public Works
53.062 Surface runoff or groundwater connections prohibited
53.063 Excavations
53.064 Licenses
Use of Public Services
53.080 Discharges of unpolluted water
53.081 Discharges of waters or wastes
53.082 Limited discharges
53.083 Discharges hazardous to life or constitute public nuisances
53.084 Increasing use of process water
53.085 Pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities
53.086 Grease, oil and sand interceptors
53.087 Industrial wastes; installations
53.088 Industrial wastes; requirements
53.089 Measurements, tests and analyses of waters and wastes
53.090 Protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials
53.091 Permitting substance or matter to flow or pass into public sewers
53.092 Repairing service connection
53.093 Catch basin or waste traps required for motor vehicle washing or servicing facilities
53.094 Special agreement and arrangement
User Rate Schedule for Charges
53.110 Charges generally
53.111 Purpose
53.112 Definitions
53.113 Establishment of a sewer service charge system
53.114 Determination of sewer service charges
53.115 Sewer service fund
53.116 Administration
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
53.130 Authorized employees permitted to enter all properties
53.131 Authorized employees obtaining information for industrial processes
53.132 Authorized employees to observe safety rules
53.133 Authorized employees permitted to enter all property with easements
53.999 Penalty
Sewer Regulations 23
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.001 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also referred to as the Clean Water Act, being 33
U.S.C. §§ 1253 et seq., as amended.
ASTM. American Society for Testing Materials.
AUTHORITY. This city or its representative thereof.
5 BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD ). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in 5 days at 20° C, expressed in terms
of milligrams per liter (mg/l).
BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives
the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning 3 feet outside the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of
disposal, also referred to as a house connection or service connection.
CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of the city as presently established or as amended
by ordinance or other legal actions at a future time. The term CITY when used herein may also be used
to refer to the City Council and its authorized representative.
CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure specially constructed for the purpose of measuring flow and
sampling of wastes.
EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
serving of food.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Gaseous, liquid and solid wastes resulting from industrial or
manufacturing processes, trade or business, or from the development, recovery and processing of natural
resources, as distinct from residential or domestic strength wastes.
24 East Grand Forks - Public Works
INDUSTRY. Any nongovernmental or nonresidential user of a publicly owned treatment works
which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, latest edition, which is categorized
in Divisions A, B, D, E and I.
INFILTRATION. Water entering the sewage system (including building drains and pipes) from the
ground through means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections and manhole walls.
INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I). The total quantity of water from both infiltration and inflow.
INFLOW. Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system (including building drains) from
sources such as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar drains, yard and area drains, foundation drains,
drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections from storm sewers, catch
basins, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage.
INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the city's wastewater disposal system processes
or operations which causes or significantly contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's
NPDES or SDS permit. The term includes sewage sludge use or disposal by the city in accordance with
published regulations providing guidelines under Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any
regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.), the Clean
Air Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.), the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq.), or
more stringent state criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the city.
MAY. The term is permissive.
MPCA. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Federal regulations establishing
pretreatment standards for introduction of pollutants in publicly-owned wastewater treatment facilities
which are determined to be not susceptible to treatment by those treatment facilities or would interfere
with the operation of those treatment facilities, pursuant to Section 307(b) of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1317(b)).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A
permit issued by the MPCA, setting limits on pollutants that a permittee may legally discharge into
navigable waters of the United States pursuant to Sections 402 and 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342 and
33 U.S.C. § 1345).
NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewers, which overflow
into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or ground water.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration, or during which the only pollutant added is heat.
Sewer Regulations 25
NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE. Wastewater that is primarily introduced by
5 residential users with a BOD concentration not greater than 287 mg/l and a suspended solids (TSS)
concentration not greater than 287 mg/l.
PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.
pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in terms of grams per
liter of solution.
PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewater from industrial sources prior to the introduction
of the waste effluent into a publicly-owned treatment works.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing
of food that have been shredded to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than ½-inch (1.27 cm) in any
dimension.
SEWAGE. The spent water of a community. The preferred term is wastewater.
SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
(1) COLLECTION SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect wastewaters from
individual point source discharges and connections.
(2) INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport wastewater
from collection sewers to a treatment facility.
(3) PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer which is not owned and maintained by a public authority.
(4) PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer owned, maintained and controlled by a public authority.
(5) SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of
ground, storm and surface waters which are not admitted intentionally.
(6) STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A drain or sewer intended to carry storm waters,
surface runoff, ground water, subsurface water, street wash water, drainage and unpolluted water from
any source.
SHALL. The term is mandatory.
26 East Grand Forks - Public Works
STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (SDS) PERMIT. Any permit (including any terms, conditions and
requirements thereof) issued by the MPCA pursuant to M.S. § 115.07, as it may be amended from time
to time for a disposal system as defined by M.S. § 115.01(8), as it may be amended from time to time.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). The total suspended matter
that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and is
removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, latest edition, and referred to as non-filterable residue.
TOXIC POLLUTANT. The concentration of any pollutant or combination of pollutants which upon
exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause adverse affects as defined in standards issued
pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a)).
UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect, or
water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards, and would not be benefitted
by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.
USER. Any person who discharges or causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the city's
wastewater disposal system.
UTILITIES SUPERINTENDENT. The person appointed by the City Council to supervise the
sewer and water systems of the city.
WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community and referred to as sewage. From the standpoint
of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial
buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with any ground water, surface water and storm
water that may be present.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS or TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of any
devices, facilities, structures, equipment or processes owned or used by the city for the purpose of the
transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or
industrial wastewater, or structures necessary to recycle or reuse water including interceptor sewers,
outfall sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power and other equipment and their appurtenances;
extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide
a reliable recycled water supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works
including land which is an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of
residues resulting from that treatment.
WPCF. The Water Pollution Control Federation.
Sewer Regulations 27
§ 53.002 CONTROL OF SEWERS; ADMINISTRATION OF CHAPTER.
The Utilities Superintendent, or other official designated by the City Council shall have control and
general supervision of all public sewers and service connections in the city, and shall be responsible for
administering the provisions of this chapter to the end that a proper and efficient public sewer is
maintained.
§ 53.003 BUILDING SEWERS; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
Building sewer construction shall meet the pertinent requirements of the Minnesota State Building
Code, which is those chapters of Minn. Rules referenced in Minn. Rules part 1300.2400, subpart 6, as
they may be amended from time to time, and the Minnesota Plumbing Code, Minn. Rules Ch. 4715, as
it may be amended from time to time. The applicant shall notify the Building Official when the building
sewer and connection is ready for inspection. The connection shall be made under the supervision of
the Building Official or the Building Official's representative. No backfill shall be placed until the work
has been inspected and approved, or until the certification has been received.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.004 TAMPERING WITH WASTEWATER FACILITIES.
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the wastewater facilities. Any
person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of a misdemeanor.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.005 COST OF REPAIRING OR RESTORING SEWERS.
In addition to any penalties that may be imposed for violation of any provision of this chapter, the
city may assess against any person the cost of repairing or restoring sewers or associated facilities
damaged as a result of the discharge of prohibited wastes by that person, and may collect the assessment
as an additional charge for the use of the public sewer system or in any other manner deemed appropriate
by the city.
2010 S-1 Repl.
28 East Grand Forks - Public Works
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 53.015 DEPOSITS OF UNSANITARY MANNER PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary
manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the city's jurisdiction, any
human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable waste.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.016 DISCHARGE OF WASTEWATER OR OTHER POLLUTED WATERS.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any wastewater or other polluted waters,
except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this
chapter and the city's NPDES/SDS permit.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.017 RESTRICTIONS ON WASTEWATER DISPOSAL FACILITIES.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy,
privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.018 INSTALLATION OF SERVICE CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER.
The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation or other purposes from which wastewater is discharged, and which is situated within the city
and adjacent to any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be
located, a public sanitary sewer of the city shall be required at the owner's expense to install a suitable
service connection to the public sewer in accordance with provisions of this code within 365 days of the
date the public sewer is operational; provided, the public sewer is within 200 feet of the structure
generating the wastewater. All future buildings constructed on property adjacent to the public sewer
shall be required to immediately connect to the public sewer. If sewer connections are not made
pursuant to this section, an official 10-day notice shall be served instructing the affected property owner
to make the connection.
Penalty, see § 53.999
Sewer Regulations 29
PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL
§ 53.035 PUBLIC SEWER NOT AVAILABLE.
Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of § 53.018, the building sewer shall be
connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this subchapter and
Minn. Rules Ch. 7080, Individual Sewage Treatment Systems Program, as they may be amended from
time to time.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.036 PERMITS.
(A) Required. Prior to commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the
owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city. The application for the permit shall be made
on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and
other information as are deemed necessary to the city.
(B) Inspections. A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until
the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city or its authorized representative. The city or
its representative shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and in any event, the
applicant for the permit shall notify the city when work is ready for final inspection, and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 24 hours of the receipt of notice.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.037 TYPE, CAPACITIES, LOCATION AND LAYOUT.
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with
all requirements of Minn. Rules Ch. 7080, Individual Sewage Treatment Systems Program, as they may
be amended from time to time. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural
outlet.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.038 DIRECT CONNECTION REQUIRED.
At the time as a public sewer becomes available to a property serviced by a private wastewater
disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 365 days in compliance
with this chapter, and within 365 days any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal
systems shall be cleaned of sludge. The bottom shall be broken to permit drainage, and the tank or pit
filled with suitable material.
Penalty, see § 53.999
30 East Grand Forks - Public Works
§ 53.039 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE BY OWNER.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner
at all times at no expense to the city.
§ 53.040 APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional
requirements that may be imposed by the MPCA or the Minnesota Department of Health.
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 53.055 RESTRICTIONS ON NEW CONNECTIONS.
Any new connections to the sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited unless sufficient capacity is
5 available in all downstream facilities, including but not limited to capacity for flow, BOD and suspended
solids, as determined by the Utilities Superintendent.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.056 BUILDING SEWER PERMITS.
(A) Required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into,
use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit
from the city.
(B) Applications. Applications for permits shall be made by the owner or authorized agent and the
party employed to do the work, and shall state the location, name of owner, street number of the building
to be connected and how occupied. No person shall extend any private building drain beyond the limits
of the building or property for which the service connection permit has been given.
(C) Classes. There shall be 2 classes of building sewer permits: 1 for residential and commercial
service, and 1 for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or any other information considered pertinent in the
judgement of the city. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information
describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and type of activity.
Sewer Regulations 31
(D) Inspection and connection. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and
inspection shall be made under the supervision of the Building Official or authorized representative
thereof.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.057 COSTS AND EXPENSES.
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be
borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly
or indirectly occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.058 SEPARATE BUILDING SEWERS REQUIRED.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where 1
building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway. The building sewer
from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered 1 building sewer.
The city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting
from any connection.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.059 OLD BUILDING SEWERS; RESTRICTIONS ON USE.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on
examination and test by the Building Official or his or her representative, to meet all requirements of this
chapter.
§ 53.060 CONFORMANCE TO STATE BUILDING AND PLUMBING CODE
REQUIREMENTS.
(A) The size, slopes, alignment, materials of construction of building sewers and the methods to be
used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling of the trench, shall all conform
to the requirements of the State Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations
of the city.
2010 S-1 Repl.
32 East Grand Forks - Public Works
(B) The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements
of the State Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. All
connections shall be made gastight and watertight, and verified by proper testing to prevent the inclusion
of infiltration/inflow. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved
by the city prior to installation.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.061 ELEVATION BELOW BASEMENT FLOOR.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the
public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.062 SURFACE RUNOFF OR GROUNDWATER CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, sump pumps, foundation drains, areaway
drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or indirectly to the
wastewater disposal system.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.063 EXCAVATIONS.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights
so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed
in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.064 LICENSES.
(A) Required. No person shall make a service connection with any public sewer unless regularly
licensed under this chapter to perform the work, and no permit shall be granted to any person except a
regularly licensed person. A person licensed as a plumber by the State of Minnesota, or a person in the
ditch installing the pipe who has a card showing that they have completed a program of training that
Sewer Regulations 33
incorporates the Plumbing Code installation requirements, issued by either the Associated Builders and
Contractors, Laborers-Employers Cooperation Educational Trust, or Minnesota Utility Contractors
Association, is not subject to the licensing requirements of this section.
(B) Application. Any person desiring a license to make a service connection with public sewers
shall apply in writing to the City Council with satisfactory evidence that the applicant or employer is
trained or skilled in the business and qualified to receive a license. All applications shall be referred to
the Building Official for recommendations to the Council. If approved by the Council, the license shall
be issued by the City Clerk upon the filing of a bond as hereinafter provided.
(C) Issuance. No license shall be issued to any person until a policy of insurance to the city,
approved by the Council, is filed with the City Administrator conditioned that the licensee will indemnify
and save harmless the city from all suits, accidents and damage that may arise by reason of any opening
in any street, alley or public ground made by the licensee or by those in the licensee's employment for
any purpose whatever, and that the licensee will replace and restore the street and alley over that opening
to the condition existing prior to installation, adequately guard with barricades and lights, and will keep
and maintain the same to the satisfaction of the Building Official, and shall conform in all respects to any
rules and regulations of the Council relative thereto, and pay all fines that may be imposed on the
licensee by law.
(D) Fee. The license fee for making service connections shall be as established by the City Council,
as they may amend it from time to time. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the license year
unless the license is suspended or revoked by the Council for cause.
(E) Suspension or revocation. The Council may suspend or revoke any license issued under this
subchapter for any of the following causes:
(1) Giving false information in connection with the application for a license.
(2) Incompetence of the licensee.
(3) Willful violation of any provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation pertaining to
the making of service connections.
Penalty, see § 53.999
2010 S-1 Repl.
34 East Grand Forks - Public Works
USE OF PUBLIC SERVICES
§ 53.080 DISCHARGES OF UNPOLLUTED WATER.
(A) No person shall discharge or caused to be discharged any water such as stormwater, ground
water, roof runoff, surface drainage or non-contact cooling water to any sanitary sewer.
(B) Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to those sewers as are
specifically designed as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the city and other regulatory
agencies. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or
natural outlet on approval of the city and upon approval and the issuance of a discharge permit by the
MPCA.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.081 DISCHARGES OF WATERS OR WASTES.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes
to any public sewers:
(A) Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be,
sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious
in any other way to the wastewater disposal system or to the operation of the system. Prohibited
materials include but are not limited to gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers,
alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and
sulfides.
(B) Solid or viscous substances which will cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other
interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as but not limited to grease,
garbage with particles greater than ½-inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure,
bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone
or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste
paper, wood, plastic, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil,
mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
(C) Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or greater than 9.5 or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater
disposal system.
Sewer Regulations 35
(D) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other pollutants, to inhibit or disrupt any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater disposal system.
A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a)
of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a)).
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.082 LIMITED DISCHARGES.
(A) The following described substances, materials, water or wastes shall be limited in discharges
to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either sewers, the wastewater
treatment works, treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
and soil, vegetation and ground water, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or
constitute a nuisance. The Utilities Superintendent may set limitations lower than limitations established
in the regulations below if, in his or her opinion, the more severe limitations are necessary to meet the
above objectives. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of wastes, the Utilities
Superintendent will give consideration to factors as the quantity of subject waste in reaction to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process,
the city's NPDES/SDS permit, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes
in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors.
(B) The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged
to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the Utilities Superintendent are as
follows:
(1) Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65.6°C), or causing, individually
or in combination with other wastewater, the influent at the wastewater treatment plant to have a
temperature exceeding 104°F (40°C), or having heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity
in the wastewater treatment works resulting in interference therein.
(2) Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess
of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between
32°F and 150°F (0°C and 65.6°C); and any wastewater containing oil and grease concentrations of
mineral origin of greater than 100 mg/l, whether emulsified or not.
(3) Any quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a slug as defined in
§ 53.001.
(4) Any garbage not properly shredded, as defined in § 53.001 of this chapter. Garbage
grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals,
catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food on the
premises or when served by caterers.
36 East Grand Forks - Public Works
(5) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly or by interaction
with other wastes are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent
entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair.
(6) Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process such as but
not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
(7) Non-contact cooling water or unpolluted storm, drainage or ground water.
(8) Wastewater containing inert suspended-solids such as but not limited to fullers earth, lime
slurries, and lime residues, or of dissolved solids such as but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate, in quantities that would cause disruption with the wastewater disposal system.
(9) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the Utilities Superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
(10) Any waters or wastes containing the following substances to the degree that any material
received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works is detrimental to treatment
process, adversely impacts land application, adversely effects receiving waters, or is in violation of
standards pursuant to Section 307(b) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(b)): Arsenic, Cadmium, Copper,
Cyanide, Lead, Mercury, Nickel, Silver, total Chromium, Zinc and Phenolic compounds which cannot
be removed by the city's wastewater treatment system.
(11) Any wastewater which creates conditions at or near the wastewater disposal system which
violates any statute, rule, regulation or ordinance of any regulatory agency, or state or federal regulatory
body.
5 (12) Any waters or wastes containing BOD or suspended solids of character and quantity that
unusual attention or expense is required to handle the materials at the wastewater treatment works, except
as may be permitted by specific written agreement subject to the provisions of § 53.094.
§ 53.083 DISCHARGES HAZARDOUS TO LIFE OR CONSTITUTE PUBLIC NUISANCES.
(A) If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers
which contain substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 53.082, or which in the
judgement of the Utilities Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater treatment
facilities, processes, or equipment, receiving waters or soil, vegetation, and ground water, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers, pursuant
to Section 307(b) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(b)) and all amendments thereof;
Sewer Regulations 37
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and
(4) Require payment to cover the added costs of handling, treating and disposing of wastes not
covered by existing taxes or sewer service charges.
(B) If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design, installation and
maintenance of the facilities and equipment shall be made at the owner's expense and shall be subject
to the review and approval of the city pursuant to the requirements of the MPCA.
§ 53.084 INCREASING USE OF PROCESS WATER.
No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any manner, attempt to dilute a discharge as
a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations
contained in §§ 53.081 and 53.082, or contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or
any state requirements.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.085 PRETREATMENT OR FLOW-EQUALIZING FACILITIES.
Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation at the expense of the owner.
§ 53.086 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Public Works
Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease
in excessive amounts, as specified in § 53.082(B)(2), any flammable wastes as specified in § 53.081(A),
sand or other harmful ingredients; except that interceptors shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units unless required by the Minnesota Plumbing Code. All interceptors shall be
of the type to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal of the captured materials
by appropriate means, and shall maintain a record of dates and means of disposal which are subject to
review by the Utilities Superintendent. Any removal and hauling of the collecting materials not
performed by the owner's personnel must be performed by a currently licensed waste disposal firm.
Penalty, see § 53.999
2010 S-1 Repl.
38 East Grand Forks - Public Works
§ 53.087 INDUSTRIAL WASTES; INSTALLATIONS.
Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure, or control manhole, with necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of wastes. The
structure shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the city. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be
maintained by the owner to be safe and accessible at all times.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.088 INDUSTRIAL WASTES; REQUIREMENTS.
The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes may, at the
discretion of the city, be required to provide laboratory measurements, tests or analyses of waters or
wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special condition for discharge established by
the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type and frequency
of sampling and laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city. The
industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that
compliance with federal, state and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the city at times and in the manner as prescribed by the city.
The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses and reporting required by the city. At
those times as deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and supplies for
analysis by an independent laboratory.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.089 MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES OF WATERS AND WASTES.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference
is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association.
Sampling methods, location, times, duration and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis
subject to approval by the Utilities Superintendent.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.090 PROTECTION FROM ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE OF PROHIBITED
MATERIALS.
Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a sanitary sewer shall provide
protection from an accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this
chapter. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited materials shall be
Sewer Regulations 39
provided and maintained at the owner's expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating
procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the Utilities Superintendent for review and
approval prior to construction of the facility. Review and approval of the plans and operating procedures
shall not relieve any user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this chapter. Users shall notify the Utilities Superintendent immediately upon having
a slug or accidental discharge of substances of wastewater in violation of this chapter to enable
countermeasures to be taken by the Utilities Superintendent to minimize damage to the wastewater
treatment works. The notification will not relieve any user of any liability for any expense, loss or
damage to the wastewater treatment system or treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the city
on account thereof under any state and federal law. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may
cause or discover a discharge are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.091 PERMITTING SUBSTANCE OR MATTER TO FLOW OR PASS INTO PUBLIC
SEWERS.
No person having charge of any building or other premises which drains into the public sewer shall
permit any substance or matter which may form a deposit or obstruction to flow or pass into the public
sewer. Within 30 days after receipt of written notice from the city, the owner shall install a suitable and
sufficient catch basin or waste trap, or if one already exists, shall clean out, repair or alter the same, and
perform other work as the Utilities Superintendent may deem necessary. Upon the owner's refusal or
neglect to install a catch basin or waste trap or to clean out, repair, or alter the same after the period of
30 days, the Utilities Superintendent may cause the work to be completed at the expense of the owner
or representative thereof.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.092 REPAIRING SERVICE CONNECTION.
Whenever any service connection becomes clogged, obstructed, broken or out of order, or
detrimental to the use of the public sewer, or unfit for the purpose of drainage, the owner shall repair
or cause the work to be done as the Utilities Superintendent may direct. Each day after 30 days that a
person neglects or fails to so act shall constitute a separate violation of this section, and the Utilities
Superintendent may then cause the work to be done, and recover from the owner or agent the expense
thereof by an action in the name of the city.
Penalty, see § 53.999
40 East Grand Forks - Public Works
§ 53.093 CATCH BASIN OR WASTE TRAPS REQUIRED FOR MOTOR VEHICLE
WASHING OR SERVICING FACILITIES.
The owner or operator of any motor vehicle washing or servicing facility shall provide and maintain
in serviceable condition at all times a catch basin or waste trap in the building drain system to prevent
grease, oil, dirt or any mineral deposit from entering the public sewer system.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.094 SPECIAL AGREEMENT AND ARRANGEMENT.
No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement
or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual
strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the
industrial concern; provided, that National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and the city's
NPDES/SDS Permit limitations are not violated.
USER RATE SCHEDULE FOR CHARGES
§ 53.110 CHARGES GENERALLY.
Each user of sewer service shall pay the charges applicable to the type of service, and in accordance
with the provisions set forth in this subchapter.
§ 53.111 PURPOSE.
The purpose of the subchapter is to provide for sewer service charges to recover costs associated
with operation, maintenance and replacement to ensure effective functioning of the city's wastewater
treatment system, and local capital costs incurred in the construction of the city's wastewater treatment
system.
§ 53.112 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ADMINISTRATION. Those fixed costs attributable to administration of the wastewater treatment
works such as billing and associated bookkeeping and accounting costs.
Sewer Regulations 41
CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of the city as presently established or as amended
by ordinance or other legal actions at a future time. When used herein the term CITY may also refer
to the City Council or its authorized representative.
DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. A charge levied on users of wastewater treatment facilities for the cost
of repaying money bonded to construct the facilities.
INCOMPATIBLE WASTE. Waste that either singly or by interaction with other wastes interferes
with any waste treatment process, constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance
or creates any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment works.
INDUSTRIAL USERS or INDUSTRIES.
(1) (a) Entitles that discharge into a publicly owned wastewater treatment works liquid wastes
resulting from the processes employed in industrial or manufacturing processes, or from the development
of any natural resources. These are identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, latest
edition, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemental under 1 of the following
divisions:
Division A. Agriculture, forestry and fishing
Division B. Mining
Division D. Manufacturing
Division E. Transportation, communications, electric, gas, and sanitary sewers
Division I. Services
(b) For the purpose of this definition, domestic waste shall be considered to have the
5 following characteristics: BOD - less than 287 mg/l; Suspended solids - less than 287 mg/l.
(2) Any nongovernmental user of a publicly owned treatment works which discharges
wastewater to the treatment works which contains toxic pollutants or poisonous solids, liquids or gases
in sufficient quantity either singly or by interaction with other wastes to contaminate the sludge of any
municipal systems, or to injure or to interfere with any sewage treatment process, or which constitutes
a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or creates any hazard in or has an adverse
effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works.
MAY. The term is permissive.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. Activities required to provide for the dependable and
economical functioning of the treatment works, throughout the design or useful life, whichever is longer
of the treatment works, and at the level of performance for which the treatment works were constructed.
The term includes replacement.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. Expenditures for operation and maintenance,
including replacement.
42 East Grand Forks - Public Works
REPLACEMENT. Obtaining and installing of equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are
necessary during the design life or useful life, whichever is longer, of the treatment works to maintain
the capacity and performance for which the works were designed and constructed.
REPLACEMENT COSTS. Expenditures for replacement.
SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with minor quantities of
ground, storm and surface waters which are not admitted intentionally.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The aggregate of all charges, including charges for operation,
maintenance, replacement, debt service, and other sewer related charges that are billed periodically to
users of the city's wastewater treatment facilities.
SEWER SERVICE FUND. A fund into which income from sewer service charges is deposited
along with other income, including taxes intended to retire debt incurred through capital expenditure for
wastewater treatment. Expenditure of the sewer service fund will be for operation, maintenance and
replacement costs and to retire debt incurred through capital expenditure for wastewater treatment.
SHALL. The term is mandatory.
TOXIC POLLUTANT. The concentration of any pollutant or combination of pollutants as defined
in standards issued pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a)), which upon exposure
to or assimilation into any organism, will cause adverse effects.
USER CHARGE. A charge levied on a user of a treatment works for the user's proportionate share
of the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement.
USERS. Those residential, commercial, governmental, institutional and industrial establishments
which are connected to the public sewer collection system.
WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community, also referred to as sewage. From the standpoint
of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial
buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with any ground water, surface water and storm
water that may be present.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS or TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of any
devices, facilities, structures, equipment or processes owned or used by the city for the purpose of the
transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or
industrial wastewater, or structures necessary to recycle or reuse water including interceptor sewers,
outfall sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power and other equipment and their appurtenances;
extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide
Sewer Regulations 43
a reliable recycled water supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works
including land which is an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of
residues resulting from the treatment.
§ 53.113 ESTABLISHMENT OF A SEWER SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM.
(A) The city hereby establishes a Sewer Service Charge System whereby all revenue collected from
users of the wastewater treatment facilities will be used to affect all expenditures incurred for annual
operation, maintenance and replacement and for debt service on capital expenditure incurred in
constructing the wastewater treatment works.
(B) Each user shall pay its proportionate share of operation, maintenance, and replacement costs
of the treatment works, based on the users proportionate contribution to the total wastewater loading
from all users.
(C) Each user shall pay debt service charges to retire local capital costs as determined by the City
Council.
(D) Sewer service rates and charges to users of the wastewater treatment facility shall be determined
and fixed in a Sewer Service Charge System developed according to the provisions of this subchapter.
The Sewer Service Charge System shall be the system enacted prior to the adoption of this code
(E) Revenues collected for sewer service shall be deposited in a separate fund known as The Sewer
Service Fund. Income from revenues collected will be expended to off-set the cost of operation,
maintenance and equipment replacement for the facility and to retire the debt for capital expenditure.
(F) Sewer service charges and the sewer service fund will be administrated in accordance with the
provisions of § 53.116.
(G) A connection fee as fixed in City Council, as that ordinance may be amended from time to time,
shall be charged to each user connecting a new service to the Sanitary Sewer System. The connection
fee shall be due and payable within 90 days of the date the connection is completed.
Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.114 DETERMINATION OF SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.
The sewer service rates and charges to users of the wastewater treatment facility shall be as
established by ordinance or resolution prior to the adoption of this code, unless amended or modified
by City Council from time to time.
Penalty, see § 53.999
44 East Grand Forks - Public Works
§ 53.115 SEWER SERVICE FUND.
(A) The city hereby establishes a Sewer Service Fund as an income fund to receive all revenues
generated by the sewer service charge system, and all other income dedicated to the operation,
maintenance, replacement and construction of the wastewater treatment works, including taxes, special
charges, fees and assessments intended to retire construction debt. The city also establishes the
following accounts as income and expenditure accounts within the sewer service fund:
(1) Operation and maintenance account.
(2) Equipment replacement account.
(3) Debt retirement account.
(B) All revenue generated by the sewer service charge system, and all other income pertinent to the
treatment system, including taxes and special assessments dedicated to retire construction debt, shall be
held by the City Clerk separate and apart from all other funds of the city. Funds received by the sewer
service fund shall be transferred to the Operation and Maintenance Account, the Equipment Replacement
Account, and the Debt Retirement Account in accordance with state and federal regulations and the
provisions of this chapter.
(C) Revenue generated by the sewer service charge system sufficient to ensure adequate replacement
throughout the design life or useful life, whichever is longer, of the wastewater facility shall be held
separate and apart in the Equipment Replacement Account and dedicated to affecting replacement costs.
Interest income generated by the Equipment Replacement Account shall remain in the Equipment
Replacement Account.
(D) Revenue generated by the sewer service charge system sufficient for operation and maintenance
shall be held separate and apart in the Operation and Maintenance Account.
§ 53.116 ADMINISTRATION.
The sewer service charge system and sewer service fund shall be administrated according to the
following provisions:
(A) The City Administrator shall maintain a proper system of accounts suitable for determining the
operation and maintenance, equipment replacement and debt retirement costs of the treatment works, and
shall furnish the City Council with a report of those costs annually in December. The City Council shall
annually determine whether or not sufficient revenue is being generated for the effective operation,
maintenance, replacement and management of the treatment works, and whether sufficient revenue is
being generated for debt retirement. The Council will also determine whether the user charges are
distributed proportionately to each user in accordance with § 53.113(B). The city shall thereafter, but
2010 S-1 Repl.
Sewer Regulations 45
not later than the end of the year, reassess and as necessary revise the Sewer Service Charge System then
in use to ensure the proportionality of the user charges and to ensure the sufficiency of funds to maintain
the capacity and performance to which the facilities were constructed, and to retire the construction debt.
(B) In accordance with federal and state requirements, each user will be notified annually in
conjunction with a regular billing of that portion of the sewer service charge attributable to operation,
maintenance and replacement.
(C) In accordance with federal and state requirements, the City Administrator shall be responsible
for maintaining all records necessary to document compliance with the Sewer Service Charge System
adopted.
(D) Bills for sewer service charges shall be rendered on a quarterly basis succeeding the period for
which the service was rendered and shall be due 10 days from the date of rendering. Any bill not paid
in full 30 days after the due date will be considered delinquent. At that time the city shall notify the
delinquent owner/occupant in writing regarding the delinquent bill and subsequent penalty. The penalty
shall be computed at 10% of the original bill and shall be increased the same 10% for every quarter the
bill is outstanding. Disconnection of services for late payment shall follow the procedures established
in Chapter 50.
(E) The owner of the premises shall be liable to pay for the service to their premises, and the
service is furnished to the premises by the city only upon the condition that the owner of the premises
is liable therefore to the city.
(F) Any additional costs caused by discharges to the treatment works of toxics or other incompatible
wastes, including the cost of restoring wastewater treatment services, clean up and restoration of the
receiving waters and environs, and sludge disposal, shall be borne by the discharger of the wastes, at
no expense to the city.
POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS
§ 53.130 AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEES PERMITTED TO ENTER ALL PROPERTIES.
The Public Works Superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper
credentials and identification, are authorized, with the permission of the licensee, owner, resident or
other person in control of property within the city, to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observations, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to the discharges to the city's sewer system
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in
control of property within the city does not permit the entrance to the property, the city shall obtain an
administrative search warrant as provided for in § 10.20 before entering the property, except in
emergency situations.
2010 S-1 Repl.
46 East Grand Forks - Public Works
§ 53.131 AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEES OBTAINING INFORMATION FOR INDUSTRIAL
PROCESSES.
The Public Works Superintendent or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain
information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the type and source of
discharge to the wastewater collection system. An industry may withhold information considered
confidential; however, the industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in
question might result in an advantage to competitors.
§ 53.132 AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEES TO OBSERVE SAFETY RULES.
While performing necessary work on private properties, the Public Works Superintendent or duly
authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the company, and the property owner shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees
and the city shall indemnify the property owner against loss or damage to its property by city employees
and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the
company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as may be caused by negligence
or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in § 53.087.
§ 53.133 AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEES PERMITTED TO ENTER ALL PROPERTY WITH
EASEMENTS.
The Public Works Superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city
holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of but not limited to inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within
the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full accordance
with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
§ 53.999 PENALTY.
(A) (1) Any person found to be violating any provisions of §§ 53.001 through 53.094 and 53.130
through 53.133 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the
period of time stated in the notice, permanently cease all violations.
(2) Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in division
(A) of this section shall be punished as provided in § 10.99. Each day in which any violation occurs
shall be deemed as a separate offense.
2010 S-1 Repl.
Sewer Regulations 47
(3) Any person violating any of the provisions of §§ 53.001 through 53.094 and 53.130
through 53.133 shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city
by reason of that violation.
(B) (1) Each and every sewer service charge levied by and pursuant to §§ 53.110 through 53.116
is made a lien upon the lot or premises served, and all charges which are on October 31 of each year past
due and delinquent shall be certified to the County Auditor by November 29, for collection. Nothing
in §§ 53.110 through 53.116 shall be held or construed as in any way stopping or interfering with the
right of the city to levy as taxes or assessments against any premises affected any delinquent or past due
sewer service charges.
(2) As an alternative to levying a lien, the city may, at its discretion, file suit in a civil action
to collect amounts as are delinquent and due against the occupant, owner or user of the real estate, and
shall collect as well all attorney's fees incurred by the city in filing the civil action. Attorney's fees shall
be fixed by order of the court.
(3) In addition to all penalties and costs attributable and chargeable to recording notices of the
lien or filing a civil action, the owner or user of the real estate being serviced by the treatment works
shall be liable for interest upon all unpaid balances at the rate of 8% per annum.
48 East Grand Forks - Public Works
CHAPTER 54: STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY
Section
54.01 Storm water drainage utility
§ 54.01 STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY.
(A) Establishment. Pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to time, the city
establishes a storm drainage utility and authorizes the imposition of just and reasonable charges for the
use and availability of storm drainage facilities. The storm drainage utility operations shall be a part of
the Public Works Department and under the administration of the City Administrator.
(B) Finding and determination.
(1) In the exercise of its governmental authority and in order to promote the public health,
safety, convenience and general welfare, the city has constructed, operated and maintained a storm
drainage system. This section is adopted in the further exercise of the authority and for the same
purposes.
(2) The system, as constructed heretofore, has been financed and paid for through the
imposition of special assessments and ad valorem taxes. It is now necessary and desirable to provide an
additional method of recovering some or all of the future costs of improving, establishing, enlarging,
replacing, repairing, maintaining and operating the system through the imposition of charges as provided
in this section.
(3) In imposing charges, it is necessary to establish a methodology that undertakes to make
them just and equitable. Taking into account the status of completion of the system, past methods of
recovering system costs, the topography of the city and other relevant factors, it is determined that it
would be just and equitable to assign responsibility for some or all of the future costs of improving,
establishing, enlarging, replacing, repairing, maintaining and operating the system on the basis of the
expected storm water runoff from the various parcels of land within the city during a standard rainfall
event.
49
2010 S-1
50 East Grand Forks - Public Works
(C) Storm Drainage Utility Fund. There is hereby created a Storm Drainage Utility Fund into which
all charges, when collected, and all monies received from the sale of any facilities or equipment or any
by-products shall be placed. The monies shall be used first to pay the normal, reasonable and current
costs of operating and maintaining the facilities.
(D) Runoff equivalent factor (REF) defined. For the purpose of this section, RUNOFF
EQUIVALENT FACTOR (REF) is defined as the ratio of the average volume of surface water runoff
generated by 1 acre of a given land use to the average volume of runoff generated by 1 acre of typical
single-family residential land, during a standard 1-year rainfall event.
(E) Storm water drainage charges. In determining charges, the City Council shall by resolution
establish a basic system rate to be charged monthly against 1 standardized or measured drainage unit
having an REF of 1. The charge to be made against each parcel of land shall then be determined by
multiplying the REF for the parcel's land use classification times the parcel's drainage unit times the
basic system rate. The REF values for various land uses are as follows:
Class/Land Use REF
1. Single-family and multi-family residential 1.00
2. Small commercial-I 2.00
3. Small commercial-II 3.00
4. Large commercial, industrial, institutional, churches, and the like 4.00
5. Parks, cemeteries, road right-of-way and vacant land 0.00
(F) Drainage units.
(1) Standardized drainage unit (Classification 1). For the purpose of calculating storm water
drainage charges, all Classification 1 land use parcels shall be considered to have 1 drainage unit per
residence (duplex = 2 residences, triplex = 3 residences, etc).
(2) Standardized drainage unit (Classification 2). For the purpose of calculating storm water
drainage charges, all Classification 2 land use parcels shall be considered to have 1 drainage unit per
business (maximum parcel size = ½ acre).
(3) Standardized drainage unit (Classification 3). For the purpose of calculating storm water
drainage charges, all Classification 3 land use parcels shall be considered to have 1 drainage unit per
business (maximum parcel size = an acre).
2010 S-1
Storm Water Drainage Utility 51
(4) Measured drainage unit (Classification 4). For the purpose of calculating storm water
drainage charges, all Classification 4 land use parcels shall be considered to have 1 drainage unit for each
1 acre of measured impermeable surface (roofs, parking lots, and the like) located on the parcel
(minimum parcel size = 1 acre). Each fractional acre of impermeable surface will be rounded up to the
nearest acre.
(G) Other land uses. Other land uses not listed in the foregoing table shall be classified by the City
Administrator by assigning them to classes most nearly like the listed uses, from the standpoint of runoff
volume for the standard rainfall event. An appeal of the classifications from the determination of the City
Administrator may be made to the City Council.
(H) Adjustment of charge. The City Council may by resolution adopt policies providing for the
adjustments of charges for parcels based upon land use data supplied by affected property owners which
demonstrates a runoff volume for a standard rainfall event substantially different from the REF being
used for the parcels. The adjustments for the storm water drainage charges shall not be made
retroactively.
(I) Exemptions. Public street rights-of-way, cemeteries, parks, city-owned improvements not
included in enterprise fund operations - excluding storm water operations and vacant land with ground
cover are exempt from storm water drainage charges.
(J) Payment of charges. Statements for storm water drainage charges shall be made a part of the
present utility billing system invoiced through the City Water and Light Department on a monthly basis.
All charges shall be subject to established procedure for determining and collecting customer charges.
(K) Late payment penalty. Each billing for storm water drainage charges which are not paid when
due shall incur a penalty charge of 10% of the amount past due.
(L) Establishment of tax lien. Any past due storm water drainage charges will be certified to the
County Auditor for collection with real taxes against the property served by the utility established in this
section for collection as other taxes are collected in the following year pursuant to M.S. § 444.075,
Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time, and the code. In addition, the city may have the right
to bring a civil action or take other legal remedies to collect unpaid charges.
(M) Phase-in for non-residential classes. The city will increase the monthly charge by no more than
2 times the basic system rate on an annual basis at the anniversary day of the adoption of this section.
The monthly charge will reflect changes to the basic system rate prior to the addition of the phase-in
amount
(Ord. 295, 3rd Series, passed 12-19-2006)
2010 S-1
52 East Grand Forks - Public Works
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
70. GENERAL PROVISIONS
71. TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
72. PARKING REGULATIONS
73. SNOWMOBILE TRAFFIC CONTROL AND
REGULATIONS
74. ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
75. BICYCLES
76. TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
77. SPECIAL USE VEHICLES
1
2010 S-1
2 East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
70.01 Statutes adopted by reference
70.02 Definitions
70.99 Penalty
§ 70.01 STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
(A) Except as otherwise provided in this title, or in Title IX, the regulatory and procedural
provisions of M.S. Ch. 169, as it may be amended from time to time, commonly referred to as the
Highway Traffic Regulation Act, as amended through Laws 1994, is incorporated herein and adopted
by reference, including the penalty provisions thereof.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this Title, or in Title IX, M.S. §§ 171.01, 171.02, 171.08,
171.22, 171.23 and 171.24, as they may be amended from time to time, are incorporated herein and
adopted by reference, including the penalty provisions thereof.
(1981 Code, § 7.04) (Ord. 174, 3rd Series, eff. 4-20-1995)
Cross-reference:
Additional applicable provisions are located in Ch. 96, Streets and Sidewalks
§ 70.02 DEFINITIONS.
Terms used in this title shall have the meanings set forth in M.S. § 169.01 unless otherwise
provided.
AVENUE. Those streets or roadways within the city limits which contain the word Avenue in their
name as posted. AVENUE shall also be considered to mean those streets or roadways within the city
limits which contain the word Lane, Circle or Boulevard within their name as posted.
DIRECTION. Unless otherwise excepted under the definition of STREET herein, shall be
considered to run in a generally north-south direction and avenues will be considered to run in a
generally east-west direction.
3
2010 S-1
4 East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
DOUBLE PARKING. The parking of a vehicle upon any highway, street or avenue alongside
another vehicle parked between it and the curb.
DRIVER. A person in actual physical control of a vehicle while it is being driven, or who is directly
charged with the control, as the driver, when it is not being driven.
PARKING. The voluntary standing of a vehicle upon any highway, street or avenue whether
accompanied or unaccompanied by an operator; but, where the driver of a vehicle seeks to load or unload
passengers, goods or merchandise in or from the vehicle, then parking shall mean the standing of the
vehicle upon the highway, street or avenue only for the period of time which is reasonably necessary to
load or unload passengers or goods close at hand ready to be loaded or unloaded as the case may be.
STREET or HIGHWAY. Shall be considered the entire width between boundary lines of any way
or place when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of
vehicular traffic, as defined by M.S. Chapter 169, as such chapter may be from time to time amended,
supplemented or replaced. Streets in the city may be designated Streets, Drives, Courts, Avenues,
Lanes, Circles, Boulevards or Ways.
VEHICLE. Every vehicle, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorized bicycle, bicycle, snowmobile,
trailer or semitrailer as the same are defined in M.S. Chapter 169, as such chapter may be from time to
time amended, supplemented or replaced, or as known in the highway traffic regulations, as adopted by
the Council, as such regulations may be from time to time amended, supplemented or replaced.
(Ord. 292, 3rd Series, passed 8-1-2006)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this code for which another
penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty
which may be imposed for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days or a fine of not
more than $1,000, or both.
(B) Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense
which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
2010 S-1
General Provisions 4A
(C) In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of prosecution may be
added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs
or continues.
(D) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any official duty imposed by this
code shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.
2010 S-1
4B East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
71.01 Truck route
71.02 Driving through private property to avoid traffic signal
71.03 Exhibition driving
71.04 Recreational motor vehicle regulations
71.05 U-turns
71.06 Left turns prohibited
§ 71.01 TRUCK ROUTE.
It is unlawful for any person to drive a truck (other than a pick-up truck), truck trailer, tractor trailer
or truck tractors of more than one-half ton capacity, automobile trailer, or automobile to which a trailer
is attached, in thru traffic, upon any street except those which have been designated and sign posted as
truck routes. For the purposes of this chapter, THRU TRAFFIC means originating without the city and
with a destination without the city, as distinguished from LOCAL TRAFFIC which means traffic either
originating or having a destination within the city.
(1981 Code, § 7.01) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.02 DRIVING THROUGH PRIVATE PROPERTY TO AVOID TRAFFIC SIGNAL.
It is unlawful for any person to avoid obedience to any traffic control device by driving upon or
through any private property.
(1981 Code, § 7.03) Penalty, see § 70.99
5
6 East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
§ 71.03 EXHIBITION DRIVING.
(A) Prima facie evidence. It is prima facie evidence of exhibition driving when a motor vehicle
stops, starts, accelerates, decelerates, or turns at an unnecessary rate of speed so as to cause tires to
squeal, gears to grind, soil to be thrown, engine backfire, fishtailing or skidding, or, as to 2-wheeled
or 3-wheeled motor vehicles, the front wheel to lose contact with the ground or roadway surface.
(B) Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person to do any exhibition driving on any street, parking
lot, or other public or private property, except when an emergency creates necessity for such operation
to prevent injury to persons or damage to property; provided, that this section shall not apply to driving
on a racetrack. For purposes of this section, a RACETRACK means any track or premises whereon
motorized vehicles, horses, dogs, or other animals or fowl legally compete in a race or timed contest for
an audience, the members of which have directly or indirectly paid a consideration for admission.
(1981 Code, § 7.09) (Ord. 7, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.04 RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATIONS.
(A) Definition of recreational motor vehicle. A RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE is any
self-propelled vehicle and any vehicle drawn, pushed or otherwise propelled by a self-propelled vehicle
and designed for use for recreational purposes, including, but not limited to, motorcycles, motor
scooters, trail bikes, other all terrain vehicles, 4-wheel drive motor vehicles, or any other motor vehicle
licensed or unlicensed and used for recreational purposes. Snowmobiles being the subject of regulation
pursuant to Ch. 73 are specifically excluded from the provisions of this section.
(B) Use of recreational motor vehicles. It is a misdemeanor for any person to operate a recreational
motor vehicle as follows:
(1) On the private property of another without lawful authority or consent of the owner or
occupant, express or implied;
(2) On public sidewalks, walkways or trails provided or used for pedestrian travel;
(3) On or across any publicly-owned lands, including but not limited to dikes, levees, parks,
ice skating rinks, school grounds, recreation areas and playgrounds, unless a permit has been obtained
from the proper public authorities, or unless such areas have been specially designated for such use, nor
shall the vehicles park on the areas unless a permit has been obtained from the proper public authorities;
(4) At any place while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotics or habit forming
drugs;
Traffic Regulations 7
(5) In such a manner as to create or cause unnecessary engine noise or tire squeal or causes the
tires to spin or slide upon the acceleration or stopping of the vehicle or that causes the vehicle to
unnecessarily turn abruptly or sway from side to side, or to operate the vehicle in such a careless,
reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the person or property of another or to cause injury or
damage thereto;
(6) In any cemetery;
(7) In any golf course;
(8) In any planting or tree nursery in a manner which damages or destroys growing stock;
(9) Unless equipped with a standard muffler or mufflers which are properly attached and which
reduce the noise of operation of the vehicle to a noise level which shall not be a disturbance to residences
of the area of operation, and no person shall use a muffler cut out, by pass or similar device on the
vehicle.
(C) Definition of other motor vehicles. OTHER MOTOR VEHICLES are any self-propelled
vehicles not included in the definition in division (A) of this section, except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(D) Use of other motor vehicles. It is a misdemeanor for any person to operate any other motor
vehicle in violation of the provisions of subsections (B)(1), (2), (3), (6), (7), or (8).
(1981 Code, § 7.10) (Ord. 127, 2nd Series, eff. 7-17-1976) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.05 U-TURNS.
It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle by turning so as to proceed in the opposite
direction upon any street except at a street intersection, and then only if the street intersection is not sign
posted prohibiting a U-turn or otherwise controlled by a traffic signal, provided, that any person making
a permitted U-turn shall yield the right-of-way to all other vehicles.
(1981 Code, § 7.11) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.06 LEFT TURNS PROHIBITED.
The Chief of Police may, in his or her discretion, and with the consent of the Council, prohibit left
turns entirely, or during specified hours, at certain intersections. It is unlawful for any person to make
a left turn at any intersection sign posted prohibiting the same, or make a left turn during the hours of
such sign posted prohibition.
(1981 Code, § 7.12) (Ord. 7, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981) Penalty, see § 70.99
8 East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
72.01 Presumption
72.02 General parking prohibitions
72.03 Unauthorized removal
72.04 House trailer, camping trailer, other trailers and bus parking
72.05 Direction to proceed
72.06 Parallel parking
72.07 Angle parking
72.08 Streets without curb
72.09 Parking hours
72.10 Calendar parking
72.11 Truck parking
72.12 Parking rules in municipal parking lots and ramps
72.13 Impounding and removing vehicles
72.14 Physically handicapped parking
72.15 Vehicle repair on streets
72.16 Courtesy parking
72.17 Envelope fees
72.18 Parking prohibited during recycling collection
§ 72.01 PRESUMPTION.
As to any vehicle parking in violation of this title or Chapter 96, when the driver thereof is not
present, it shall be presumed that the owner parked the same or that the driver was acting as the agent
of the owner.
(1981 Code, § 8.01)
9
10 East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
§ 72.02 GENERAL PARKING PROHIBITIONS.
It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the specific directions of a police officer or traffic control device
in any of the following places:
(A) On a sidewalk;
(B) In front of a public or private driveway;
(C) Within an intersection;
(D) Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant;
(E) On a crosswalk;
(F) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at any intersection;
(G) In a sign posted fire lane;
(H) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal
located at the side of a roadway;
(I) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
(J) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite
the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance when properly sign posted;
(K) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or
parking would obstruct traffic;
(L) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
(M) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street;
(N) At any place where official signs prohibit or restrict stopping;
(O) In any alley;
(P) On any boulevard or berm which has been curbed; or
(Q) In such a manner that blocks vehicular access to a mailbox during the hours that mail is
delivered.
(1981 Code, § 8.02) (Ord. 134, 3rd Series, eff. 5-29-1992) Penalty, see § 70.99
Parking Regulations 11
§ 72.03 UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL.
It is unlawful for any person to move a vehicle not owned by such person into any prohibited area
or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(1981 Code, § 8.03) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.04 HOUSE TRAILER, CAMPING TRAILER, OTHER TRAILERS AND BUS PARKING.
It is unlawful for any person to leave or park a house trailer, camping trailer, boat trailer (whether
loaded or unloaded), snowmobile or motorbike (whether loaded or unloaded), bus or other similar
recreational vehicle or trailer, on or within the limits of any street or right-of-way or municipal parking
lot, except where signs are erected designating the same as a campsite for more than 12 consecutive
hours.
(1981 Code, § 8.04) (Ord. 8, 3 Series, eff. 6 rd -6-1981; Am. Ord. 205, 3rd Series, passed 1-16-1997)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.05 DIRECTION TO PROCEED.
It is unlawful for any person to stop or park a vehicle on a street when directed or ordered to
proceed by any police officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.
(1981 Code, § 8.05) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.06 PARALLEL PARKING.
Except where angle parking is specifically allowed and indicated by curb marking or sign posting,
or both, each vehicle stopped or parked upon a 2-way road where there is an adjacent curb shall be
stopped or parked with the right hand wheels of the vehicle parallel with and within 12 inches of the
right hand curb and, where painted markings appear on the curb or the street, the vehicle shall be within
such markings, front and rear, provided that upon a 1-way roadway all vehicles shall be so parked,
except that the left hand wheels of the vehicle may be parallel with and within 12 inches from the left
hand curb, but the front of the vehicle in any event and with respect to the remainder of the vehicle shall
be in the direction of the flow of traffic upon such 1-way street; it is unlawful to park in violation of this
section.
(1981 Code, § 8.06) Penalty, see § 70.99
12 East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
§ 72.07 ANGLE PARKING.
Where angle parking has been established and is allowed, as shown by curb marking or sign posting,
or both, each vehicle stopped or parked shall be at an angle of approximately 45 to 60 degrees with the
front wheel touching the curb and within any parking lines painted on the curb or street, provided that
the front wheel not touching the curb shall be the portion of the vehicle furthest in the direction of 1-way
traffic; it is unlawful to park in violation of this section.
(1981 Code, § 8.07) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.08 STREETS WITHOUT CURB.
Upon streets not having a curb each vehicle shall be stopped or parked parallel and to the right of
the paving, improved or main traveled part of the street; it is unlawful to park in violation of this section.
(1981 Code, § 8.08) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.09 PARKING HOURS.
Parking on streets shall be limited as follows.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave standing any vehicle upon any street for a
continuous period in excess of 24 hours.
(B) The Chief of Police may, when authorized by resolution of the Council, designate certain
streets, blocks or portions of streets or blocks as prohibited parking zones, or 5-minute, 10-minute,
15-minute, 30-minute, 1-hour, 2-hour, 4-hour, 6-hour, 8-hour, morning or afternoon rush hour limited
parking zones and shall mark by appropriate signs any zones so established. The zones shall be
established whenever necessary for the convenience of the public or to minimize traffic hazards and
preserve a free flow of traffic. It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave standing any vehicle
in a prohibited parking zone for a period in excess of the sign posted limitation or during sign posted
hours of prohibited parking.
(C) It is unlawful for any person to remove, erase or otherwise obliterate any mark or sign placed
upon a tire or other part of a vehicle by a police officer for the purpose of measuring the length of time
such vehicle has been parked.
(D) For the purpose of enforcement of this section, any vehicle moved less than 1 block in a limited
time parking zone shall be deemed to have remained stationary.
(1981 Code, § 8.09) (Ord. 8, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981) Penalty, see § 70.99
Parking Regulations 13
§ 72.10 CALENDAR PARKING.
In order to facilitate the removal of snow and ice from the public streets, avenues, roads and other
rights-of- way, the following additional parking restrictions shall be in effect.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
(a) Yellow commercial routes.
Bygland Rd. SE from 5th Ave. SE to 4th St. SE
Central Ave. NE NW
Central Ave. service roads NE and NW
College Dr. NE
Demers Ave.
Gateway Dr. NE service road
Gateway Dr. NW service road from Central Ave. service road NW to 3rd Ave. NW
River St. NW
Sherlock Parkway to Demers Ave.
Terrace Dr. NW to Sherlock Parkway
1st St. SE from Point Bridge to 3rd Ave. SE
2nd Ave. NE 17th St. NW - Louie Murray Bridge
2nd St. NW
3rd Ave. NW from Cental to River St.
3rd Ave. SE to 5th Ave. SE
3rd St. NW
3rd St. NE 200 - 1000 blocks
4th St. NE from 5th Ave. NE - 9th Ave. NE
4th St. NW
5th Ave. NE from 23rd St. NE to 4th Ave. NW east side of street 1400 - 1600 blocks
5th Ave. NW from Hwy 2 - 4th St. NW
6th Ave. NE
6th Ave. NW west side 1400 - 1500 block
7th Ave. NE
8th Ave. NE
9th Ave. NE
10th St. NW from Central to Terrace Dr. NW
10th St. NE
14th St. NE
2010 S-1
14 East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
15th St. NE
15th St. NW south side 600 - 700 blocks
17th St. NE
20th St. NE
(b) Blue routes.
Bygland Rd. SE from 5th St. SE to Central Middle School
Forest Ct. NW
Garden Circle NW
Garden Ct. NW
Greenwood Dr. SE
James Ave. SE
James Circle SE
James Ct. SE
Park Dr. SE
Pebble Beach Road
Pioneer Ct. NW
River Dr. SE
River Road NW
St. Andrews Dr.
Sunnyside Ct. NW
Troon Circle
Wylie Ct. NW
1st Ave. NE
2nd Ave. NE
2nd Ave. NW
3rd Ave. NE
3rd Ave. NW
3rd Ave. SE
4th Ave. NE
4th Ave. NW
4th St. SE 300 - 400 block
5th Ave. NE
5th Ave. NW
5th Ave. SE
6th Ave. NW
6th Ave. SE
7th Ave. NW
7th Ave. SE
8th Ave. NW
9th Ave. SE
2010 S-1
Parking Regulations 15
10th Ave. NW
10th Ave. SE
11th Ave. NW
11th Ave. SE
12th Ave. SE
13th Ave. SE
14th Ave. NW
16th Ave. SE
17th Ave. SE
18th Ave. SE
19th Ave. SE
20th Ave. SE
23rd Ave. SE
(c) Red routes.
Greenway Blvd. SE
Kimberly Circle SE
Laurel St. SE
Mero Ct. SE
Morgan Place SE
Sherlock Circle SE
3rd St. NW
4th St. NE 200 - 400 block
4th St. SE
5th St. NE
5th St. NW
5th St. SE
6th St. NE
6th St. NW
6th St. SE
7th St. NW
7th St. NE
7th St. SE
8th St. NE
8th St. SE
9th St. NE
9th St. SE
10th St. SE
11th St. NW
11th St. SE
12th St. NW
2010 S-1
16 East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
12th St. SE
13th St. NW
13th St. SE
14th St. NW
15th St. NW
17th St. NW
17th St. SE
18th St. NW
19th St. NW
20th St. NW
21st St. NW
22nd St. NW
23rd St. NW
(Ord. 78, 3rd Series, eff. 10-4-1986; Ord. 107, 3rd Series, eff. 1-12-1990; Am. Ord. 244, passed
12-29-1999; Am. Ord. 296, 3rd Series, passed 12-10-2006)
MOTOR VEHICLE. Includes automobiles and all other modes of transportation propelled by
other than muscular power.
PERIOD OF ENFORCEMENT. Remain the same or change to include a year round
prohibition on red, yellow and blue routes to assist street cleaning.
TRAILER. Any piece of equipment which is designed for transporting passengers or property
and which is not self-propelled but is intended to be drawn behind a motor vehicle.
(Ord. 78, 3rd Series, eff. 10-4-1986)
(B) Parking prohibitions.
(1) It is unlawful to park or leave standing any motor vehicle or trailer on a yellow commercial
route between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. during the period of enforcement.
(2) In all areas of the city excluding the yellow commercial route, it is unlawful to park or
leave standing any motor vehicle or trailer on any roadway or right-of-way designated a blue route
between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 12:00 noon on any Monday, Wednesday or Friday; or on any
roadway or right-of-way designated a red route between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 12:00 noon on
Tuesday, Thursday or Saturday during the period of enforcement.
(Ord. 124, 3rd Series, eff. 12-14-1990; Am. Ord. 244, passed 12-29-1999; Am. Ord. 296, 3rd Series,
passed 12-19-2006)
(3) It shall not be unlawful to otherwise lawfully park a motor vehicle with its motor idling on
any street, avenue, court, drive, or roadway for a duration of 5 minutes or less during the time periods
in which parking is restricted as set forth in this section.
(Ord. 102, 3rd Series, eff. 10-13-1989; Am. Ord. 296, 3rd Series, passed 12-19-2006)
2010 S-1
Parking Regulations 16A
(4) During such hours that the calendar parking prohibitions are in effect, the owner or
occupant of real property adjacent to any street, avenue, road, court, drive, or cul-de-sac may park
operable, registered, licensed and insured motor vehicles on the city right-of-way between the curb and
the sidewalk (or adjacent to the curb if there is no sidewalk) commonly referred to as the berm, with the
exception that such owner or occupant of real property may only park the motor vehicles on the portion
of the berm that is immediately adjacent to the residence occupied by the owner or occupant, and with
the further exceptions that the parking shall not be permitted within 10 feet of an intersection or corner,
or within 10 feet of a fire hydrant, and that the parked motor vehicles shall not block a sidewalk.
(Ord. 107, 3 Series, eff. 1-1 rd 2-1990; Am. Ord. 296, 3rd Series, passed 12-19-2006)
(C) Presumption. For purposes of this section, any motor vehicle or trailer parked or left on a
roadway or right-of-way of the city in violation of this section shall be presumed to have been parked
or left by the registered owner of the motor vehicle or trailer.
(Ord. 78, 3rd Series, eff. 10-24-1986)
(D) Snow emergency. A snow emergency automatically goes into effect when 2 inches or more of
snow has fallen until the streets are cleaned. Under a snow emergency, no parking on any city street
is allowed until that street has been cleared to its full width. Violators will be ticketed and towed.
(Am. Ord. 296, 3rd Series, passed 12-19-2006)
(1981 Code, § 8.10) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.11 TRUCK PARKING.
(A) Unless specifically designated by the Council by resolution and sign posted permitting such
parking, it shall be unlawful to park a semi-trailer, whether or not attached to a truck tractor, within an
area zoned as a residential district, or a neighborhood that is primarily residential in nature and scope.
(B) (1) It is unlawful to park a truck (other than a truck of 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight,
or less, with a wheelbase of no more than 170 inches), truck trailer, tractor trailer or truck tractor within
an area zoned as a residential district except for the purpose of loading or unloading the same.
(Ord. 180, 3rd Series, eff. 6-29-1995)
(2) It is unlawful to park any of the following on any city street or municipally owned parking
lot: truck-tractor, farm tractor, road tractor, semitrailer, commercial motor vehicle, mobile crane, flatbed
trailer, trailers, implements of husbandry, road construction equipment, and any other type of
self-propelled construction equipment. An exception to this section is allowed for any construction
project or event for which a permit has been issued.
(a) Example 1. Road construction or repair authorized by the City of East Grand Forks;
2010 S-1
16B East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
(b) Example 2. Contractor's trailer for home remodel/siding equipment which has been
authorized by the City of East Grand Forks; and
(c) Example 3. Vendors for Cats Incredible.
(Am. Ord. 292, 3rd Series, passed 8-1-2006)
(C) It is unlawful to park a commercial vehicle of more than 12,000 pounds gross vehicle weight
upon any street in the business district except streets as specifically designated by the Council by
resolution and sign posted, but parking of such vehicle for a period of not more than 20 minutes shall
be permitted in such space for the purpose of necessary access to abutting property while actively loading
or unloading when such access cannot reasonably be secured from an alley or from an adjacent street
where truck parking is not so restricted.
(D) It is unlawful to park a truck or other vehicle using or equipped with a trailer, or extended body
or other extension or projection beyond the original length of the vehicle, or any passenger bus,
diagonally along any street except for a time sufficient to load or unload, and in such case, only parallel
parking shall be permitted; provided, however, that a truck may stand backed up to the curb if the weight
or bulk of the load makes parallel parking impracticable, but then only for a period of time sufficient to
load or unload.
(E) Parking of commercial vehicles is permitted in duly designated and sign posted loading zones,
and in alleys, for a period of up to 20 minutes, provided that the alley parking does not prevent the flow
of traffic therein, all of which shall be for the purpose of access to abutting or adjacent property while
actively loading or unloading.
(1981 Code, § 8.11) (Ord. 8, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.12 PARKING RULES IN MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS AND RAMPS.
In municipally-owned parking lots and ramps, the Council may limit the sizes and types of motor
vehicles to be parked thereon, hours of parking, and prescribed method of parking, provided that such
limitations and restrictions are sign posted thereon. It is unlawful to park or leave standing any vehicle
backed into a parking place, to drive in a direction opposite the flow of traffic marked by 1-way signs
or arrows, or to park any vehicle in any municipally owned parking lot or ramp contrary to the
restrictions or limitations sign posted therein.
(1981 Code, § 8.12) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.13 IMPOUNDING AND REMOVING VEHICLES.
When any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or municipally-owned parking lot in
violation of any parking regulation, the officer is authorized to require the driver or other person in
2010 S-1
Parking Regulations 16C
charge of the vehicle to remove the same to a position in compliance with this chapter. When any police
officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street or municipally owned parking lot in violation of any
parking regulation, the officer is authorized to impound the unlawfully parked vehicle and to provide for
the removal thereof and to remove the same to a convenient garage or other facility or place of safety;
provided, that if any charge shall be placed against the vehicle for cost of removal or storage or both by
anyone called upon to assist therewith the same shall be paid prior to removal from the place of storage
or safekeeping.
(1981 Code, § 8.13)
§ 72.14 PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PARKING.
(A) Statutory parking privileges for physically handicapped shall be strictly observed and enforced.
Police officers are authorized to tag vehicles on either private or public property in violation of such
statutory privileges.
(B) It is unlawful for any person, whether or not physically handicapped, to stop, park, or leave
standing a motor vehicle:
(1) In a sign posted fire lane at any time; or
(2) In lanes where, and during such hours as, parking is prohibited to accommodate heavy
traffic during morning and afternoon rush hours.
(Ord. 44, 3rd Series, eff. 6-1-1984)
2010 S-1
16D East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
Parking Regulations 17
(C) Citizen volunteers may aid in the enforcement of statutory parking privileges for the physically
handicapped by providing the Police Department with proof of the violations. Upon receipt of the proof,
the police may issue a notice of violation to the registered owner of the vehicle by mail.
(Ord. 175, 3rd Series, eff. 4-20-1995)
(1981 Code, § 8.14) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.15 VEHICLE REPAIR ON STREETS.
It is unlawful for any person to service, repair, assemble or dismantle any vehicle parked upon a
street, or attempt to do so, except to service the vehicle with gasoline or oil or to provide emergency
repairs thereon.
(1981 Code, § 8.15) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.16 COURTESY PARKING.
The Council is authorized, by resolution, to waive meter charges and hours of parking limitations
herein stated upon an application duly filed on any day and to any particular group; provided, that
members of the group shall have displayed in their motor vehicles courtesy parking sticker, card or other
similar designation. The Council may, by such resolution, restrict effective hours, days and places of
the waiver.
(1981 Code, § 8.16) (Ord. 8, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
§ 72.17 ENVELOPE FEES.
(A) In order to provide the proper regulation, control and inspection of traffic upon public streets
within the city, an envelope fee is hereby levied and assessed upon the violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter, except as hereinafter provided. Whenever any vehicle is parked contrary to these
provisions, the Police Department shall attach to such a vehicle a notice stating that it has been parked
in violation of this section and instructing the owner or operator to report to the Police Department in
regard to the violation. The owner or operator may pay to the Chief of Police, or his or her duly
authorized agent, in full satisfaction of the violations, as follows:
(1) For a violation of § 72.10: In an amount set by City Council from time to time.
(2) For all parking violations other than a violation of § 72.10 and/or a violation of the statute
regulating physically handicapped parking: In an amount set by City Council from time to time.
(1981 Code, § 8.17) (Am. Ord. 190, 3rd Series, passed 12-5-1995; Am. Ord. 196, 3rd Series, passed
3-21-1996)
18 East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
(B) It is unlawful for any person to fail to pay the envelope fee as provided in division (A) of this
section. Any police officer may further issue a citation charging any person with a violation of the
provisions of this chapter in lieu of using the procedure herein provided in division (A) of this section.
(1981 Code, § 8.18) (Ord. 19, 3rd Series, eff. 5-29-1982)
§ 72.18 PARKING PROHIBITED DURING RECYCLING COLLECTION.
It is unlawful to park or leave standing any motor vehicle or trailer on any public road right-of-way,
including but not necessarily limited to rights-of-way designated as streets, avenues, courts, roads,
drives, and/or culs-de-sac, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., on the day that recycled
materials are scheduled to be collected from the rights-of-way. Public alleys are not included in this
parking prohibition.
(Am. Ord. 272, 3rd Series, passed 9-2-2003) Penalty, see § 70.99
CHAPTER 73: SNOWMOBILE TRAFFIC CONTROL AND REGULATIONS
Section
73.01 Intent
73.02 Definitions
73.03 Application of traffic ordinances
73.04 Restrictions
73.05 Stopping and yielding
73.06 Persons under 18
73.07 Equipment
73.08 Unattended snowmobiles
73.09 Emergency operation permitted
§ 73.01 INTENT.
It is the intent of this chapter to supplement M.S. §§ 84.81 to 84.91, and M.S. Ch. 169, as these
statutes may be amended from time to time and Minn. Rules parts 6100.5000 through 6100.6000, as
these rules may be amended from time to time, with respect to the operation of snowmobiles. These
statutes and rules are incorporated herein by reference. This section is not intended to allow what the
state statutes and rules prohibit, nor to prohibit what the state statutes and rules allow.
§ 73.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
DEADMAN THROTTLE or SAFETY THROTTLE. A device which, when pressure is removed
from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be disengaged from the driving mechanism.
OPERATE. To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile.
OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile.
OWNER. A person, other than a lien holder having the property in or title to a snowmobile, or
entitled to the use or possession thereof.
19
20 East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
PERSON. Includes an individual, partnership, corporation, the state and its agencies and
subdivision, and any body of persons, whether incorporated or not.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire strip of land traversed by a highway or street in which the public
owns the fee or an easement for roadway purposes.
ROADWAY. That portion of a highway or street improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel.
SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice, steered by skis or
runners.
STREET. A public thoroughfare, roadway, alley or trail used for motor vehicular traffic which is
not an interstate, trunk, county-state aid, or county highway.
§ 73.03 APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC ORDINANCES.
The provisions of Ch. 70 of this code shall apply to the operation of snowmobiles upon streets and
highways, except for those relating to required equipment, and except those which by their nature have
no application.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 73.04 RESTRICTIONS.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to enter, operate or stop a snowmobile within the limits of the city:
(1) On the roadway of any street, except the most right hand lane then available for traffic or
as close as practicable to right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing
another vehicle stopped in the lane or proceeding in the same direction, or in making a left turn.
Snowmobiles may also be operated upon the outside slope of trunk, county-state aid and county highways
where the highways are so configured within the corporate limits.
(2) On a public sidewalk provided for pedestrian travel.
(3) On boulevards within any public right-of-way.
(4) On private property of another without specific permission of the owner or person in
control of the property.
(5) Upon any school grounds, except as permission is expressly obtained from responsible
school authorities.
Snowmobile Traffic Control and Regulations 21
(6) On public property, playgrounds and recreation areas, except areas previously listed or
authorized for the use by resolution of the City Council, in which case the use shall be lawful, and
snowmobiles may be driven in and out of those areas by the shortest route.
(7) On streets as permitted by this chapter at a speed exceeding 10 miles per hour.
(8) On any flood control levee.
(9) On any public bike path.
(10) During the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday, and 12:01 a.m.
to 8:00 a.m. on other days closer than 100 feet from any residence. This provision is not intended to
prohibit snowmobiles from operating on city streets during the hours specified herein.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile within the limits of the city:
(1) So as to tow any person or thing in a public street or highway except through use of a rigid
tow bar attached to the rear of the snowmobile; provided, that a disabled snowmobile may be towed to
a private residence or a place of business where snowmobiles are repaired without the use of a rigid tow
bar.
(2) Within 100 feet of any fisherman, pedestrian, skating rink or sliding area where the
operation would conflict with use or endanger other persons or operation.
(3) To intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any animal.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 73.05 STOPPING AND YIELDING.
No snowmobile shall enter any uncontrolled intersection without making a complete stop. The
operator shall then yield the right-of-way to any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection, or so close
to the intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 73.06 PERSONS UNDER 18.
(A) No person under 14 years of age shall operate on streets or make a direct crossing of a city
street as the operator of a snowmobile. A person 14 years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age,
may operate a snowmobile on streets as permitted under this chapter and make a direct crossing of those
2010 S-1 Repl.
22 East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
streets only if he or she has in his or her immediate possession a valid snowmobile safety certificate
issued pursuant to M.S. § 84.873, as it may be amended from time to time.
(B) It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile to permit the snowmobile to be operated contrary
to the provision of this section.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 73.07 EQUIPMENT.
It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile any place within the limits of the city unless
it is equipped with the following:
(A) Standard mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the noise of operation of the
motor to the minimum necessary for operation. No person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass straight
pipe or similar device on a snowmobile motor.
(B) Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the snowmobile under any
condition of operation.
(C) A safety or so called deadman throttle in operating condition.
(D) When operated between the hours of 1/2 hour after sunset to 1/2 hour before sunrise, or at times
of reduced visibility, at least 1 clear lamp attached to the front, with sufficient intensity to reveal persons
and vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead during the hours of darkness under normal
atmospheric conditions. The head lamp shall be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes
of an oncoming snowmobile operator. It shall also be equipped with at least 1 red light plainly visible
from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.
(E) Snowmobiles shall fly a pennant flag or red or blaze material, of a size not less than 12 inches
by 9 inches, at a height of not less than 6 feet from ground level at any time when the vehicle is operated
on public streets.
(F) Reflective material at least 16 square inches on each side, forward of the handlebars and at the
highest practical point on any towed object, so as to reflect lights at a 90 degree-angle.
Penalty, see § 10.99
2010 S-1 Repl.
Snowmobile Traffic Control and Regulations 22A
§ 73.08 UNATTENDED SNOWMOBILES.
Every person leaving a snowmobile on a public place shall lock the ignition, remove the key and
take the same with him or her.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 73.09 EMERGENCY OPERATION PERMITTED.
Notwithstanding any prohibitions in this chapter, a snowmobile may be operated on a public
thoroughfare in an emergency during the period of time and at locations where snow upon the roadway
renders travel by automobile impractical.
2010 S-1 Repl.
22B East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 74: ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
Section
74.01 Definition
74.02 Permit application
74.03 Insurance
74.04 Times of operation
74.05 Permit regulations
74.06 Permit fee
74.07 Additional authority required
§ 74.01 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this section, an ALL-TERRAIN MULTIPURPOSE VEHICLE is a motorized
flotation-tired vehicle with low-pressure tires that is limited in engine displacement to less than 800 cubic
centimeters and total dry weight of less than 600 pounds.
(1981 Code, § 7.13, Subd. 1) (Am. Ord. 200, 3rd Series, passed 7-18-1996)
§ 74.02 PERMIT APPLICATION.
(A) Applicants for a permit under this section shall file with the City Administrator a sworn
application in writing on a form to be furnished by the City Administrator. The application shall contain,
at a minimum but not necessarily limited to, the following information:
(1) The name, address, telephone number, and date of birth of the applicant;
(2) If the applicant is a corporation or other business entity, the name, address, telephone
number and state of origin of the business entity;
(3) The make, model, serial number, color, weight and engine displacement of each all-terrain
multipurpose vehicle to be operated under the permit;
(4) The name, address, telephone number, date of birth, driver’s license number, and state
which issued the driver’s license for each person who will be operating the all-terrain multipurpose
vehicle;
23
24 East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
(5) The purpose for which the all-terrain multipurpose vehicle will be used.
(B) Upon receipt of each application, the City Administrator shall refer the application to the Chief
of Police who shall immediately commence such investigation of the applicant and all potential drivers
of the all-terrain multipurpose vehicle as listed on the application as the Chief of Police deems necessary
for the protection of the general public.
(C) After the completion of his or her investigation of the applicant and all potential drivers of the
all-terrain multipurpose vehicle as listed on the application, the Chief of Police shall enter upon the
application his or her recommendation for approval or disapproval of the application. Should the Chief
of Police recommend that the application be not approved, he or she shall also enter on the application
the reasons for such recommendation. The Chief of Police shall then return the application to the City
Administrator, who shall then present the application to the City Council for its consideration at its next
regularly scheduled meeting.
(D) If the application is granted by the City Council, a permit shall be issued by the City
Administrator. The Council may, in its sole discretion and for any reasonable cause, refuse to grant any
application.
(1981 Code, § 7.13, Subd. 3) (Am. Ord. 200, 3rd Series, passed 7-18-1996)
§ 74.03 INSURANCE.
Proof of insurance complying with the provisions of M.S. § 65B.48, Subd. 5, as it may be amended
from time to time, must be attached to the application.
(1981 Code, § 7.13, Subd. 4) (Am. Ord. 200, 3rd Series, passed 7-18-1996)
§ 74.04 TIMES OF OPERATION.
All-terrain multipurpose vehicles may only be operated on the above-referenced designated roadways
from sunrise to sunset. They shall not be operated in inclement weather or when visibility is impaired
by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions or any time when there is insufficient light to clearly see
persons and vehicles on the roadway at a distance of 500 feet.
(1981 Code, § 7.13, Subd. 5) (Am. Ord. 200, 3rd Series, passed 7-18-1996)
§ 74.05 PERMIT REGULATIONS.
More than 1 all-terrain multipurpose vehicle may be operated under 1 permit. Permits may be
granted for a period of not to exceed 1 year and may be annually renewed. A permit may be revoked at
any time if there is evidence that the permittee cannot operate or has not operated the all-terrain
multipurpose vehicle in a safe manner or has operated the all-terrain multipurpose vehicle off the
All-Terrain Vehicles 25
designated roadways. Every person operating an all-terrain multipurpose vehicle under permit on
designated roadways has all the rights and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle, except
when those provisions cannot reasonably be applied to all-terrain multipurpose vehicles; and further
except that the provisions of M.S. Ch. 171, as amended from time to time, are not applicable to persons
operating all-terrain multipurpose vehicles under permit on designated roadways pursuant to this section;
and further except that the provisions of M.S. Ch. 169, as amended from time to time, relating to
equipment on vehicles, except for the requirements of M.S. § 169.70, as amended from time to time,
are not applicable to all-terrain multipurpose vehicles operating under permit on designated roadways.
(1981 Code, § 7.13, Subd. 6) (Am. Ord. 200, 3rd Series, passed 7-18-1996)
§ 74.06 PERMIT FEE.
All fees for the issuance of a permit under this section shall be set by the Council from time to time
by resolution.
(1981 Code, § 7.13, Subd. 7) (Am. Ord. 200, 3rd Series, passed 7-18-1996)
§ 74.07 ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY REQUIRED.
Permits are granted under this section pursuant to the authority conferred upon the city by M.S.
§ 169.045, as amended from time to time, and as such should in no way be construed as usurping the
power and authority of the State Highway Commissioner to deny such use upon the trunk highways of
the state, and that it is not the intent of this section to absolve permittees of their responsibility to seek
and obtain permission for the operation from the State Highway Commissioner, should the permission
be required.
(1981 Code, § 7.13, Subd. 8) (Am. Ord. 200, 3rd Series, passed 7-18-1996)
26 East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 75: BICYCLES
Section
75.01 Traffic laws apply
75.02 Manner and number riding
75.03 Hitching rides
75.04 Where to ride
75.05 Right-of-way; sidewalks
75.06 Carrying articles
75.07 Lighting and brake equipment
75.08 Sale with reflectors
§ 75.01 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject
to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except as to special regulations in
this title and except as to those provisions of this title which by their nature can have no application.
(1981 Code, § 7.50, Subd. 1)
§ 75.02 MANNER AND NUMBER RIDING.
(A) It is unlawful for any person propelling a bicycle to ride other than upon or astride a permanent
and regular seat attached thereto.
(B) No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at 1 time than the number for which it is
designed and equipped.
(1981 Code, § 7.50, Subd. 2) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.03 HITCHING RIDES.
It is unlawful for any person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle to
attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
(1981 Code, § 7.50, Subd. 3) Penalty, see § 70.99
27
28 East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
§ 75.04 WHERE TO RIDE.
(A) Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the
roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the
same direction.
(B) Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall ride single file except on paths or parts of
roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
(C) Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders
shall use such paths and shall not use the roadway.
(1981 Code, § 7.50, Subd. 4)
§ 75.05 RIGHT-OF-WAY; SIDEWALKS.
Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person shall yield the right-of-way to
any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian; provided, that
it is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle on a sidewalk in a business area.
(1981 Code, § 7.50, Subd. 5)
§ 75.06 CARRYING ARTICLES.
It is unlawful for any person operating a bicycle to carry any package, bundle or article which
prevents the driver from keeping at least 1 hand upon the handle bars.
(1981 Code, § 7.50, Subd. 6) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.07 LIGHTING AND BRAKE EQUIPMENT.
(A) Every bicycle when in use at night time shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall
emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the
rear of a type approved by the Department which is visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet
to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp
emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red
reflector.
(B) Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked
wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(1981 Code, § 7.50, Subd. 7)
Bicycles 29
§ 75.08 SALE WITH REFLECTORS.
It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any new bicycle unless it is equipped with such
reflectors as are prescribed in § 75.07.
(1981 Code, § 7.50, Subd. 8) Penalty, see § 70.99
30 East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 76: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
I. Designated roadways for use by four-wheel all-terrain vehicles
SCHEDULE I. DESIGNATED ROADWAYS FOR USE BY FOUR-WHEEL ALL-TERRAIN
VEHICLES.
All-terrain multipurpose vehicles may be operated on the following roadways by permit only:
(A) Commencing at 203 – 2 Avenue Northeast; nd thence north on 2nd Avenue Northeast to its
intersection with Business Highway #2; thence east on Business Highway #2 to the city limit;
(B) Commencing at 203 – 2nd Avenue Northeast; then north on 2nd Avenue Northeast to its
intersection with 9th Street Northeast; then west on 9th Street Northeast to its intersection with Central
Avenue; thence north on Central Avenue to its intersection with 14th Street Northwest; thence west on
14th Street Northwest to its intersection with 5th Avenue Northwest; thence from this intersection both
north on 5th Avenue Northwest to 15th Street Northwest and south on the 5th Avenue Northwest to 13th
Street Northwest;
(C) Commencing at 203 – 2nd Avenue Northeast; thence south on 2nd Avenue Northeast over the
Louis Murray Memorial Bridge and continuing south on 3rd Avenue Southeast to the city limit;
(D) Commencing at 200 – 1st Avenue Northwest; thence east on 1st Avenue Northwest to its
intersection with Central Avenue; thence north on Central Avenue to its intersection with 8th Street
Northeast; thence east on 8th Street Northeast to Stauss Park;
(E) Commencing at Stauss Park; thence north on 5th Avenue Northeast to its intersection with 17th
Street Northeast; thence west on 17th Street Northeast to its intersection with 6th Avenue Northwest;
thence south on 6th Avenue Northwest to River Heights Park;
(F) Commencing at Stauss Park; thence west on 8th Street Northeast to its intersection with 2nd
Avenue Northeast; thence south on 2nd Avenue Northeast to its intersection with 3rd Street Southeast;
thence east on 3rd Street Southeast to its intersection with Bygland Road; thence south on Bygland Road
to its intersection with 4th Street Southeast; thence east on 4th Street Southeast to Folson Park.
(1981 Code, § 7.13, Subd. 2) (Am. Ord. 200, 3rd Series, passed 7-18-1996)
31
32 East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 77: SPECIAL USE VEHICLES
Section
77.01 Definitions
77.02 Operation
77.03 Permits
77.04 Application
77.05 Permit fee
77.06 Term of permit
77.07 Condition of permit
77.08 Permit issuance and display and vehicle marking
77.09 Insurance required
77.10 Mechanical condition
77.11 Occupants
77.12 Times and operation
77.13 Application of traffic laws
77.14 Slow moving vehicle emblem
77.15 Required equipment
77.16 Suspension and revocation of permits
77.99 Penalty
§ 77.01 DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
DRIVER. The person driving and having physical control over the motorized golf cart and being
the permit holder.
SPECIAL USE VEHICLE. Any motorized golf cart for passenger conveyance being driven with
4 wheels with four 4 low pressure tires that is limited in engine displacement of less than 800 cubic
centimeters and total dry weight less than 800 pounds.
(Ord. 301, 3rd Series, passed 8-21-2007)
33
2010 S-l
34 East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
§ 77.02 OPERATION.
The operation of a special use vehicle by permit is hereby authorized on the roadways of all streets
within the City of East Grand Forks, except on federal or state trunk highways except to cross at
designated intersections and are totally prohibited from operation on Central Avenue, Demers Avenue,
Gateway Drive (Highway 2), Business Highway 2, Highway 220 and are totally prohibited from entering
or crossing the intersection of Highway 2 and Highway 220 North in the City of East Grand Forks for
public safety reasons. It is unlawful for any person to operate a special use vehicle on streets in the city
without first obtaining a permit as provided herein. Persons who obtain a permit as required below are
the persons authorized to operate a special use vehicle on designated roadways or portions thereof within
the city.
(Ord. 301, 3rd Series, passed 8-21-2007) Penalty, see § 77.99
§ 77.03 PERMITS.
Authorization to operate a special use vehicle on city streets is by permit only. Permits shall be
issued by the Police Chief only to physically disabled persons, as defined in M.S. § 169.345, who have
supplied the information required by § 77.04.
(Ord. 301, 3rd Series, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 77.04 APPLICATION.
(A) Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall contain
the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) Make, model name, year and serial number of the special use vehicle;
(3) Current driver's license or reason for not having a current license;
(4) Such other information as the city may require.
(B) In addition, each permit application, whether for an initial permit or a renewal, shall be
accompanied by a certificate signed by a physician stating that the applicant is capable of safely operating
a special use vehicle on the roadway or streets designated in the permit application and should be granted
a permit based upon mobility impairments.
(Ord. 301, 3rd Series, passed 8-21-2007)
2010 S-l
Special Use Vehicles 35
§ 77.05 PERMIT FEE.
An annual permit fee shall be establishing from time to time by resolution of the City Council. The
permit fee shall be $10 unless adjusted by resolution by the East Grand Forks City Council.
(Ord. 301, 3rd Series, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 77.06 TERM OF PERMIT.
Permits shall be granted for a period of 1 year and may be renewed annually, January 1, to
December 31.
(Ord. 301, 3rd Series, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 77.07 CONDITION OF PERMIT.
No permit shall be granted or renewed unless the following conditions are met:
(A) The applicant must demonstrate that they currently hold a valid driver's license or have a
certificate signed by a physician stating that the applicant doctor's order verifying that they are capable
to safely operate a motorized golf cart.
(B) The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in compliance with the provision of Minnesota
Statutes concerning insurance coverage for a motorized golf cart.
(C) The applicant has not had his/her driver's license revoked as a result of criminal proceedings.
(D) If the applicant has provided a certificate as indicated in division (A) of this section then the
applicant must have successfully passed a driving test to the satisfaction of the East Grand Forks Police
Department.
(Ord. 301, 3rd Series, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 77.08 PERMIT ISSUANCE AND DISPLAY AND VEHICLE MARKING.
All permits shall be issued for a specific special use vehicle and individual, except as otherwise
herein provided permit tags, including number and year for which issued, shall be plainly visible from
the front and back of the special use vehicle.
(Ord. 301, 3rd Series, passed 8-21-2007)
2010 S-l
36 East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
§ 77.09 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
Before a special use vehicle permit is issued by the city, and at all times effective during such permit
period, the permit holder shall have and maintain public liability and bodily injury insurance in the
amount established by Minnesota Statutes.
(Ord. 301, 3rd Series, passed 8-21-2007) Penalty, see § 77.99
§ 77.10 MECHANICAL CONDITION.
The special use vehicle must be in good mechanical condition and thoroughly safe for transportation
of passengers.
(Ord. 301, 3rd Series, passed 8-21-2007) Penalty, see § 77.99
§ 77.11 OCCUPANTS.
The number of occupants in the special use vehicle may not exceed the design occupant load.
(Ord. 301, 3rd Series, passed 8-21-2007) Penalty, see § 77.99
§ 77.12 TIMES AND OPERATION.
Special use vehicles may only be operated on designated roadways from sunrise to sunset. They shall
not be operated in inclement weather or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other
conditions, or at any time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles on the
roadway at a distance of 500 feet. Additionally, they may only be operated between April 15 and
October 31 each year.
(Ord. 301, 3rd Series, passed 8-21-2007) Penalty, see § 77.99
§ 77.13 APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC LAWS.
Every person operating a special use vehicle under permit on designated roadways has all the rights
and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under the provisions of any ordinance of the city
or M.S. Chapter 169, except when these provisions cannot reasonably be applied to special use vehicles
and except as otherwise specifically provided in M.S. § 169.045, Subd 7.
(Ord. 301, 3rd Series, passed 8-21-2007)
2010 S-l
Special Use Vehicles 37
§ 77.14 SLOW MOVING VEHICLE EMBLEM.
Special use vehicles shall display the slow moving vehicle emblem provided for in M.S. § 169.522
when operated on designated roadways.
(Ord. 301, 3rd Series, passed 8-21-2007) Penalty, see § 77.99
§ 77.15 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.
Special use vehicles shall be equipped with a rear view mirror to provide the driver with adequate
vision from behind and the following equipment:
(A) Head lights;
(B) Tail lights;
(C) Brake lights;
(D) Turn signals;
(E) Seatbelts; and
(F) Horn.
(Ord. 301, 3rd Series, passed 8-21-2007) Penalty, see § 77.99
§ 77.16 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
A permit may be revoked or modified at any time by the Police Chief if there is evidence that the
permit holder cannot safely operate a motorized golf cart on the roadway of streets within the city or
upon a finding that the holder thereof has violated any statutory provisions of this chapter or M.S.
Chapter 169.
(Ord. 301, 3rd Series, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 77.99 PENALTY.
In addition to the revocation or suspension of the permit, any person violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
(Ord. 301, 3rd Series, passed 8-21-2007)
2010 S-l
38 East Grand Forks - Traffic Code
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. PUBLIC PARKS
91. FAIR HOUSING
92. PUBLIC CEMETERY
93. FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
94. ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES, EXCESS
PROPERTY AND UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
95. ANIMALS
96. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
97. SHADE TREE DISEASE CONTROL AND
PREVENTION
98. GENERAL NUISANCES
99. BACKGROUND CHECK; MUNICIPAL
EMPLOYEES AND APPOINTEES
1
2010 S-1
2 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
CHAPTER 90: PUBLIC PARKS
Section
90.01 Rules and regulations governing public parks
§ 90.01 RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING PUBLIC PARKS.
Upon the recommendation of the board or commission having administration or advisory authority
with reference to city parks, or upon its own motion, the Council may adopt and amend the rules and
regulations by resolution, and it shall thereafter be unlawful to violate any rules or regulations.
(1981 Code, § 9.84)
3
4 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
CHAPTER 91: FAIR HOUSING
Section
91.01 Declaration of policy
91.02 Definitions
91.03 Prohibited acts in regard to housing
91.04 Enforcement procedures
91.05 Statute of limitations
91.06 Civil enforcement procedure
Cross-reference:
Housing Maintenance Code, see § 150.07
Rental Dwelling Code, see § 150.09
§ 91.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
Discrimination with regard to housing on the basis of race, sex, creed, religion, marital status, and
disability adversely affects the health, welfare, peace and safety of the community. Persons subject to
such discrimination suffer depressed living conditions and create conditions which endanger the public
peace and order. The public policy of the city is declared to be to foster equal opportunity for all to
obtain decent, safe and sanitary housing without regard to their race, creed, color, national origin,
marital status, disability status, sex and strictly in accord with their individual merits as human beings.
It is also the policy of the city to protect all persons from all unfounded charges of discrimination.
(1981Code, § 2.70, Subd. 1) (Ord. 148, 2nd Series, eff. 6-24-1978)
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION. Includes segregate or separate.
DISABILITY. Any condition or characteristic that renders a person a disabled person. A disabled
person is any person who:
(1) Has a physical, sensory, or mental impairment which materially limits 1 or more major life
activities;
5
2010 S-1 Repl.
6 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
(2) Has a record of such impairment; or
(3) Is regarded as having such an impairment.
MARITAL STATUS. Whether a person is single, married, remarried, divorced, separated, or a
surviving spouse and in employment cases, includes protection against discrimination on the basis of the
identity, situation, actions or beliefs of a former spouse.
(1981 Code, § 2.70, Subd. 2) (Ord. 148, 2nd Series, eff. 6-24-1978)
§ 91.03 PROHIBITED ACTS IN REGARD TO HOUSING.
It is unlawful:
(A) For any person to discriminate on grounds of race, creed, religion, color, sex, marital status,
status with regard to public assistance, national origin, age or disability in the sale, lease, or rental of
any housing unit or units;
(B) For any broker, agent, salesman or other person acting in behalf of another to so discriminate
in the sale, lease, or rental of any housing unit or units belonging to such other person;
(C) For any person engaged in the business of financing the purchase, rehabilitation, remodeling
or repair of housing units or in the business of selling insurance with respect to housing units to refuse
to provide the financing or insurance or to discriminate with regard to the terms or conditions thereof
by reason of the race, color, sex, religion, creed, national origin, marital status, status with regard to
public assistance, age or disability of the applicant or because of the location of the unit or units in areas
of the city occupied by persons of a particular race, color, sex, religion, creed, national origin, marital
status, status with regard to public assistance, age or disability; or to discriminate by treating differently
any person or group of persons who desire to purchase, lease, acquire, construct, rehabilitate, repair or
maintain real property in a specific urban area because of social, economic or environmental conditions
of the area in the granting, withholding, extending, modifying, or renewing, or in the rates, terms,
conditions, or privileges of any such financial assistance or in the extension of services in connection
therewith. The bona fide programs of federal, state or local governmental units or agencies, however
structured or authorized to upgrade or improve in any manner a specific urban area, shall not be deemed
to be a violation of this section.
(D) For any person, having sold, leased, or rented a housing unit or units to any person to
discriminate with respect to facilities, services, or privileges of occupancy by reason of race, color, sex,
creed, religion, national origin, age or disability, marital status or status with regard to public assistance.
(E) For any person to make or publish any statement evidencing an intent to discriminate on
grounds of race, creed, religion, color, sex, national origin or ancestry, marital status, status with regard
to public assistance, age or disability in the sale, lease, or rental of a housing unit or units.
2010 S-1 Repl.
Fair Housing 7
(F) For any person to make any inquiry regarding race, color, sex, creed, religion, national origin,
marital status, status with regard to public assistance, age or disability or to keep any record or use any
form of application designed to elicit such information in connection with the sale, lease, rental, or
financing of a housing unit or units.
(G) For any person for the purpose of inducing a real estate transaction from which he or she may
benefit financially:
(1) To represent that a change has occurred or will or may occur in the composition of the
block, neighborhood, or area in which the property is located, in respect of the race, color, sex, creed,
religion, national origin, marital status, status with regard to public assistance, age or disability of those
living there; or
(2) To represent that this change will or may result in the lowering of property values, an
increase in crime, or antisocial behavior, or a decline in the quality of schools in the block,
neighborhood, or area concerned.
(H) Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person or group of persons selling,
renting or leasing property to modify the property in any way or exercise a higher degree of care for a
person having a disability than for a person who does not have a disability; nor shall this section be
construed to relieve any person or persons of any obligations generally imposed on all persons regardless
of any disability in a written lease, rental agreement, or contract or purchase or sale, or to forbid
distinctions based on the inability to fulfill the terms and conditions, including financial obligations of
such lease, agreement or contract.
(I) The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) The rental of a portion of a dwelling containing accommodations for 2 families, 1 of which
is occupied by the owner; or
(2) The rental by an owner or occupier of a 1-family accommodation in which he or she resides
of a room or rooms in such accommodation to another person or persons if the discrimination is by sex,
marital status, status with regard to public assistance or disability. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to require any person or group of persons selling, renting or leasing property to modify the
property in any way or exercise a higher degree of care for a person having a disability than for a person
who does not have a disability; nor shall this section be construed to relieve any person or persons of
any obligations generally imposed on all persons regardless of any disability in a written lease, rental
agreement, or contract of purchase or sale or to forbid distinctions based on the inability to fulfill the
terms and conditions, including financial obligations, of such lease, agreement or contract.
(1981 Code, § 2.70, Subd. 3) (Ord. 148, 2nd Series, eff. 6-24-1978)
8 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
§ 91.04 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
The Housing and Redevelopment Authority in and for the city (HRA) is designated as the
enforcement agency for this chapter and shall have the power to receive, hear and determine complaints
as provided herein. The HRA Executive Director shall promptly investigate, upon complaint or upon
his or her own motion, any violations of this chapter. If after investigation he or she shall have reason
to believe a violation has occurred, he or she may refer the matter to the City Attorney for criminal
prosecution, initiate civil enforcement procedures as herein provided, or enter into a settlement
agreement which, when approved by the HRA Board of Commissioners, shall have the same force as
an HRA Board of Commissioners order.
(1981 Code, § 2.70, Subd. 4) (Ord. 148, 2nd Series, eff. 6-24-1978)
§ 91.05 STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
No action may be brought for civil enforcement or criminal prosecution unless the charge of alleged
discriminatory practice was filed with the HRA within 180 days from the occurrence of the practice.
(1981 Code, § 2.70, Subd. 5) (Ord. 148, 2nd Series, eff. 6-24-1978)
§ 91.06 CIVIL ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.
Civil enforcement procedures shall be prosecuted by the HRA Executive Director before the HRA
Board of Commissioners in the following manner.
(A) The HRA Executive Director shall serve upon the respondent by certified mail a complaint,
signed by him or her, which shall set forth a clear and concise statement of the facts constituting the
violation, set a time and place for hearing, and advise the respondent of his or her right to file an answer
to appear in person or by an attorney and to examine and cross examine witnesses.
(B) The hearing shall not be less than 20 days after service of the complaint. At any time prior to
the hearing the respondent may file an answer. Facts not denied by answer shall be deemed admitted.
If the answer sets out new matter, it shall be deemed denied by the Executive Director.
(C) The complaint or answer may be amended at any given time prior to the hearing with the
consent of the opposing party.
(D) Hearings shall be before the HRA Board of Commissioners.
(E) The HRA Executive Director may obtain subpoenas from the District Court to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of documents at any hearing.
Fair Housing 9
(F) If, after hearing, the panel shall conclude that a violation has occurred, it shall prepare an order
which may contain any provision deemed desirable to do justice to the complainant or to prevent further
violations. It may include provisions which require the respondent to rent, sell, or lease particular
housing to the complainant or to do any other thing as may be just. The panels findings of fact and order
shall be served on the respondent and each member of the HRA Board of Commissioners (herewith
referred to as the HRA Board) by mail shall become the findings and order of the HRA Board unless,
within 10 days after mailing of the findings and order, the HRA Board shall revoke or amend the order,
but any order of a panel may be modified by the HRA Board at any time.
(1981 Code, § 2.70, Subd. 6) (Ord. 148, 2nd Series, eff. 6-24-1978)
10 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
CHAPTER 92: PUBLIC CEMETERY
Section
92.01 Location, plat, prohibition of other cemeteries
92.02 Sale of lots
92.03 Handling of funds
92.04 Burial permits
92.05 Cemetery Commission; duties
92.06 Illegal acts
§ 92.01 LOCATION, PLAT, PROHIBITION OF OTHER CEMETERIES.
(A) A public cemetery has heretofore been established, named the Resurrection Cemetery of East
Grand Forks, and the plat thereof, as prepared by Donald L. Floan, Engineer, has heretofore been
approved and filed, said cemetery being established pursuant to the Law of 1895, Chapter 8, § 133. The
establishment, platting and naming of the public cemetery are in all things ratified and confirmed. The
public cemetery being platted on the following tract of land situated in the county and state, described
as follows, to wit:
A tract of land in the NE 1/4 of the NE 1/4 of Section 34, Township 152 North, Range 50 West
of the 5th Principal Meridian, which tract is described as follows, to wit: commencing at the
corner common to Sections 26, 27, 34 and 35 of Township 152 North, Range 50 West of the
5th Principal Meridian, which corner is the true point of beginning; thence south along the
section line between sections 34 and 35 for a distance of 1016.00 feet, thence due west for a
distance of 1013-36 feet; thence deflecting right 90'05'57" and proceeding northerly 1017.65
feet to the section line common to Sections 34 and 27; thence deflecting right 900 001 11" and
proceeding easterly along said section line common to Sections 34 and 27 for a distance of
1000.00 feet to the true point of beginning, said described tract comprised of 23.499 acres in
the NE 1/4 of the NE 1/4 of Section 34, Township 152 North, Range 50 West of the 5th
Principal Meridian, County of Polk, and State of Minnesota.
(B) And on such other tracts of land as the Council shall deem necessary. The Council has
heretofore approved rules, regulations and charges for the Resurrection Cemetery and the rules,
regulations and charges are hereby ratified and confirmed.
(1981 Code, § 2.53, Subd. 1)
11
12 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
§ 92.02 SALE OF LOTS.
The prices of cemetery lots and other services, as determined by Council resolution, shall be filed
with the City Administrator. Any person paying the price thus fixed for any lot shall be entitled to a deed
conveying the same executed by the Mayor and City Administrator. The purchaser shall expressly agree
in the deed that his or her rights are subject to such reasonable rules and regulations as the Council may
adopt relative to use of the cemetery.
(1981 Code, § 2.53, Subd. 2)
§ 92.03 HANDLING OF FUNDS.
All money received from the sale of lots and other services shall be paid to the City Administrator,
who shall give a receipt therefor. No deed to any cemetery lot shall be issued, nor shall any services be
performed until receipt showing payment to the City Administrator of cost thereof shall be exhibited to
the person whose duty it is to give the deed or perform the services. All money received from the sale
of lots and for the performance of services shall be placed in the Cemetery Fund, which Fund shall be
used for the payment of purchase price for grounds or for maintenance and improvements. The City
Administrator shall keep an account of all receipts and disbursements of money belonging to the
Cemetery Fund and shall pay money out of the Fund only on orders signed by the Mayor and
countersigned by the City Administrator, which orders shall specify that the money shall be paid from
the Cemetery Fund.
(1981 Code, § 2.53, Subd. 3)
§ 92.04 BURIAL PERMITS.
Before any interment shall be made in any cemetery in this city a burial permit shall be obtained
from the local or the state registrar of vital statistics. Within 36 hours after the death of any person in
the city and before the body is removed for burial within the city, the undertaker or person having charge
of the interment shall apply for the permit. This application shall be accompanied by a death certificate
as prescribed by the State Board of Health. No burial permit shall be issued until the application and
death certificate shall have been properly completed and presented. The body of a deceased person shall
not be brought into the city for burial unless accompanied by a burial permit for removal issued by the
registrar or sub-registrar of the registration district wherein the death occurred.
(1981 Code, § 2.53, Subd. 4)
§ 92.05 CEMETERY COMMISSION; DUTIES.
The cemetery shall be under the jurisdiction of a commission of 3 members, to be known as The
Cemetery Commission of the City of East Grand Forks, Minnesota. The Commissioners constituting
the Cemetery Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the Council. Those
Public Cemetery 13
initially appointed shall be appointed for terms of 1, 2, and 3 years, respectively. Thereafter all
Commissioners shall be appointed for 3 years respectively. Each vacancy in an unexpired term shall be
filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made. The Commissioners shall hold
office until their successors have been appointed and qualified. The Mayor, by and with the consent of
the Council, may remove any Commissioner for misconduct or neglect. Immediately after appointment,
the Commission shall organize by electing 1 of its members chairperson and 1 as vice chairperson. They
shall appoint an Executive Secretary, who need not be a member of the Commission, who shall be
responsible for the records of the Commission and such other duties as the Commission shall determine.
The salary of the Executive Secretary shall be set by the Council. The Cemetery Commission shall have
control and management of the cemetery and be responsible for its maintenance and improvement. They
shall have such other powers and duties as are prescribed by law or by the Council.
(1981 Code, § 2.53, Subd. 5)
§ 92.06 ILLEGAL ACTS.
The following are illegal acts:
(A) No person may discharge any firearm or have possession of any firearm within the cemetery
grounds without permission of Cemetery Commission;
(B) No person may remove any object from any place in the Cemetery or make any excavation
without the consent of the Cemetery Commission;
(C) No person may obstruct any drive or path in the cemetery or in any way injure, deface or
destroy any structure, grave, flower, tree, or other thing in the cemetery;
(D) No person may drive any vehicle faster than a walk within the cemetery, nor drive over any
path or roadway not authorized by the Cemetery Commission;
(E) No person may disturb the quiet of the cemetery by noise or improper conduct of any kind;
(F) No person may enter or leave the cemetery except at the entries provided;
(Ord. 213, eff. 3-28-1968)
(G) No person may use the cemetery grounds or any road therein as a public thoroughfare, nor drive
any motorized vehicle through the cemetery grounds except for purposes relating to the cemetery. For
the purpose of this subsection, MOTORIZED VEHICLE means any self-propelled vehicle equipped with
a unit for its propulsion by means of energy stored thereon, including a vehicle designed to be propelled
by means of such energy alternatively or in combination with human power, and includes vehicles
designed to be drawn by self-propelled vehicles;
(Ord. 38, 3rd Series, eff. 6-1-1984)
14 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
(H) No child may be permitted within the cemetery unless in the control of an adult;
(I) No person may allow an animal to run at large in the cemetery;
(J) No person may loiter at any time, nor in the cemetery without permission of the Cemetery
Commission at any time between the hours of sunset and 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. 213, eff. 3-28-1968)
(1981 Code, § 2.53, Subd. 6)
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
93.01 Open burning of dried leaves
Firewood Storage
93.20 Statement of policy
93.21 Scope
93.22 Conditions of storage
93.23 Exemptions
93.24 Existing wood piles
Open Burning
93.35 Definitions
93.36 Prohibited materials
93.37 Permit required for open burning
93.38 Purposes allowed for open burning
93.39 Permit application for open burning; permit fees
93.40 Permit process for open burning
93.41 Permit holder responsibility
93.42 Revocation of open burning permit
93.43 Denial of open burning permit
93.44 Burning ban or air quality alert
93.45 Rules and laws adopted by reference
93.99 Penalty
15
16 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 OPEN BURNING OF DRIED LEAVES.
The open burning of leaves, tree branches or limbs, rubbish, trash or other material is prohibited,
except that the open burning of diseased trees, their branches and limbs is permissible after first
obtaining a burning permit from the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief may by rule and regulation control and
restrict the issuance of the burning permits. The fee for the issuance of the burning permits shall be set
by the Council from time to time by resolution.
(1981 Code, § 9.89) (Ord. 109, 3rd Series, eff. 3-2-1990)
FIREWOOD STORAGE
§ 93.20 STATEMENT OF POLICY.
The Council finds that the use of renewable resources including wood is increasing. The Council
recognizes that to protect public health and safety, wood piles must be erected, located, and maintained
in a safe and orderly fashion.
(1981 Code, § 9.80, Subd. 1) (Ord. 58, 3rd Series, eff. 8-23-1985)
§ 93.21 SCOPE.
This subchapter applies to the storage of wood on properties within the city except for the
exemptions noted below. This subchapter shall apply to any wood or wood product usually used or
intended to be used as firewood.
(1981 Code, § 9.80, Subd. 2) (Ord. 58, 3rd Series, eff. 8-23-1985)
§ 93.22 CONDITIONS OF STORAGE.
Firewood shall be stored in the following fashion:
(A) In neat, safe and secure stacks to a maximum of 6 feet in height;
(B) Elevated in a manner and location to minimize possible problems of rat or other pest infestation;
(C) No wood shall be stored in a front yard or yard that is commonly considered the front yard;
Fire Prevention and Protection 17
(D) The maximum amount of wood that may be stored within an R zone shall not exceed the lot
coverage requirements as per Chapter 152;
(E) The maximum amount of wood that may be stored within all other zones shall be as approved
by the Building Official and Fire Marshal;
(F) All persons storing firewood for resale purposes shall first submit application to the Planning
Commission and Council for approval;
(G) All storage of firewood shall meet the requirements of this code;
(H) Stored firewood that is abandoned or declared a public nuisance by the Building Official or Fire
Marshal shall be removed;
(I) No wood shall be stored within the required minimum area of setback from a street right-of-way
or property line.
(1981 Code, § 9.80, Subd. 3) (Ord. 58, 3rd Series, eff. 8-23-1985)
§ 93.23 EXEMPTIONS.
Wood storage under the following circumstances shall be exempt from the conditions outlined above:
(A) Wood stored or kept in a completely enclosed structure impervious to the elements;
(B) Temporary storage of logs for up to 15 days outside of the required areas of setback from
property lines and the street is allowed for the purpose of cutting and splitting logs to a size usable in
the residence’s wood burning device.
(1981 Code, § 9.80, Subd. 4) (Ord. 58, 3rd Series, eff. 8-23-1985)
§ 93.24 EXISTING WOOD PILES.
Any wood pile in existence as of the effective date of this subchapter, which does not comply with
the provisions of this subchapter must be removed or placed in compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter within 90 days of adoption of this subchapter, or upon written notice to comply by the
Building Official and Fire Marshal. The notice shall be in writing and shall be served upon the property
owner either in person or by mail.
(1981 Code, § 9.80, Subd. 5) (Ord. 58, 3rd Series, eff. 8-23-1985)
18 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
OPEN BURNING
§ 93.35 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
FIRE CHIEF, FIRE MARSHAL, and ASSISTANT FIRE MARSHALS. The Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals of the Fire Department which provides fire protection services to
the city.
OPEN BURNING. The burning of any matter if the resultant combustion products are emitted
directly to the atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct or chimney, except a recreational fire
as defined herein. Mobile cooking devices such as manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood
smokers, and propane or natural gas devices are not defined as OPEN BURNING.
RECREATIONAL FIRE. A fire set with approved starter fuel no more than 3 feet in height,
contained within the border of a recreational fire site using dry, clean wood; producing little detectable
smoke, odor or soot beyond the property line; conducted with an adult tending the fire at all times; for
recreational, ceremonial, food preparation for social purposes; extinguished completely before quitting
the occasion; and respecting weather conditions, neighbors, burning bans, and air quality so that
nuisance, health or safety hazards will not be created. No more than 1 recreational fire is allowed on
any property at 1 time.
RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE. An area of no more than a 3-foot diameter circle (measured from
the inside of the fire ring or border); completely surrounded by non-combustible and non-smoke or odor
producing material, either of natural rock, cement, brick, tile or blocks or ferrous metal only an which
area is depressed below ground, on the ground, or on a raised bed. Included are permanent outdoor
wood burning fireplaces. Burning barrels are not a RECREATION FIRE SITE as defined herein.
RECREATIONAL FIRE SITES shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any structure.
STARTER FUELS. Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches, cardboard or charcoal fire
starter. Paraffin candles and alcohols are permitted as starter fuels and as aids to ignition only. Propane
gas torches or other clean gas burning devices causing minimal pollution must be used to start an open
burn.
WOOD. Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, presto logs, charcoal, cord wood or
untreated dimensional lumber. The term does not include wood that is green with leaves or needles,
rotten, wet, oil soaked, or treated with paint, glue or preservatives. Clean pallets may be used for
recreational fires when cut into 3-foot lengths.
Fire Prevention and Protection 19
§ 93.36 PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
(A) No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning oils, petro fuels, rubber, plastics,
chemically treated materials, or other materials which produce excessive or noxious smoke such as tires,
railroad ties, treated, painted or glued wood composite shingles, tar paper, insulation, composition
board, sheet rock, wiring, paint or paint fillers.
(B) No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of hazardous waste or salvage
operations, open burning of solid waste generated from an industrial or manufacturing process or from
a service or commercial establishment or building material generated from demolition of commercial or
institutional structures.
(C) No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of discarded material resulting from the
handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving or consumption of food.
(D) No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of any leaves or grass clippings.
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.37 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OPEN BURNING.
No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the city without first having
obtained an open burn permit, except that a permit is not required for any fire which is a recreational
fire as defined in § 93.35.
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.38 PURPOSES ALLOWED FOR OPEN BURNING.
(A) Open burn permits may be issued only for the following purposes:
(1) Elimination of fire of health hazard that cannot be abated by other practical means.
(2) Ground thawing for utility repair and construction.
(3) Disposal of vegetative matter for managing forest, prairie or wildlife habitat, and in the
development and maintenance of land and rights-of-way where chipping, composting, landspreading or
other alternative methods are not practical.
(4) Disposal of diseased trees generated on-site, diseased or infected nursery stock, diseased
bee hives.
20 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
(5) Disposal of unpainted, untreated, non-glued lumber and wood shakes generated from
construction, where recycling, reuse, removal or other alternative disposal methods are not practical.
(B) Fire training permits can only issued by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.39 PERMIT APPLICATION FOR OPEN BURNING; PERMIT FEES.
(A) Open burning permits shall be obtained by making application on a form prescribed the
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and adopted by the Fire Department. The permit application
shall be presented to the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals for reviewing and
processing those applications.
(B) An open burning permit shall require the payment of a fee. Permit fees shall be in the amount
established by the City Council.
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.40 PERMIT PROCESS FOR OPEN BURNING.
Upon receipt of the completed open burning permit application and permit fee, the Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals shall schedule a preliminary site inspection to locate the proposed
burn site, note special conditions, and set dates and time of permitted burn and review fire safety
considerations.
§ 93.41 PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITY.
(A) Prior to starting an open burn, the permit holder shall be responsible for confirming that no
burning ban or air quality alert is in effect. Every open burn event shall be constantly attended by the
permit holder or his or her competent representative. The open burning site shall have available,
appropriate communication and fire suppression equipment as set out in the fire safety plan.
(B) The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the permit holder or his or her
representative leaves the site. No fire may be allowed to smolder with no person present. It is the
responsibility of the permit holder to have a valid permit, as required by this subchapter, available for
inspection on the site by the Police Department, Fire Department, MPCA representative or DNR forest
officer.
Fire Prevention and Protection 21
(C) The permit holder is responsible for compliance and implementation of all general conditions,
special conditions, and the burn event safety plan as established in the permit issued. The permit holder
shall be responsible for all costs incurred as a result of the burn, including but not limited to fire
suppression and administrative fees.
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.42 REVOCATION OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
The open burning permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of DNR forest officer, the Fire
Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals. Reasons for revocation include but are not limited to
a fire hazard existing or developing during the course of the burn, any of the conditions of the permit
being violated during the course of the burn, pollution or nuisance conditions developing during the
course of the burn, or a fire smoldering with no flame present.
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.43 DENIAL OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
If established criteria for the issuance of an open burning permit are not met during review of the
application, it is determined that a practical alternative method for disposal of the material exists, or a
pollution or nuisance condition would result, or if a burn event safety plan cannot be drafted to the
satisfaction of the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals, these officers may deny the
application for the open burn permit.
§ 93.44 BURNING BAN OR AIR QUALITY ALERT.
No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted when the city or DNR has officially declared a
burning ban due to potential hazardous fire conditions or when the MPCA has declared an Air Quality
Alert.
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.45 RULES AND LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
The provisions of M.S. §§ 88.16 to 88.22, as these statutes may be amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter as if fully set forth at this point.
22 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
Violation of any provision of this chapter, including maintaining a nuisance after being notified in
writing by first class mail of a violation of any provision of this chapter, shall be a misdemeanor and
punished as provided in § 10.99
CHAPTER 94: ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES, EXCESS PROPERTY
AND UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Section
General Provisions
94.01 Disposal of unclaimed property
94.02 Disposal of excess property
94.03 Persons who may not purchase; exception
Disposal of Abandoned Motor Vehicles
94.20 Definitions
94.21 Custody
94.22 Sale; waiting periods
94.23 Notice
94.24 Right to reclaim
94.25 Auction or sale
94.26 Operator’s deficiency claim
94.27 Disposal of vehicles
94.28 Contracts and disposal
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.
(A) Definition. The term ABANDONED PROPERTY means tangible or intangible property that
has lawfully come into the possession of the city in the course of municipal operations, remains
unclaimed by the owner, and has been in the possession of the city for at least 60 days and has been
declared such by a resolution of the Council.
(B) Preliminary notice. If the City Administrator knows the identity and whereabouts of the owner,
he or she shall serve written notice upon him or her at least 30 days prior to a declaration of
abandonment by the Council. If the city acquired possession from a prior holder, the identity and
whereabouts of whom are
23
24 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
known by the City Administrator notice shall also be served upon him or her. The notice shall describe
the property and state that unless it is claimed and proof of ownership or entitlement to possession
established, the matter of declaring it abandoned property will be brought to the attention of the Council
after the expiration of 30 days from the date of the notice.
(C) Notice and sale. Upon adoption of a resolution declaring certain property to be abandoned
property, the City Administrator Treasurer shall publish a notice thereof describing the same, together
with the names (if known) and addresses (if known) of prior owners and holders thereof and including
a brief description of the property. The text of the notice shall also state the time, place and manner of
sale of all the property, except cash and negotiables. The notice shall be published with 2-weeks’
published notice. Sale shall be made to the highest bidder at public auction or sale conducted in the
manner directed by the Council in its resolution declaring property abandoned and stated in the notice.
(D) Fund and claims thereon. All proceeds from the sale shall be paid into the General Fund of the
city and expenses thereof paid therefrom. The former owner, if he or she makes a claim within 8 months
from the date of publication of the notice herein provided, and upon application and satisfactory proof
of ownership, may be paid the amount of cash or negotiables or, in the case of property sold, the amount
received therefor, less a pro rata share of the expenses of storage, publication of notice, and sale
expenses, but without interest. The payment shall be also made from the General Fund.
(1981 Code, § 2.32, Subd. 2)
§ 94.02 DISPOSAL OF EXCESS PROPERTY.
(A) Declaration of surplus and authorizing sale of property. The City Administrator may, from
time to time, recommend to the Council that certain personal property (chattels) owned by the city is
no longer needed for a municipal purpose and should be sold. By action of the Council, the property
shall be declared surplus, the value estimated and the City Administrator authorized to dispose of the
property in the manner stated herein.
(B) Surplus property with a total estimated value of less than $500. The City Administrator may
sell surplus property with a total value of less than $500 through negotiated sale.
(C) Surplus property with a total estimated value between $500 and $1,000. The City Administrator
shall offer for public sale, to the highest bidder, surplus property with a total estimated value of from
$500 to $1,000. Notice of the public sale shall be given stating time and place of sale and generally
describing the property to be sold at least 10 days prior to the date of sale either by publication once in
the official newspaper or by posting in a conspicuous place in the City Hall at the City Administrator’s
option. The sale shall be by auction.
Abandoned Motor Vehicles, Excess Property and Unclaimed Property 25
(D) Surplus property with a total estimated value over $1,000. The City Administrator shall offer
for public sale, to the highest bidder, surplus property with a total estimated value over $1,000. Notice
of the public sale shall be given stating time and place of sale and generally describing property to be
sold at least 10 days prior to the date of sale by publication once in the official newspaper. The sale shall
be to the person submitting the highest sealed bid.
(E) Receipts from sales of surplus property. All receipts from sales of surplus property under this
section shall be placed in the Administrative (General Fund) Fund.
(1981 Code, § 2.32, Subd. 3) (Ord. 112, 3rd Series, eff. 5-4-1990)
§ 94.03 PERSONS WHO MAY NOT PURCHASE; EXCEPTION.
(A) No employee of the city who is a member of the administrative staff, department head, a
member of the Council, or an advisor serving the city in a professional capacity may be a purchaser of
property under this chapter. Other city employees may be purchasers if they are not directly involved
in the sale, if they are the highest responsible bidder, and if at least 1-week’s published or posted notice
of sale is given.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to be a purchaser of property under this chapter if the purchase
is prohibited by the terms of this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 2.32, Subd. 4) Penalty, see § 10.99
DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 94.20 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle as defined in M.S. Ch. 169, as amended
from time to time, that has remained for period of more than 48 hours on public property illegally or
lacking vital component parts, or has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on private property
without the consent of the person in control of the property, or in an inoperable condition such that it
has no substantial potential further use consistent with its usual function unless it is kept in an enclosed
garage or storage building. It shall also mean a motor vehicle voluntarily surrendered by its owner to
and accepted by the city. A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in M.S. Ch. 168, as amended from
26 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
time to time, shall not be considered an abandoned motor vehicle within the meaning of this section.
Vehicles on the premises of junk yard or automobile graveyards, which are licensed and maintained in
accordance with the City Code, shall not be considered abandoned motor vehicles within the meaning
of this section.
JUNK VEHICLE. A vehicle that is 3 years old or older; is extensively damaged, with the damage
including such things as broken or missing wheels, motor, drive train, or transmission, is apparently
inoperable; does not have a valid, current registration plate; and has an approximate fair market value
equal only to the approximate value of the scrap in it.
UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE. A vehicle that is subject to removal and impoundment pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes but is not a junk vehicle or abandoned vehicle.
VITAL COMPONENT PARTS. Those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to the mechanical
functioning of the vehicle, including, but not limited to the motor, drive train, and wheels.
(1981 Code, § 2.32, Subd. 1) (Ord. 2, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981; Am. Ord. 260, 3rd Series, passed
1-7-2003)
§ 94.21 CUSTODY.
The city may take into custody and impound any abandoned or junk motor vehicle or any
unauthorized vehicle as provided by statute.
(1981 Code, § 2.32, Subd. 1) (Ord. 2, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981; Am. Ord. 260, 3rd Series, passed
1-7-2003)
§ 94.22 SALE; WAITING PERIODS.
(A) An impounded vehicle is eligible for disposal or sale 15 days after notice to the owner if the
vehicle is determined to be a junk vehicle, except that it may have a valid, current registration plate and
still be eligible for disposal or sale or an abandoned motor vehicle.
(B) An impounded is eligible for disposal or sale 45 days after notice to the owner if the vehicle is
determined to be an unauthorized vehicle.
(1981 Code, § 2.32, Subd. 1) (Ord. 2, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981; Am. Ord. 260, 3rd Series, passed
1-7-2003)
Abandoned Motor Vehicles, Excess Property and Unclaimed Property 27
§ 94.23 NOTICE.
(A) When an impounded vehicle is taken into custody, the city or impound lot operator shall give
notice of the taking within 5 days. The notice shall set forth the date and place of the taking, the year,
make, model, and serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle, if the information can be reasonably
obtained, and the place where the vehicle is being held, shall inform the owner and any lien holders of
their right to reclaim the vehicle under § 94.24 and shall state that failure of the owner or lien holder to
exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle and contents within the appropriate time allowed under statute
shall be deemed a waiver by them of all right, title, and interest in the vehicle and a consent to the
transfer of title to and disposal or sale of the vehicle and contents pursuant to § 94.25.
(B) The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if any, of the impounded motor vehicle
and to all readily identifiable lien holders of record. This information shall be made available to
impound lot operators for notification purposes. If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty
the identity and address of the registered owner and all lien holders, the notice shall be published once
in the official newspaper where the motor vehicle was towed from or abandoned. Published notices may
be grouped together for convenience and economy. If an unauthorized vehicle remains unclaimed after
30 days from the date the notice was sent, a second notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the registered owner, if any, of the unauthorized vehicle and to all readily identifiable lien
holders of record.
(1981 Code, § 2.32, Subd. 1) (Ord. 2, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981; Am. Ord. 260, 3rd Series, passed
1-7-2003)
§ 94.24 RIGHT TO RECLAIM.
(A) The owner or any lien holder of an impounded motor vehicle shall have the right to reclaim the
vehicle from the city or impound lot upon payment of all towing and storage charges resulting from
taking the vehicle into custody within 15 or 45 days as applicable under this chapter after the date of the
notice required by this chapter.
(B) Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to impair any lien of a garage keeper under the
laws of this state or the right of the lien holder to foreclose. For the purposes of this section, GARAGE
KEEPER is an operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a motor vehicle storage
facility, or an operator of an establishment for servicing, repair, or maintenance of motor vehicles.
(1981 Code, § 2.32, Subd. 1) (Ord. 2, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981; Am. Ord. 260, 3rd Series, passed
1-7-2003)
28 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
§ 94.25 AUCTION OR SALE.
(A) An abandoned or unauthorized motor vehicle and contents taken into custody by the city or any
impound lot and not reclaimed under § 94.24 may be disposed of or sold at auction or sale when eligible
pursuant to § 94.24. The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the
purchaser to register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims
of ownership. Before such a vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must receive a motor vehicle
safety check.
(B) From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned or unauthorized motor vehicle by the city or
public impound lot, the city shall reimburse itself for the cost of towing, preserving, and storing the
vehicle and all administrative, notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to this subchapter. Any
remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lien holder
for 90 days and then shall be deposited in the General Fund of the city.
(C) The operator of a nonpublic impound lot may retain any proceeds from a sale derived from a
sale conducted under the authority of this chapter. The operator may retain all proceeds from the sale
of any personal belongings and contents in the vehicle that were not claimed by the owner or the owner’s
agent before the sale; except that any suspected contraband or other items that likely would be subject
to forfeiture in a criminal trial must be turned over to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
(1981 Code, § 2.32, Subd. 1) (Ord. 2, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981; Am. Ord. 260, 3rd Series, passed
1-7-2003)
§ 94.26 OPERATOR’S DEFICIENCY CLAIM.
The nonpublic impound lot operator has a deficiency claim against the registered owner of the
vehicle for the reasonable cost of services provided in the towing, storage, and inspection of the vehicle
minus the proceeds of the sale or auction. The claim for storage costs may not exceed the cost of
25-days’ storage for an abandoned or junk vehicle and 55-days’ storage for a vehicle determined to be
an unauthorized vehicle.
(1981 Code, § 2.32, Subd. 1) (Ord. 2, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981; Am. Ord. 260, 3rd Series, passed
1-7-2003)
§ 94.27 DISPOSAL OF VEHICLES.
Where no bid has been received for an abandoned or junk motor vehicle, the city may dispose of
it in accordance with this subchapter.
(1981 Code, § 2.32, Subd. 1) (Ord. 2, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981; Am. Ord. 260, 3rd Series, passed
1-7-2003)
Abandoned Motor Vehicles, Excess Property and Unclaimed Property 29
§ 94.28 CONTRACTS AND DISPOSAL.
(A) The city may contract with any qualified person for collection, storage, incineration, volume
reduction, transportation, or other services necessary to prepare abandoned motor vehicles and other
scrap metal for recycling or other methods of disposal.
(B) Where the city enters into a contract with a person duly licensed by the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency, the Agency shall review the contract to determine whether it conforms to the Agency’s
plan for solid waste disposal. A contract that does so conform may be approved by the Agency. Where
a contract has been approved, the Agency may reimburse the city for the costs incurred under the
contract which have not been reimbursed.
(C) If the city utilizes its own equipment and personnel for disposal of the abandoned motor vehicle,
it shall be entitled to reimbursement for the cost thereof along with its other costs herein provided.
(1981 Code, § 2.32, Subd. 1) (Ord. 2, 3 Series, eff. 6-6-1981; rd Am. Ord. 260, 3rd Series, passed
1-7-2003)
30 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
CHAPTER 95: ANIMALS
Section
95.01 Running at large prohibited
95.02 License required
95.03 Fees
95.04 License period
95.05 Tag required
95.06 Immunization
95.07 Unlawful acts
95.08 Animal pound
95.09 Notice of impounding
95.10 Release from animal pound
95.11 Muzzling proclamation
95.12 Immobilization of dogs and cats
95.13 Limitation on number
95.14 Quarantine for certain dogs and cats
95.15 Persons in possession
95.16 Keeping, transportation, treatment and housing of animals and fowl
95.17 Wild animals
§ 95.01 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
It is a petty misdemeanor for the owner of any pet to permit the animal to run at large. Any pet
shall be deemed to be running at large with the permission of the owner unless it is on a durable leash
secured to an object which it cannot move and on the premises of the owner or on a leash or otherwise
under the control of an accompanying person of suitable age and discretion.
(1981 Code, § 9.21, Subd. 1) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
It is a petty misdemeanor for the owner of any dog or cat, 6 months of age or more, to fail to obtain
a license therefor from the city.
(1981 Code, § 9.21, Subd. 2) Penalty, see § 10.99
31
2010 S-1
32 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
§ 95.03 FEES.
All fees for the licensing and impounding of dogs and cats, including penalties for late application,
shall be fixed and determined by the Council, adopted by resolution, and uniformly enforced. The fees
may from time to time be amended by the Council by resolution.
(1981 Code, § 9.21, Subd. 3)
§ 95.04 LICENSE PERIOD.
All dog and cat licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year and shall become delinquent on
the first day of April in each year or within 7 months after birth.
(1981 Code, § 9.21, Subd. 4)
§ 95.05 TAG REQUIRED.
All licensed dog and cats shall wear a collar and have a tag firmly affixed thereto evidencing the
license for the current year. A duplicate for a lost tag may be issued by the city upon presentation of
the receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the current year. Tags shall not be transferable,
and no refund shall be made on any dog or cat license fee because of leaving the city or death of the dog
or cat before the expiration of the license.
(1981 Code, § 9.21, Subd. 5)
§ 95.06 IMMUNIZATION.
(A) All applications for dog and cat licenses shall be accompanied by a current certificate of
immunization for rabies signed by a veterinarian duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state
and stating:
(1) The owner’s name;
(2) A description of the dog or cat; and
(3) The date beyond which the immunization is not considered effective.
(B) On or prior to the date of expiration of the effective immunization, the owner of a dog or cat
shall file with the city a new certificate containing the same information as herein required.
(1981 Code, § 9.21, Subd. 6) (Ord. 9, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
Animals 33
§ 95.07 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
It is a petty misdemeanor for the owner or person having custody or control of any dog or cat to:
(A) Fail to have the license tag issued by the city firmly attached to a collar worn at all times by the
licensed animal; or
(B) Own or keep a dog or cat which is dangerous (any such animal which has caused injury to
persons or property shall be deemed dangerous); or
(C) Interfere with any police officer, or other city employee, in the performance of their duty to
enforce this chapter; or
(D) Fail to keep the dog from barking, howling or whining or the cat from emitting loud or unusual
noise; or
(E) Fail to prevent the dog or cat from defecating in or upon any school ground, public street,
sidewalk, alley, tree bank (berm), park or any other public ground or any private property within the
city, other than the premises of the owner or person having custody or control of the dog or cat; or
(F) Fail to immediately remove the feces of the dog or cat that defecates on public property or
otherwise in violation of the prohibition contained in the preceding subsection; or
(G) Permit the feces of a dog or cat to accumulate for more than 24 hours on the owner’s premises
or the premises of the person having custody or control of the dog or cat.
(1981 Code, § 9.21, Subd. 7) (Ord. 137, 3rd Series, eff. 8-28-1992)
§ 95.08 ANIMAL POUND.
(A) Any dog or cat found in the city without a tag, running at large, barking, howling or whining
when the owner is not present or cannot control the animal, or otherwise conducting itself in a manner
prohibited by this chapter shall be placed in the Animal Pound, and an accurate record of the time of the
placement shall be kept on each dog or cat. Every dog or cat so placed in the Animal Pound shall be held
for redemption by the owner, for a period of not less than 5 regular business days. A REGULAR
BUSINESS DAY is one during which the Pound is open for business to the public for at least 4 hours
between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Impoundment records shall be preserved for a minimum of 6 months
and shall show:
(1) The description of the animal by specie, breed, sex, approximate age, and other
distinguishing traits;
(2) The location at which the animal was seized;
34 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
(3) The date of seizure;
(4) The name and address of the person from whom any animal 6 months of age or over was
received; and
(5) The name and address of the person to whom any animal 6 months of age or over was
transferred.
(B) If unclaimed, the dog or cat shall be humanely destroyed and the carcass disposed of, unless
it is requested by a licensed educational or scientific institution under authority of M.S. § 35.71, as it
may be amended from time to time; provided, however, that if a tag affixed to the animal, or a statement
by the animal’s owner after seizure specifies that the animal should not be used for research, the animal
shall not be made available to any such institution but may be destroyed after the expiration of the 5-day
period.
(1981 Code, § 9.21, Subd. 8) (Ord. 45, 3rd Series, eff. 6-1-1984)
§ 95.09 NOTICE OF IMPOUNDING.
Upon the impounding of any dog or cat, the owner shall be notified.
(1981 Code, § 9.21, Subd. 9)
§ 95.10 RELEASE FROM ANIMAL POUND.
Dogs and cats shall be released to their owners, as follows:
(A) If the dog or cat is owned by a resident of the city, after purchase of a license as aforesaid, and
payment of the impounding fees;
(B) If the dog or cat is owned by a person not a resident of the city, after immunization of any dog
for rabies, and payment of the impounding fee for the period which the dog or cat was impounded.
(1981 Code, § 9.21, Subd. 10)
§ 95.11 MUZZLING PROCLAMATION.
Whenever the prevalence of rabies renders the action necessary to protect the public health and
safety, the Council shall issue a proclamation ordering every person owning or keeping a dog to muzzle
it securely so that it cannot bite. It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to violate the proclamation and
any unmuzzled dog unrestrained during the time fixed in the proclamation shall be subject to
impoundment as heretofore provided, and the owner of the dog shall be in violation of this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 9.21, Subd. 11)
Animals 35
§ 95.12 IMMOBILIZATION OF DOGS AND CATS.
For the purpose of enforcement of this chapter, any peace officer, cat or dog catcher, or other
person assisting a peace officer or cat or dog catcher may use a so called tranquilizer gun or other
instrument for the purpose of immobilizing and catching a dog or cat.
(1981 Code, § 9.21, Subd. 12) (Ord. 9, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
§ 95.13 LIMITATION ON NUMBER.
It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to own or keep more than 2 dogs over the age of 4 months
or more than 2 cats over the age of 4 months on his or her premises except in a district zoned for
agricultural use. The limitation of 2 dogs may be increased to 3 dogs so long as at least 1 of the 3 dogs
is used by the City Police Department for law enforcement purposes. Under no circumstances may the
3-dog limit be exceeded.
(1981 Code, § 9.21, Subd. 13) (Ord. 97, 3rd Series, eff. 8-26-1988; Am. Ord. 242, 3rd Series, passed
9-16-1999) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.14 QUARANTINE FOR CERTAIN DOGS AND CATS.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
NON-PENETRATING WOUND. One where no tooth of the biting dog or cat has broken the
surface of the victim’s skin, regardless of whether there may be injury below the skin as evidenced by
discoloration or otherwise.
PENETRATING WOUND. One where a tooth of a biting dog or cat has broken the surface
of the victim’s skin resulting in a scratch, laceration, or puncture type wound.
QUARANTINED. The seizing of a biting dog or cat and the placement of the dog or cat in an
animal shelter or veterinary hospital by the Chief of Police for a period of not less than 10 days at the
owner’s expense. The dog or cat shall be examined by a veterinarian immediately after it has bitten
anyone and again at the end of the quarantine period. If at the end of the quarantine period the
veterinarian is convinced that the dog or cat is free of rabies the dog or cat shall be released from
quarantine. If the dog or cat dies during confinement, the carcass of the dog or cat shall be delivered
to the Health Officer who shall take such steps as are necessary to determine if the dog or cat had rabies.
(B) Any dog or cat which has not been currently immunized for rabies and which bites a person,
regardless of whether the bite results in a penetrating or non penetrating wound, shall be quarantined.
(C) Any dog or cat which bites a person resulting in a penetrating wound shall be quarantined
regardless of whether the dog or cat has been currently immunized for rabies.
36 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
(D) Any dog or cat which has been currently immunized for rabies and which bites a person
resulting in a non-penetrating wound shall not be quarantined. However, the owner of the dog or cat
shall keep the dog or cat in the owner’s residence segregated from all other animals for a period of not
less than 10 days. On the tenth day following the date that the dog or cat bit a person, the Chief of
Police shall observe the dog or cat and if the dog or cat appears to be ill or sick, the Chief of Police shall
immediately seize and transport the dog or cat to a veterinarian for immediate examination at the owner’s
expense. If the veterinarian is convinced that the dog or cat is free of rabies, the dog or cat shall be
released by the Chief of Police. If the veterinarian suspects that the dog or cat has rabies, the dog or cat
shall be quarantined.
(1981 Code, § 9.21, Subd. 14) (Ord. 111, 3rd Series, eff. 3-23-1990)
§ 95.15 PERSONS IN POSSESSION.
Any person who feeds or houses a dog or cat temporarily or permanently shall have all of the duties
and bear the responsibilities of an owner under the provisions of this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 9.21, Subd. 15) (Ord. 9, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
§ 95.16 KEEPING, TRANSPORTING, TREATMENT AND HOUSING OF ANIMALS AND
FOWL.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ANIMALS. Farm animals and all other animals, reptiles and feathered birds or fowl except
dogs, cats, gerbils, hamsters and caged household birds.
FARM ANIMALS. Cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats, swine, ponies, geese, turkeys,
chickens, guinea hens and honey bees.
(Ord. 9, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
(B) Keeping. It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any animal, not in transit, except:
(1) Farm animals kept in that portion of the city zoned for agricultural purposes; or
(2) Animals kept as part of a show licensed under the City Code; or
(3) Animals kept in a laboratory for scientific or experimental purposes; or
(4) Animals kept in an animal hospital or clinic for treatment by a licensed veterinarian; or
Animals 37
(5) Honey bees kept in that portion of the city zoned I-1 and only then during the honey bees’
dormant stage.
(Ord. 73, 3rd Series, eff. 7-4-1986)
(C) Animals in transit. It is unlawful for any person to transport animals unless they are:
(1) Confined within a vehicle, cage or other means of conveyance; or
(2) Farm animals being transported in a portion of the city zoned for agricultural purposes; or
(3) Restrained by means of bridles, halters, ropes or other means of individual restraint.
(D) Treatment. It is unlawful for any person to treat an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner.
(E) Housing. It is unlawful for any person to keep any animal in any structure infested by rodents,
vermin, flies or insects.
(F) Trespasses. It is unlawful for any person to herd, drive or ride any animal over and upon any
grass, turf, boulevard, city park, cemetery, garden or lot without specific permission therefor from the
owner.
(1981 Code, § 9.29) (Ord. 9, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.17 WILD ANIMALS.
(A) Purpose. This section is adopted for the purpose of protecting the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of the city.
(B) Definition. For the purposes of this section, the term WILD ANIMAL means and includes any
animal, not of the traditional domesticated species, which is inherently dangerous and presents a potential
risk to the public.
(C) Running at large prohibited. It is unlawful for the owner of any wild animal to permit the
animal to run at large. Any animal shall be deemed to be running at large with the permission of the
owner unless it is effectively confined within a motor vehicle, building, or enclosure.
(D) Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to keep, shelter or harbor any wild animal
without a permit therefor from the city.
(E) Permit term and fees. All permits shall be issued for a term of 2 years and the fee for the
permits shall be fixed and determined by the Council, adopted by resolution and uniformly enforced.
The fee may from time to time be amended by the Council by resolution.
38 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
(F) Conditions of permit. No permit for the keeping of wild animals shall be issued until the
applicant has met the following criteria for the keeping and housing of wild animals:
(1) A plan is approved by the Council which establishes the nature and size of the cage or
enclosure to house the animal considering the animal’s size, weight, strength and relative danger to the
public; specifying all protective devices to be maintained to restrain the animal and discourage tampering
by humans and other animals; providing for suitable exercise facilities; and an emergency response plan
to be on file with the city;
(2) Erection and maintenance of suitable fencing for the protection of adjoining property
owners and the general public;
(3) Providing suitable sanitation controls so as not to create a public or private nuisance;
(4) Proof of insurance for medical expense and liability.
(G) Inspection. Prior to the issuance of the permit, the city shall require an inspection to be made
to determine that the facilities are suitable for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the
public. The inspection shall be made by a person approved by the city and the cost of the inspection
shall be borne by the applicant.
(H) Suspension or revocation of permit.
(1) The Council may, for any violation or other reasonable cause:
(a) Refuse to grant any renewal application;
(b) Suspend for a period of 60 days; or
(c) Revoke any permit issued under this section.
(2) The action shall be made only upon a finding that the permittee has failed to comply with
the provisions of this section. The Council shall take such immediate action as it deems necessary for
the public protection to remedy any potentially dangerous situation. The owner of the animal shall be
responsible for any expense incurred as the result of the action. Before revocation of any permit, the
Council shall give notice to the permittee and grant the permittee opportunity to be heard. The permittee
shall have 30 days following a revocation hearing to correct any violations of this section found to be
the basis for revocation, during which time period the revocation shall be suspended.
(1981 Code, § 9.37) (Ord. 176, 3rd Series, eff. 4-20-1995)
CHAPTER 96: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
96.01 Definitions
96.02 Traffic and parking control
96.03 Scope and orders of peace officer
96.04 Application
96.05 Ice and snow on public sidewalks
96.06 Construction and reconstruction of roadway surfaces, sidewalks and curbs and gutters
96.07 Street openings or excavations
96.08 Sidewalk maintenance and repair
96.09 Obstructions in streets
96.10 Limiting time of railway-street crossing obstruction
96.11 Requirement of sewer and water main service lateral installation
96.12 Load limits
96.13 Private use of public streets and parking lots
96.14 Curb setback
96.15 Parades
96.16 Curb and gutter street and sidewalk painting or coloring
96.17 Motorized vehicles prohibited on sidewalks
96.18 Trees overhanging streets
§ 96.01 DEFINITIONS.
Except as otherwise defined in the City Code, or where the context clearly indicates a contrary
intent, the words and terms defined in M.S. Ch. 169, as it may be amended from time to time, shall be
applicable to City Code Title VII and Ch. 96.
(1981 Code, § 6.01) (Ord. 6, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
Cross-reference:
Traffic Code, see Title VII
§ 96.02 TRAFFIC AND PARKING CONTROL.
(A) Council action. No device, sign or signal shall be erected or maintained for traffic or parking
control unless the Council shall first have approved and directed the same, except as otherwise provided
in this section; provided, that when traffic and parking control is marked or sign posted, the marking or
sign posting shall attest to Council action thereon.
39
2010 S-1 Repl.
40 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
(B) Temporary restrictions. The city, acting through the Chief of Police, may temporarily restrict
traffic or parking for any private, public or experimental purpose. It is the duty of the Chief of Police
to so restrict traffic or parking when a hazardous condition arises or is observed.
(C) Traffic restrictions and prohibitions. It is a misdemeanor for any person to drive a vehicle
contrary to lane restrictions or prohibitions painted on any street or contrary to sign posted, fenced, or
barricaded restrictions or prohibitions.
(Ord. 6, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
(D) Parking restrictions and prohibitions. It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle contrary
to lane restrictions or prohibitions appropriately painted on any curb or contrary to sign posted, fenced,
or barricaded restrictions or prohibitions.
(Ord. 42, 3rd Series, eff. 6-1-1984)
(E) Damaging or moving markings. It is a misdemeanor for any person to deface, mar, damage,
move, remove, or in any way tamper with any structure, work, material, equipment, tools, sign, signal,
barricade, fence, painting or appurtenance in any street unless the person has written permission from
the city or is an agent, employee or contractor for the city or other authority having jurisdiction over a
particular street and acting within the authority or scope of a contract with the city or such other
authority.
(Ord. 6, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
(1981 Code, § 6.02) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.03 SCOPE AND ORDERS OF PEACE OFFICER.
(A) Generally. The provisions of this chapter and Title VII relate exclusively to the streets, alleys,
and private roads in the city, and the operation and parking of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation
and parking of vehicles upon such streets, alleys and private roads.
(B) Orders of a peace officer. It is a misdemeanor for any person to willfully fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct,
control or regulate traffic.
(1981 Code, § 6.03) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.04 APPLICATION.
(A) The provisions of this chapter and Title VII applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the streets
shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles, including, but not limited to, those owned or operated by the
United States, this state, or any county, city, town, district or any other political subdivision of the state,
subject to such specific exemptions as set forth in this chapter and Title VII with reference to authorized
emergency vehicles.
Streets and Sidewalks 41
(B) Every person riding a bicycle or an animal or driving any animal drawing a vehicle upon a
roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and Title VII applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Provisions specifically
referring to bicycles shall be in addition to other provisions of this chapter and Title VII applying to
vehicles.
(1981 Code, § 6.04)
§ 96.05 ICE AND SNOW ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS.
(A) Ice and snow a nuisance. All snow and ice remaining upon public sidewalks is declared to
constitute a public nuisance and shall be abated by the owner or tenant of the abutting private property
within 12 hours after such snow or ice has ceased to be deposited.
(B) City to remove snow and ice. The city may cause to be removed from all public sidewalks,
beginning 24 hours after snow or ice has ceased to fall, all snow and ice which may be discovered
thereon, and it shall keep a record of the cost of the removal and the private property adjacent to which
the accumulations were found and removed.
(C) Cost of removal to be assessed. The City Administrator shall, upon direction of the Council,
and on receipt of the information provided for in the preceding subdivision, extend the cost of the
removal of snow or ice as a special assessment against the lots or parcels of ground abutting on walks
which were cleared, and the special assessments shall at the time of certifying taxes to the County
Auditor be certified for collection as other special assessments are certified and collected.
(D) Civil suit for cost of removal. The City Administrator shall, in the alternative, upon direction
of the Council, bring suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover from the persons owning land
adjacent to which sidewalks were cleared, as provided in division (B) of this section, the cost of the
clearing and the cost and disbursements of a civil action therefor.
(E) City Administrator to report sidewalks cleared. The City Administrator shall present to the
Council at its first meeting after snow or ice has been cleared from the sidewalks as provided in division
(B) of this section the report of the city thereon and shall request the Council to determine by resolution
the manner of collection to be used as provided in division (C) or (D) of this section.
(1981 Code, § 6.05) (Am. Ord. 6, 3rd Series, passed 5-21-1981)
42 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
§ 96.06 CONSTRUCTION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF ROADWAY SURFACES,
SIDEWALKS AND CURBS AND GUTTERS.
(A) Methods of procedure.
(1) Abutting or affected property owners may contract for, construct or reconstruct roadway
surfacing, sidewalk or curb and gutter in accordance with this section if advance payment is made
therefor or arrangements for payment considered adequate by the city are completed in advance.
(2) With or without petition by the methods set forth in the Local Improvement Code of
Minnesota Statutes, presently beginning with M.S. § 429.011, as it may be amended from time to time.
(B) Permit required. It is unlawful to penetrate curb and gutter for sump or downspout drainage
or to construct a sidewalk, curb and gutter, driveway or roadway surfacing in any street or other public
property in the city without a permit in writing from the Building Official. Application for the permit
shall be made on forms approved and provided by the city and shall sufficiently describe the
contemplated improvements, the contemplated date of beginning of work, and the length of time required
to complete the same, provided, that no permit shall be required for any such improvement ordered
installed by the Council. All applications shall be referred by the Building Official to the Street
Commissioner, and no permit shall be issued until approval has been received from the Street
Commissioner. All such applications shall contain an agreement by the applicant to be bound by this
chapter and plans and specifications consistent with the provisions of this chapter and good engineering
practices shall also accompany the application. A permit from the city shall not relieve the holder from
damages to the person or property of another caused by the work.
(C) Specifications and standards. All construction and reconstruction of roadway surfacing,
sidewalk and curb and gutter improvements, including curb cuts, shall be strictly in accordance with
specifications and standards on file with the Building Official’s office. Such specifications and standards
are adopted by resolution of the City Council and are part of this section.
(D) Inspection. The Building Inspector shall inspect such improvements as deemed necessary or
advisable. Any work not done according to the applicable specifications and standards shall be removed
and corrected at the expense of the permit holder. Any work done hereunder may be stopped by the
Inspector if found to be unsatisfactory or not in accordance with the specifications and standards, but this
shall not place a continuing burden upon the city to inspect or supervise the work.
(E) Curb and gutter penetrations. Penetrations of the curb and gutter may be made for the purpose
of sump drainage provided the following requirements are met:
(1) Sump drainage penetrations shall be core drilled into the uppermost 1/2 of the existing curb
with a minimum of 3 inches from the center of the discharge pipe to the bottom of the gutter.
(2) Core drilled penetrations shall be no larger than 2 inches in diameter.
Streets and Sidewalks 43
(3) All core drilled penetrations shall be sealed on both sides of the penetration against the
passage of water.
(4) Property owner shall sign a release form stating that such person shall indemnify and hold
the city harmless from all damages or claims arising out of the construction, reconstruction or
penetrations of curb and gutters in the city rights-of-way.
(F) Existing conformance. All existing sump drainage penetrations, not in conformance shall
conform to this section within 90 days of the passage of these provisions.
(G) Failure to make repairs. If the owner of the abutting property fails to make repair of
accomplish reconstruction as herein required, the City Administrator shall report such failure to the City
Council. Based on a damage assessment made by the City Engineer, the Council may order such work
done under its direction and the cost thereof assessed to the abutting property owner as a special
assessment authorized by Minnesota Statutes.
(1981 Code, § 6.07) (Am. Ord. 256, 3rd Series, passed 3-21-2002)
§ 96.07 STREET OPENINGS OR EXCAVATIONS.
It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation, opening or tunnel in, over, across or upon a
street or other public property without first having obtained a written permit from the Building Official
as herein provided.
(A) Application. Any person desiring to procure a permit as herein provided shall file with the
Building Official at least 24 hours (unless the Building Official shall find, upon investigation, that an
emergency exists) before the time proposed to begin the work a written application upon a blank form
prepared and provided by the city. The application shall state the name and business or residence address
of the applicants the name of the street, alley, sidewalk or public place in or under which it is desired
to make the excavation or opening, the kind of pavement or sidewalk thereon, the purpose, size and
location of the proposed excavation or opening, the name and business or residence address of the person
for whose benefit the work is to be done, and the time during which it is desired the opening is to be
permitted. When required by the Building Official the application shall be accompanied by a plat or
pencil tracing or sketch showing the location, character and dimensions of the proposed excavation or
opening for the installation of new work, or the location and character of the alterations involving the
location of pipes, conduits, wires or other conductors. If an excavation is made without having filed an
application and receiving a permit, and the Building Official finds that an emergency existed, then the
person making it shall have complied with this division if the application is made on the working day
next following commencement of the work. The applicant shall submit proof that a Gopher State One
Call has been made and verify that the excavation will not be closer than 2 feet from any utility marking.
(Ord. 51, 3rd Series, eff. 5-24-1985)
44 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
(B) Insurance required. Before a permit shall be issued, the Building Official shall require of the
person applying for same satisfactory evidence that the person is injured under a public liability
insurance policy with limits for bodily injury to each person of at least $100,000, and limits for bodily
injury for each accident of at least $300,000, and limits of at least $50,000 for property damage, and that
such person will indemnify and hold the city harmless from all damages or claims arising out of the
excavation work or accidents caused or claimed by the injured party to have been caused by the
excavation or by the failure to do the work or guard it properly.
(Ord. 116, 3rd Series, eff. 5-4-1990)
(C) Investigation and payment of estimated cost. Upon receipt of the application, the Building
Official shall cause the investigation to be made by the Street Department or himself or herself as may
be necessary to determine estimated cost of repair, such as back-filling, compacting, resurfacing and
replacement, and the conditions as to the time of commencement of work, manner of procedure and time
limitations upon the excavation. The foregoing estimated cost shall include permanent and temporary
repairs due to weather or other conditions, and the cost of the investigation shall be included in the
permit.
(D) Permit fee and deposit for estimated cost. The fees for the permit and deposit for estimated cost
shall be adopted by a resolution of Council and may be amended from time to time in the same manner;
provided, that a schedule of the fees, together with the date of adoption of each such fee, shall be kept
on file in the office of the City Administrator and the Building Official and available for distribution
upon request therefor. The fees shall be uniformly enforced upon the adoption or amendment.
(E) Issuance of permit. The Building Official shall issue the permit after verifying the applicant is
in conformance to this section. The permit shall at all times be in the possession of a competent person
actually on the work site and shall be shown upon demand to a police officer or properly authorized
officer or employee of the Street Department.
(F) Cost adjustment. Within 60 days following completion of the permanent repairs the Street
Commissioner shall determine actual costs of repairs, including cost of investigation, and prepare and
furnish to such permit holder an itemized statement thereof and claim additional payment from, or make
refund to, the permit holder, as the case may be.
(G) Alternate method of charging. In lieu of the above provisions relating to cost and cost
adjustment for street openings, the city may charge on the basis of surface square feet removed,
excavated cubic feet, or a combination of surface square feet and excavated cubic feet on an established
unit price uniformly charged.
(H) Inspection. The Building Official shall make inspections as are necessary or advisable. The
Building Official shall stop any construction and reconstruction of roadway surfacing for street openings
and excavations, done hereunder, if found to be unsatisfactory or not in compliance with adopted
specifications and standards. The standards and specifications are adopted by resolution of the City
Council and are part of this section.
(1981 Code, § 6.08) (Am. Ord. 116, 3rd Series, passed 4-19-1990; Am. Ord. 256, 3rd Series, passed
3-21-2002)
Streets and Sidewalks 45
§ 96.08 SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.
(A) Primary responsibility. It is the primary responsibility of the owner of property upon which
there is abutting any sidewalk to keep and maintain such sidewalk in safe and serviceable condition.
(B) Permit required. It is unlawful to construct, reconstruct or repair any public sidewalk in the
city without a permit in writing from the Building Official. Application of the permit shall sufficiently
describe the contemplated improvement(s).
(C) Inspections. The Building Official shall make inspections as are necessary or advisable to
determine that public sidewalks are kept in a safe and serviceable condition. The Building Official shall
stop any work done hereunder if found to be unsatisfactory or not in compliance with adopted
specifications and standards. The standards and specifications are adopted by resolution of the City
Council and are part of this section.
(D) Notices. Where, in the opinion of the Building Official, repair or reconstruction is required,
notice shall be given to the owner of the abutting property to complete the repair or reconstruction within
90 days. Reconstruction is required when the difference in elevation of the plane of the sidewalk exceeds
1.5 inches.
(E) Failure of owner to reconstruct or make repairs. If the owner of the abutting property fails to
make repairs or accomplish reconstruction as herein required, the City Administrator shall report the
failure to the Council and the Council may order the work to be done under its direction and the cost
thereof assessed to the abutting property owner as a special assessment authorized by M.S. § 429.101,
as amended from time to time.
(1981 Code, § 6.09) (Ord. 116, 3 Series, eff. 5-rd 4-1990; Am. Ord. 256, 3rd Series, passed 3-21-2002)
§ 96.09 OBSTRUCTIONS IN STREETS.
(A) Obstructions. It is a misdemeanor for any person to place, post, deposit, display or offer for
sale any fence, sign, goods or other obstructions upon, over, across or under any street right-of-way
without first having obtained a written permit from the Council and then only in compliance in all
respects with the terms and conditions of the permit and taking precautionary measures for the protection
of the public. An electric cord or device of any kind is included, but not by way of limitation, within the
definition of an obstruction. The city may remove any obstruction placed in a street right-of-way without
a permit and may dispose of the obstruction without notice to the person responsible for placing, posting,
depositing or displaying the obstruction.
(B) Fires. It is a misdemeanor for any person to build or maintain a fire upon a street.
46 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
(C) Dumping in streets. It is a misdemeanor for any person to throw or deposit in any street any
nails, dirt, glass or glassware, cans, discarded cloth or clothing, metal scraps, garbage, leaves, grass or
tree limbs, paper or paper products, shreds or rubbish, oil, grease or other petroleum products, or to
empty any water containing salt or other injurious chemical thereon. It is a violation of this section to
haul any such material, inadequately enclosed or covered, thereby permitting the same to fall upon
streets. It is also a violation of this section to place or store any building materials or waste resulting
from building construction or demolition on any street without first having obtained a written permit
from the Council.
(D) Signs and other structures. It is a misdemeanor for any person to place or maintain a sign,
advertisement, or other structure in any street without first having obtained a written permit from the
Council. In a district zoned for commercial or industrial enterprises special permission allowing an
applicant to erect and maintain signs overhanging the street may be granted upon such terms and
conditions as may be set forth in the zoning or construction provisions of the City Code.
(E) Placing snow or ice in the roadway.
(1) It is a misdemeanor for any person, not acting under a specific contract with the city or
without special permission from the City Superintendent of Streets, to remove snow or ice from private
property and place the same in any roadway.
(2) Where permission is granted by the City Superintendent of Streets, the person to whom the
permission is granted shall be initially responsible for payment of all direct or indirect costs of removing
the snow or ice from the street. If not paid collection shall be by civil action or assessment against the
benefitted property as any other special assessment.
(F) Continuing violation. Each day that any person continues in violation of this section shall be
a separate offense and punishable as such.
(G) Condition. Before granting any permit under any of the provisions of this section, the Council
may impose the insurance or bonding conditions thereon as it, considering the projected danger to public
or private property or to persons, deems proper for safeguarding the persons and property. The insurance
or bond shall also protect the city from any suit, action or cause of action arising by reason of such
obstruction.
(1981 Code, § 6.10) (Ord. 6, 3 Series, eff. 6-rd 6-1981; Am. Ord. 191, 3rd Series, passed 12-5-1995)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.10 LIMITING TIME OF RAILWAY STREET CROSSING OBSTRUCTION.
It is unlawful for any person operating or in charge of a railroad train, car, engine, or other railroad
equipment, or combination of the equipment, to permit the same to be parked or left standing upon any
street crossing so as to close the crossing to vehicular traffic for a longer period than 10 minutes.
(1981 Code, § 6.11) Penalty, see § 10.99
Streets and Sidewalks 47
§ 96.11 REQUIREMENT OF SEWER AND WATER MAIN SERVICE LATERAL
INSTALLATION.
(A) Requirement of sewer and water laterals. No petition for the improvement of a street shall be
considered by the Council if the petition contemplates constructing therein any part of a pavement or
stabilized base, or curb and gutter, unless all sewer and water main installations shall have been made
therein, including the installation of service laterals to the curb, if the area along the street will be served
by the utilities installed in the street.
(B) Waiver. The Council may waive the requirements of this section only if it finds the effects
thereof are burdensome and upon the notice and hearing as the Council may deem necessary or proper.
(1981 Code, § 6.14)
§ 96.12 LOAD LIMITS.
The City Administrator, upon the recommendation of the Street Department, may from time to time
impose upon vehicular traffic on any part or all of the streets the load limits as may be necessary or
desirable. The limits, and the specific extent or weight to which loads are limited, shall be clearly and
legibly sign posted thereon. It is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle on any street in violation
of the limitation so posted.
(1981 Code, § 6.15) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.13 PRIVATE USE OF PUBLIC STREETS AND PARKING LOTS.
(A) Authority, permission and procedure. Upon an application duly made to the City Administrator
and reviewed and recommended by the Chief of Police, the Council may, in its discretion, grant special
permission whereby on street parking or the use of city-owned parking lots or ramps or public sidewalks
may be temporarily or permanently prohibited or restricted for private reasons and purposes (including,
but not limited to, establishment of private or leased parking, loading zones, or display of merchandise
on sidewalks) at such places, on such terms and for such compensation as the Council may deem just and
equitable. In establishing the amount of the compensation to be paid to the city, the Council shall
consider the amount of space, location thereof, loss of parking meter revenues, if any, public
inconvenience, and hazards to persons or property. Upon complaint of any aggrieved person at any time
and by reason of any specific special permission so granted, the Council shall at its next regular meeting
after receipt of the complaint call a hearing thereon to be held after 10-days’ notice in writing to
applicant, complainant, and the other persons as may appear to have interests therein. After the hearing
the Council shall decide whether to terminate, continue or redefine the terms of the permission and the
decision shall be final and binding on all persons directly or indirectly interested therein, except that the
Council may, on its own motion, reconsider the same.
(B) Public vehicles. Free and reserved on street parking shall be limited to city-owned and operated
vehicles.
48 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
(C) Forbidden practices. It is unlawful for any person to park or otherwise infringe upon a grant
of right under this section, when clearly and distinctly marked or sign posted. It is unlawful for any
person not granted the right to assert the same or for any grantee of the right to exceed the same under
claim thereto.
(1981 Code, § 6.16) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.14 CURB SET BACK.
It is unlawful for any person to hereafter remove, or cause to be removed, any curb from its position
abutting upon the roadway to another position except to provide for ingress or egress to adjoining
premises for the purpose of a curb cut under standards applicable thereto. No future construction or
reconstruction shall be permitted to provide curb set back for the purpose of angle parking without prior
Council approval.
(1981 Code, § 6.17) (Ord. 135, 3rd Series, eff. 5-29-1992) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.15 PARADES.
(A) Definition. The term PARADE means any movement of vehicles, persons or animals, or any
combination thereof, which either moves together and as a body so as to in some way impede or affect
the free and unobstructed flow of traffic or which moves so that some part thereof is in violation of 1
or more traffic laws or regulations if the movement is without a permit hereunder.
(B) Permit required. It is unlawful to sponsor or participate in a parade for which no permit has
been obtained from the city, and it is also unlawful to obtain a parade permit and not conduct the same
in accordance with the permit granted by the city. Application for the permit shall be made to the City
Administrator and accompanied by a fee adopted by resolution of the Council, at least 14 days in advance
of the date on which it is to occur and shall state the sponsoring organization or individual, the route,
the length, the estimated time of commencement and termination, the general composition, and the
application shall be executed by the individuals applying therefor or the duly authorized agent or
representative of the sponsoring organization.
(Ord. 146, 3rd Series, eff. 12-4-1992)
(C) Procedure and granting. The City Administrator shall forthwith refer all applications for
parades to the Chief of Police for his or her consideration which shall take no longer than 7 days. If any
state trunk highways are in the route the Chief of Police shall make all necessary arrangements with the
Minnesota Department of Highways for alternate routes or whatever may be necessary. If the Chief of
Police finds that such a parade will not cause a hazard to persons or property and will cause no great
inconvenience to the public, and if he or she is able to make arrangements for necessary direction and
control of traffic, he or she shall endorse his or her acceptance and return the application to the City
Administrator who shall then issue the permit. If the Chief of Police finds the parade described in the
application to be a hazard, a substantial inconvenience, or if he or she is unable to make adequate
arrangements for direction or control
Streets and Sidewalks 49
of traffic, he or she shall return the same to the City Administrator with his or her reasons for denial,
and the permit shall not be granted unless all conditions and objections of the Chief of Police are met
or removed by the applicant.
(1981 Code, § 6.18) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.16 CURB AND GUTTER STREET AND SIDEWALK PAINTING OR COLORING.
It is unlawful for any person to paint, letter or color any street, sidewalk or curb and gutter for
advertising purposes, or to paint or color any street, sidewalk or curb and gutter for any purpose, except
with Council approval.
(1981 Code, § 6.19) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.17 MOTORIZED VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON SIDEWALKS.
It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motorized vehicle on any public sidewalk or
public property designated for use as a pedestrian walkway or bicycle trail, except when crossing the
same for ingress and egress to private property lying on the other side thereof.
(1981 Code, § 6.20) (Ord. 6, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.18 TREES OVERHANGING STREETS.
It is a misdemeanor for any person to plant or remove any tree upon or overhanging streets, without
first procuring a permit from the city in writing to do so.
(1981 Code, § 6.06) Penalty, see § 10.99
2010 S-1 Repl.
50 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
CHAPTER 97: SHADE TREE DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION
Section
97.01 Policy and purpose
97.02 Definitions
97.03 Scope and adoption by reference
97.04 Unlawful act
97.05 Inspection and diagnosis
97.06 Abatement of nuisance
97.07 Procedure for removal of infected trees and wood
97.08 Spraying trees
97.09 Transporting wood prohibited
97.10 Interference prohibited
97.11 Additional duties of City Forester
97.12 Diseased trees in streets
97.13 Subsidies
§ 97.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
The city has determined that the health of oak and elm trees is threatened by fatal diseases known
as oak wilt and Dutch elm disease. It has further determined that the loss of oak and elm trees located
on public and private property would substantially depreciate the value of property and impair the safety,
good order, general welfare and convenience of the public. It is declared to be the intention of the
Council to control and prevent the spread of these diseases and provide for the removal of dead or
diseased trees as nuisances.
(1981 Code, § 9.81, Subd. 1) (Ord. 9, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
§ 97.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
CITY FORESTER. the Park Superintendent, or such other employee of the city as the Council may
designate, and who shall thereafter qualify, together with his or her duly designated assistants.
51
52 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
NUISANCE.
(1) Any living or standing tree infected to any degree with a shade tree disease; or
(2) Any logs, branches, stumps or other parts of any dead or dying tree, so infected, unless
the parts have been fully burned or treated under the direction of the City Forester.
SHADE TREE DISEASE. Dutch elm disease or oak wilt disease.
(1981 Code, § 9.81, Subd. 2) (Ord. 9, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
§ 97.03 SCOPE AND ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
M.S. § 18.023, as it may be amended from time to time, is adopted by reference, together with the
rules and regulations of the Minnesota Commissioner of Agriculture relating to shade tree diseases;
provided, that this chapter shall supersede such statutes, rules and regulations, only to the extent of
inconsistencies.
(1981 Code, § 9.81, Subd. 3) (Ord. 9, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
§ 97.04 UNLAWFUL ACT.
It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, or permit upon premises owned by him or her or
upon public property where he or she has the duty of tree maintenance any nuisance as herein defined.
(1981 Code, § 9.81, Subd. 4) (Ord. 9, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.05 INSPECTION AND DIAGNOSIS.
It is the power and duty of the City Forester to enter upon public and private property, at any
reasonable time, for the purpose of inspecting for, and diagnosing, shade tree disease. In cases of
suspected shade tree disease, and in performance of his or her duties, the City Forester may remove such
specimens, samples and biopsies as may be necessary or desirable for diagnosis.
(1981 Code, § 9.81, Subd. 5) (Ord. 9, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
§ 97.06 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
Abatement of a nuisance, defined herein, shall be by spraying, removing, burning, or otherwise
effectively treating the infected tree or wood to prevent spread of shade tree disease. The abatement
procedures shall be carried out in accordance with the current technical and expert methods and plans
as may be designed by the Commissioner of Agriculture of the State of Minnesota. The city shall
establish specifications for tree removal and disposal methods consistent therewith.
(1981 Code, § 9.81, Subd. 6) (Ord. 9, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
Shade Tree Disease Control and Prevention 53
§ 97.07 PROCEDURE FOR REMOVAL OF INFECTED TREES AND WOOD.
(A) Whenever the City Forester finds with reasonable certainty that the infection, or danger of
infection, exists in any tree or wood on any public or private property, he or she shall proceed as
follows:
(1) If the City Forester finds that the danger of infection of other trees is not imminent because
of dormancy of shade tree disease, he or she shall make a written report of his or her finding to the
Council which shall proceed by:
(a) Abating the nuisance as a public improvement under M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be
amended from time to time; or
(b) Abating the nuisance as provided in division (B) of this section;
(2) If the City Forester finds that danger of infection of other trees is imminent, he or she shall
notify the owner of the property, or the abutting property, as the case may be, by registered or certified
mail that the nuisance exists. The City Forester shall immediately report the action to the Council and
after the expiration of the time limited by the notice he or she may abate the nuisance;
(3) If the City Forester finds with reasonable certainty that immediate action is required to
prevent the spread of shade tree disease, he or she may proceed to abate the nuisance forthwith. He or
she shall report the action immediately to the Council and to the abutting property owner, or to the
owner of the property where the nuisance is located.
(B) Upon receipt of the City Forester’s report required by subsection (A)(1), the Council shall by
resolution order the nuisance abated. Before action is taken on the resolution, the Council shall publish
notice of its intention to meet to consider taking action to abate the nuisance. This notice shall be mailed
to affected property owners and published once no less than 1 week prior to the meeting. The notice
shall state the time and place of the meeting, the streets affected, action proposed, the estimated cost of
the abatement, and the proposed basis of assessment, if any, of costs. At the hearing or adjournment
thereof, the Council shall hear property owners with reference to the scope and desirability of the
proposed project. The Council shall thereafter adopt a resolution confirming the original resolution with
such modifications as it considers desirable and provide for the doing of the work by day labor or by
contract.
(C) The City Forester shall keep a record of the costs of abatements done under this section and
shall report to the Council, on or before September 1 of each year, all work done for which assessments
are to be made stating and certifying the description of the land, lots, parcels involved and the amount
chargeable to each. The Council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof against the property
involved as a special assessment under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and
other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection the following year along
with current taxes.
54 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
(D) No damage shall be awarded the owner for destruction of any tree, wood or part thereof
pursuant to this section.
(1981 Code, § 9.81, Subd. 7) (Ord. 9, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
§ 97.08 SPRAYING TREES.
(A) Whenever the City Forester determines that any tree or wood is infected or threatened with
infection, he or she may spray or treat all nearby high value trees with an effective concentrate or
fungicide or both. Activities authorized by this section shall be conducted in accordance with technical
and expert opinions and plans of the Commissioner of Agriculture and under the supervision of the
Commissioner and his or her agents whenever possible.
(B) The notice and assessment provisions of § 97.07 apply to spraying and treatment operations
conducted under this section.
(1981 Code, § 9.81, Subd. 8) (Ord. 9, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
§ 97.09 TRANSPORTING WOOD PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any person to transport or stockpile any bark bearing elm wood, or, in the months
of April, May or June, to transport any oak wood, without having obtained a permit from the City
Forester, or into or through any designated disease control area as defined by M.S. § 18.023, as it may
be amended from time to time. The City Forester shall issue permits to transport and stockpile bark
bearing elm wood during the period from September 15 through April 1 of any given year. This
prohibition shall not apply to movement of the wood pursuant to an approved wood disposal or
utilization program authorized by M.S. § 18.023, as it may be amended from time to time, or to
transportation of elm wood intended for industrial use not to include firewood, provided the
transportation of elm logs for industrial use continues without interruption through the city or disease
control area to their intended destination lying outside the city and disease control area.
(1981 Code, § 9.81, Subd. 9) (Ord. 9, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.10 INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the City Forester while he or she
is engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this section.
(1981 Code, § 9.81, Subd. 10) (Ord. 9, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981) Penalty, see § 10.99
Shade Tree Disease Control and Prevention 55
§ 97.11 ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF CITY FORESTER.
It is the additional duty of the City Forester to coordinate, under the direction and control of the
Council, all activities of the city relating to the control and prevention of shade tree disease. He or she
shall recommend to the Council the details of a program for the control of the diseases and perform the
duties incident to such a program adopted by the Council.
(1981 Code, § 9.81, Subd. 11) (Ord. 9, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
§ 97.12 DISEASED TREES IN STREETS.
The rights, duties and responsibilities of property owners set forth in this chapter shall be equally
applicable to, and binding upon, abutting property owners with tree maintenance responsibilities under
§§ 98.35 et seq.
(1981 Code, § 9.81, Subd. 12) (Ord. 9, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
§ 97.13 SUBSIDIES.
The duty of any property owner to bear the cost of removing or maintaining trees, whether by
private contract or assessment, shall be subject to a subsidy policy, if any, established by the city for the
treatment or removal of trees infected with shade tree disease.
(1981 Code, § 9.81, Subd. 13) (Ord. 9, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
2010 S-1 Repl.
56 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
CHAPTER 98: GENERAL NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
98.01 Assessable current services
98.02 Tree diseases
Nuisances
98.15 Public nuisance
98.16 Public nuisances affecting health
98.17 Public nuisances affecting morals and decency
98.18 Public nuisances affecting peace and safety
98.19 Nuisance parking and storage
98.20 Inoperable motor vehicles
98.21 Building maintenance and appearance
98.22 Duties of city officers
98.23 Abatement
98.24 Recovery of cost
Weeds
98.35 Short title
98.36 Jurisdiction
98.37 Definitions; exclusions
98.38 Owners responsible for trimming, removal and the like
98.39 Filing complaint
98.40 Notice of violations
98.41 Appeals
98.42 Abatement by city
98.43 Liability
Clandestine Drug Labs
98.55 Clandestine drug lab sites
98.99 Penalty
57
58 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 98.01 ASSESSABLE CURRENT SERVICES.
(A) Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CURRENT SERVICE. Shall mean 1 or more of the following: snow, ice, or rubbish removal
from sidewalks; weed elimination from street grass plots adjacent to sidewalks or from private property;
removal or elimination of public health or safety hazards from private property, excluding any hazardous
building included in M.S. § 463.15 through 463.26 as they may amended from time to time; installation
or repair of water service lines; street sprinkling, street flushing, light street oiling, or other dust
treatment of streets; repair of sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of trees and removal of unsound
and insect-infected trees from the public streets or private property; and the operation of a street lighting
system.
(B) Snow, ice, dirt and rubbish.
(1) Duty of owners and occupants. The owner and the occupant of any property adjacent to
a public sidewalk shall use diligence to keep the walk safe for pedestrians. No owner or occupant shall
allow snow, ice, dirt or rubbish to remain on the walk longer than 24 hours after its deposit thereon.
Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a violation.
(2) Removal by city. The Administrator-Clerk-Treasurer or other person designated by the City
Council may cause removal from all public sidewalks all snow, ice, dirt and rubbish as soon as possible
beginning 24 hours after any matter has been deposited thereon or after the snow has ceased to fall. The
Administrator-Clerk-Treasurer or other designated person shall keep a record showing the cost of
removal adjacent to each separate lot and parcel.
(C) Public health and safety hazards. When the city removes or eliminates public health or safety
hazards from private property under the following provisions of this chapter, the administrative officer
responsibility for doing the work shall keep a record of the cost of the removal or elimination against
each parcel of property affected and annually deliver that information to the
Administrator-Clerk-Treasurer.
(D) Installation and repair of water service lines. Whenever the city installs or repairs water service
lines serving private property under Chapter 52 of this code, the Administrator-Clerk-Treasurer shall
keep a record of the total cost of the installation or repair against the property.
General Nuisances 59
(E) Repair of sidewalks and alleys.
(1) Duty of owner. The owner of any property within the city abutting a public sidewalk or
alley shall keep the sidewalk or alley in repair and safe for pedestrians. Repairs shall be made in
accordance with the standard specifications approved by the City Council and on file in the office of the
Administrator-Clerk-Treasurer.
(2) Inspections; notice. The City Council or its designee shall make inspections as are
necessary to determine that public sidewalks and alleys within the city are kept in repair and safe for
pedestrians or vehicles. If it is found that any sidewalk or alley abutting on private property is unsafe
and in need of repairs, the City Council shall cause a notice to be serviced, by registered or certified mail
or by personal service, upon the record owner of the property, ordering the owner to have the sidewalk
or alley repaired and made safe within 30 days and stating that if the owner fails to do so, the city will
do so and that the expense thereof must be paid by the owner, and if unpaid it will be made a special
assessment against the property concerned.
(3) Repair by city. If the sidewalk or alley is not repaired within 30 days after receipt of the
notice, the Administrator-Clerk-Treasurer shall report the facts to the City Council and the City Council
shall be resolution order the work done by contract in accordance with law. The
Administrator-Clerk-Treasurer shall keep a record of the total cost of the repair attributable to each lot
or parcel of property.
(F) Personal liability. The owner of property on which or adjacent to which a current service has
been performed shall be personally liable for the cost of the service. As soon as the service has been
completed and the cost determined, the Administrator-Clerk-Treasurer, or other designated official, shall
prepare a bill and mail it to the owner and thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable
at the office of the Administrator-Clerk-Treasurer.
(G) Damage to public property. Any person driving any vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance
upon any street, road, highway or structure shall be liable for all damages which the surface or structure
thereof may sustain as a result of any illegal operation, or driving or moving of the vehicle, equipment
or object or contrivance; or as a result of operating, driving or moving any vehicle, equipment, object
or contrivance weighing in excess of the maximum weight permitted by statute or this code. When the
driver is not the owner of the vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance, but is operating, driving or
moving it with the express or implied permission of the owner, then the owner and the driver shall be
jointly and severally liable for any such damage. Any person who willfully acts or fails to exercise due
care and by that act damages any public property shall be liable for the amount thereof, which amount
shall be collectable by action or as a lien under M.S. § 514.67, as it may be amended from time to time.
(H) Assessment. On or before September 1 of each year, the Administrator-Clerk-Treasurer shall
list the total unpaid charges for each type of current service and charges under this section against each
separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this section. The City Council may then spread
60 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
the charges against property benefitted as a special assessment under the authority of M.S. § 429.101
as it may be amended from time to time and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County
Auditor and collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not
exceeding 10, as the City Council may determine in each case.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005) Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.02 TREE DISEASES.
(A) Trees constituting nuisance declared. The following are public nuisances whenever they may
be found with the city:
(1) Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof, infected to any degree with the Dutch Elm
disease fungus Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman) Moreau or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles
Scolytus Multistriatus. (Eichh.) or Hylungopinus Rufipes (Marsh);
(2) Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including branches, stumps, firewood or other elm
material from which the bark has not been removed and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark
beetle insecticide;
(3) Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected to any degree with the Oak Wilt
fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum;
(4) Any dead oak tree or part thereof which in the opinion of the designated officer constitutes
a hazard, including but not limited to logs, branches, stumps, roots, firewood or other oak material
which has not been stripped of its bark and burned or sprayed with an effective fungicide;
(5) Any other shade tree with an epidemic disease.
(B) Abatement of nuisance. It is unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance as defined
in division (A) of this section to remain on any premises the person owns or controls within the city. The
City Council may be resolution order the nuisance abated. Before action is taken on that resolution, the
City Council shall publish notice of its intention to meet to consider taking action to abate the nuisance.
This notice shall be mailed to the affected property owner and published once no less than 1 week prior
to the meeting. The notice shall state the time and place of the meeting, the street affected, action
proposed, the estimated cost of the abatement, and the proposed basis of assessment, if any, of costs.
At such hearing or adjournment thereof, the City Council shall hear any property owner with reference
to the scope and desirability of the proposed project. The City Council shall thereafter adopt a resolution
confirming the original resolution with modifications as it considers desirable and provide for the doing
of the work by day labor or by contract.
(C) Record of costs. The Administrator-Clerk-Treasurer shall keep a record of the costs of
abatement done under this section for all work done for which assessments are to be made, stating and
certifying the description of the land, lots parcels involved, and the amount chargeable to each.
General Nuisances 61
(D) Unpaid charges. On or before September 1 of each year, the Administrator-Clerk-Treasurer
shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against each separate lot or parcel to which they
are attributable under this section. The City Council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof
against the property involved as a special assessment as authorized by M.S. § 429.101 as it may be
amended from time to time and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and
collection the following year along with the current taxes.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005) Penalty, see § 98.99
NUISANCES
§ 98.15 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
Whoever by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally does any of the following
is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is a misdemeanor:
(A) Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonable annoys, injuries or endangers the safety,
health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable number of members of the public;
(B) Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage any public highway or right-of-way,
or waters used by the public; or
(C) Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or §§ 98.16, 98.17 or 98.18, or any other
part of this code to be a public nuisance and for which no sentence is specifically provided.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005) Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.16 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
(A) Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable manner;
(B) All diseased animals running a large;
(C) All ponds or pools of stagnant water;
(D) Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after death;
(E) Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris;
62 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
(F) Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-tight or which are so maintained
as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and disagreeable odors;
(G) The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or body of water by sewage,
industrial waste or other substances;
(H) All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or private property;
(I) Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in unreasonable quantities;
(J) All public exposure of people having a contagious disease; and
(K) Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not operating under local license.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005) Penalty, see §98.99
§ 98.17 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals and decency:
(A) All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards, except as otherwise authorized by
federal, state or local law;
(B) Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in those occupations;
(C) All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse, gambling
houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;
(D) All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or disposed of in violation of law or where,
in violation of law, people are permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or
where intoxicating liquor is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of law, and all liquor and other
property used for maintaining that place;
(E) Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of intoxicating liquor, or for promiscuous
sexual intercourse, or any other immoral or illegal purpose.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005) Penalty, see § 98.99
General Nuisances 63
§ 98.18 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety:
(A) All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 24 hours after the snow or other
precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall;
(B) All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent people from having a clear
view of all traffic approaching an intersection;
(C) All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a sidewalk or street as to
constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
(D) All obnoxious noises in violation of Minn. Rules Ch. 7030, as they may be amended from time
to time which are hereby incorporated by reference into this code.
(E) The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the discharging of the exhaust of any stationary
internal combustion engine, motor boat, motor vehicle, motorcycle, all terrain vehicle, snowmobile or
any recreational device except through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents loud or
explosive noises therefrom and complies with all applicable state laws and regulations.
(F) The using or operation or permitting the using or operation of any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine or other device for producing or reproduction of sound
in a distinctly and loudly audible manner so as to disturb the peace, quite and comfort of any person
nearby. Operation of any device referred to above between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a
manner so as to be plainly audible at the property line of the structure or building, in which it is located,
or at a distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside a structure or building shall be prima facie
evidence of violation of this section.
(G) No personal shall participate in any party or other gathering of people giving rise to noise,
unreasonably disturbing the peace, quite, or repose of another person. When a police officer determines
that a gathering is creating such a noise disturbance, the officer may order all persons present, other than
the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is occurring, to disperse immediately. No
person shall refuse to leave after being ordered by a police officer to do so. Every owner or tenant of
such premises who has knowledge of the disturbance shall make every reasonable effort to see that the
disturbance is stopped.
(H) Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of streets, alleys, sidewalks or
public grounds except under conditions as are permitted by this code or other applicable law;
(I) Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in a dangerous manner;
64 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
(J) Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public street or
sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the street
or sidewalk;
(K) All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over streets and sidewalks, so situated
so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed and maintained as provided by chapter;
(L) The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any building or structure upon any street
or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk;
(M) Any barbed wire fence less than 6 feet above the ground and within 3 feet of a public
sidewalk or way;
(N) All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated or operated on private
property as to attract the public;
(O) Waster water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other public properties;
(P) Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household appliances, automobile
bodies or other material in a manner conducive to the harboring of rats, mice, snakes or vermin, or the
rank growth of vegetation among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire, health or safety
hazards from accumulation;
(Q) Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in another condition as to
constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming on the premises where it is located;
(R) Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a public street drain, gutter or
ditch with trash of other materials;
(S) The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public property of any glass, tacks,
nails, bottles or other substance which may injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire
when passing over the substance;
(T) The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on adjacent private property;
(U) All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the person of property of
anyone.
General Nuisances 65
(V) (1) Noises prohibited.
(a) General prohibition. No person shall make or cause to be made any distinctly and
loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, peace, safety, or welfare of any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their
property's value. This general prohibition is not limited by the specific restrictions of this section.
(b) Defective vehicles or loads. No person shall use any vehicle so out of repair or so
loaded as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise.
(c) Loading, unloading, unpacking. No person shall create loud or excessive noise in
loading, unloading, or unpacking any vehicle.
(d) Radios, phonographs, paging systems, and the like. No person shall use or operate
or permit the use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging
system, machine or other device for the production or reproduction of sound in a distinct and loudly
audible manner as to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any person nearby. Operation
of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or other device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at the property line of the structure or building in
which it is located, in the hallway or apartment adjacent, or at a distance of 50 feet if the source is
located outside a structure or building, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
(e) Schools, churches, hospitals, and the like. No person shall create any excessive noise
on a street, alley or public grounds adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or hospital
when the noise unreasonably interferes with the working of the institution or disturbs or unduly annoys
its occupants or residents and when conspicuous signs indicate the presence of such institution.
(2) Hourly restriction of certain operations.
(a) Domestic power equipment. No person shall operate a power lawn mower, power
hedge clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden tiller, edger, drill or other similar domestic power
maintenance equipment except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday. Snow removal equipment
is exempt from this provision.
(b) Refuse hauling. No person shall collect or remove garbage or refuse in any residential
district except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday.
(c) Construction activities. No person shall engage in or permit construction activities
involving the use of any kind of electric, diesel, or gas-powered machine or other power equipment
except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday.
66 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
(3) Noise impact statements. The Council may require any person applying for a change in
zoning classification or a permit or license for any structure, operation, process, installation or alteration
or project that may be considered a potential noise source to submit a noise impact statement on a form
prescribed by the Council. It shall evaluate each such statement and take its evaluation into account in
approving or disapproving the license or permit applied for or the zoning change requested.
(W) Reflected glare or light. Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting exceeding 0.5
foot-candles as measured on the property line of the property where the lighting is located when abutting
any residential parcel, and 1 foot-candle when abutting any commercial or industrial parcel.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005) Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.19 NUISANCE PARKING AND STORAGE.
(A) Declaration of nuisance. The outside parking and storage on residentially-zoned property of
large numbers of vehicles and vehicles, materials, supplies or equipment not customarily sued for
residential purposes in violation of the requirements set forth below is declared to be a public nuisance
because it (a) obstructs vehicles on streets and private property, (b) creates cluttered and otherwise
unsightly areas, (c) prevents the full use of residential streets for residential parking, (d) introduces
commercial advertising signs into areas where commercial advertising signs are otherwise prohibited,
(e) decreases adjoining landowners; and occupants' enjoyment of their property and neighborhood, and
(f) otherwise adversely affects property values and neighborhood patterns.
(B) Unlawful parking and storage.
(1) A person must not place, store, or allow the placement, or storage of ice fish houses,
skateboard ramps, playhouses or other similar non-permanent structures outside continuously for longer
than 24 hours in the front-yard area of residential property unless more than 100 feet back from the front
property line.
(2) A person must not place, store, or allow the placement or storage of pipe, lumber, forms,
steel, machinery, or similar materials, including all materials used in connection with a business, outside
on residential property, unless shielded from public view by an opaque cover or fence.
(3) A person must note cause, undertake, permit or allow the outside parking and storage of
vehicles on residential property unless it complies with the following requirements;
(a) No more than 4 vehicles per lawful dwelling unit may be parked or stored anywhere
outside on residential property, except otherwise permitted or required by the city because of
nonresidential characteristics of the property. This maximum number does not include vehicles of
occasional guest who do not reside on the property.
(b) Vehicles that are parked or stored outside in the front-yard area must be on a paved
or graveled parking or driveway area.
General Nuisances 67
(c) Vehicles, watercraft and other articles stored outside on residential property must be
owned by a person who resides on that property. Students who are away at school for periods of time
but still claim the property as their legal residence will be considered residents on the property.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005) Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.20 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.
(A) It shall be unlawful to keep, park, store or abandon any motor vehicle which is not in operating
condition, partially dismantled, used for repair of parts or as a source of repair or replacement parts for
other vehicles, kept for scrapping, dismantling or salvage of any kind, or which is not properly licensed
for operation with the state, pursuant to M.S. § 168B.011, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(B) This section does not apply to a motor vehicle enclosed in a building and/or kept out of view
from any street, road or alley, and which does not foster complaint from a resident of the city. A privacy
fence is permissible.
(C) Any motor vehicles described in this section constitute a hazard to the health and welfare of the
residents of the community in that such vehicles can harbor noxious diseases, furnish a shelter and
breeding place for vermin and present physical danger to the safety and well-being of children and
citizens; and vehicles containing fluids which, if released into the environment, can and do cause
significant health risks to the community.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005) Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.21 BUILDING MAINTENANCE AND APPEARANCE.
(A) Declaration of nuisance. Buildings, fences and other structures that have been so poorly
maintained that their physical condition and appearance detract from the surrounding neighborhood are
declared to be public nuisances because they (a) are unsightly, (b) decrease adjoining landowners and
occupants' enjoyment of their property and neighborhood, and (c) adversely affect property values and
neighborhood patterns.
(B) Standards. A building, fence or other structure is public nuisance if it does not comply with
the following requirements:
(1) No part of any exterior surface may have deterioration, holes, breaks, gaps, loose or rotting
boards or timbers.
68 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
(2) Every exterior surface that has had a surface finish such as paint applied must be maintained
to avoid noticeable deterioration of the finish. No wall or other exterior surface may have peeling,
cracked, chipped or otherwise deteriorated surface finish on more than 20% of:
(a) Any 1 wall or other flat surface; or
(b) All door and window moldings, eaves, gutters, and similar projections on any 1 side
or surface.
(3) No glass, including windows and exterior light fixtures, may be broken or cracked, and
no screens may be torn or separated from moldings.
(4) Exterior doors and shutters must be hung properly and have an operable mechanism to keep
them securely shut or in place.
(5) Cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, bay or dormer windows and similar projections must be
kept in good repair and free from cracks and defects that make them hazardous or unsightly.
(6) Roof surfaces must be tight and have no defects that admit water. All roof drainable systems
must be secured and hung properly.
(7) Chimneys, antennae, air vents, and other similar projections must be structurally sound and
in good repair. These projections must be secured properly, where applicable, to an exterior wall or
exterior roof.
(8) Foundations must be structurally sound and in good repair.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005) Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.22 DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
The Police Department, Sheriff, Minnesota Highway Patrol, shall enforce the provisions relating
to nuisances. Any peace officer shall have the power to inspect private premises and take all reasonable
precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of public nuisances. Except in emergency
situations of imminent danger to human life and safety, no police officer shall enter private property for
the purpose of inspecting or preventing public nuisances without the permission of the owner, resident
or other person in control of the property, unless the officer has obtained a warrant or order from a court
of competent jurisdiction authorizing the entry.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005)
2010 S-1 Repl.
General Nuisances 69
§ 98.23 ABATEMENT.
(A) Notice. Written notice of violation; notice or the time, date, place and subject of any hearing
before the City Council; notice of City Council order; and notice of motion for summary enforcement
hearing shall be given as set forth in this section.
(1) Notice of violation. Written notice of violation shall be served by a peace officer on the
owner of record or occupant of the premises either in person or by certified or registered mail. If the
premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the owner of record or occupant refuses
to accept notice of violation, notice of violation shall be served by posting it on the premises.
(2) Notice of City Council hearing. Written notice of any City Council hearing to determine
or abate a nuisance shall be served on the owner of record and occupant of the premises either in person
or by certified or registered mail. If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or
the owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of the City Council hearing, notice of City
Council hearing shall be served by positing it on the premises.
(3) Notice of City Council order. Except for those cases determined by the city to require
summary enforcement, written notice of any City Council order shall be made as provided in M.S.
§ 463.17 (Hazardous and Substandard Building Act), as it may be amended from time to time.
(4) Notice of motion for summary enforcement. When notice of any motion for summary
enforcement shall be made as provided for in M.S. § 463.17 (Hazardous and Substandard Building Act),
as it may be amended from timed to time.
(B) Procedure. Whenever a peace officer determines that a public nuisance is being maintained or
exists on the premises in the city, the officer shall notify in writing the owner of record or occupant of
the premises of such fact and order that the nuisance be terminated or abated. The notice of violation
shall specify the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and the time within which the nuisance is to be
abated. If the notice of violation shall specify the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and the time
within which the nuisance is to be abated. If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time
specified, the officer shall report that fact forthwith to the City Council. Thereafter, the City Council
may, after notice to the owner or occupant and an opportunity to be heard, determine that the condition
identified in the notice of violation is a nuisance and further order that if the nuisance is not abated with
the time prescribed by the City Council, the city may seek injunctive relief by serving a copy of the City
Council order and notice for summary enforcement.
(C) Emergency procedure; summary enforcement. In cases of emergency, where delay in abatement
required to complete the notice and procedure requirements set forth in divisions (A) and (B) of this
section will permit a continuing nuisance to unreasonably endanger public health safety or welfare, the
City Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance. To proceed with summary
enforcement, the officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists or is being maintained on premises
in the city and that delay in abatement of the nuisance will unreasonably endanger public health, safety
70 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
or welfare. The officer shall notify in writing the occupant or owner of the premises of the nature of the
nuisance and of the city's intention to seek summary enforcement and the time and place of the City
Council meeting to consider the question of summary enforcement. The City Council shall determine
whether or not the condition identified in the notice to the owner or occupant is a nuisance, whether
public health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by delay in abatement required to
complete the procedure set forth in division (A) of this section, and may order that the nuisance be
immediately terminated or abated. If the nuisance is not immediately terminated or abated, the City
Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.
(D) Immediate abatement. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city, without notice or other
process, from immediately abating any condition which poses an imminent and serious hazard to human
life or safety.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005) Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.24 RECOVERY OF COST.
(A) Personal liability. The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been abated by the city shall
be personally liable for the cost to the city of the abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as
the work has been completed and the cost determined, the Administrator-Clerk-Treasurer or other
official shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon the amount shall be
immediately due and payable at the office of the Administrator-Clerk-Treasurer.
(B) Assessment. After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. § 429.061, as it may be amended
from time to time if the nuisance is a public health or safety hazard on private property, the accumulation
of snow and ice on public sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside the traveled
portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees, the Administrator-Clerk-Treasurer shall, on or
before November 30 next following abatement of the nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with
all other the charges as well as other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S. § 429.101,
as it may be amended from time to time, against each separate lot or parcel to which the charges are
attributable. The City Council may then spread the charges against the property under that statute and
other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection along with current taxes
the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding 10, as the City Council may determine in
each case.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005) Penalty, see § 98.99
2010 S-1 Repl.
General Nuisances 71
WEEDS
§ 98.35 SHORT TITLE.
This subchapter shall be cited as the Weed Ordinance.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005)
§ 98.36 JURISDICTION.
This subchapter shall be in addition to any state statute or county ordinance presently in effect,
subsequently added, amended or repealed.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005)
§ 98.37 DEFINITIONS; EXCLUSIONS.
(A) For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DESTRUCTION ORDER. The notice served by the City Council or designated city official, in
cases of appeal, on the property owner of the ordinance violation.
PROPERTY OWNER. The person occupying the property, the holder of legal title or a person
having control over the property of another, such as a right-of-way, easement, license or lease.
WEEDS, GRASSES and RANK VEGETATION. Includes but is not limited to the following:
(1) Noxious weeds and rank vegetation shall include but not be limited to: alum (allium),
Buckthorn, Bur Cucumber, Canada Thistle, Corncockle, Cressleaf Groundsel, Curly Dock, Dodder,
Field Bindweed, French Weed, Hairy Whitetop, Hedge Bindweed, Hoary Cress, Horsenettle,
Johnsongrass, Leafy Spurge, Mile-A-Minute Weed, Musk Thistle, Oxeye Daisy, Perennial Sowthistle,
Poison Hemlock, Purple Loosestrife, Quackgrass, Russian Knapweed, Russian Thistle, Serrated
Tussock, Shatter Cane, Sorghum, Wild Carrot, Wild Garlic, Wild Mustard, Wild Onion, Wild Parsnip;
(2) Grapevines when growing in groups of 100 or more and not pruned, sprayed, cultivated,
or otherwise maintained for 2 consecutive years;
(3) Bushes of the species of tall, common, or European barberry, further known as berberis
vulgaris or its horticultural varieties;
(4) Any weeds, grass, or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants,
growing to a height exceeding 6 inches.
2010 S-1
72 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
(5) Rank vegetation includes the uncontrolled, uncultivated growth of annuals and perennials
plants.
(6) The term WEEDS does not include shrubs, trees, cultivated plants or crops.
(B) In no event shall cultivated plants or crops include plants which have been defined by state
statute or administrative rule as being noxious or detrimental plants.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005; Am. Ord. 300, 3rd Series, passed 6-6-2007)
§ 98.38 OWNERS RESPONSIBLE FOR TRIMMING, REMOVAL AND THE LIKE.
All property owners shall be responsible for the removal, cutting, or disposal and elimination of
weeds, grasses and rank vegetation or other uncontrolled plant growth on their property, which at the
time of notice, is in excess of 6 inches in height.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005; Am. Ord. 300, 3rd Series, passed 6-6-2007) Penalty, see
§ 98.99
§ 98.39 FILING COMPLAINT.
Any person, including the city, who believes there is property located within the corporate limits
of the city which has growing plant matter in violation of this subchapter shall make a written complaint
signed, dated and filed with the Administrator-Clerk-Treasurer. If the city makes the complaint, an
employee, officer or Council Member of the city shall file the complaint in all respects as set out above.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005)
§ 98.40 NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.
(A) Upon receiving notice of a probable existence of weeds in violation of this subchapter, a person
designated by the City Council shall make an inspection and prepare a written report regarding the
condition. If the grass or weeds in such a place are 6 inches or more in height, it shall be prima-facie
evidence of a violation of this section. Upon conclusion that there is a violation the city shall forward
a written notation in the form of a destruction order that the nuisance shall be terminated and abated. The
destruction order shall be served in person on the owner, occupant, or agent of the owner of such lot or
parcel of land ordering such person to have such weeds or grass cut and removed within 7 days after the
service of such notice. Such notice shall also state that in event of noncompliance, removal will be done
by the City of East Grand Forks at the owner's expense. When no owner, occupant, or agent of the
owner can be found, notice shall be sent by registered mail to the person who is listed on the records of
the County Auditor or County Treasurer as the owner; service will be complete with mailing.
2010 S-1
General Nuisances 73
(B) (1) All notices are to be in writing and all filings are to be with the Administrator-Clerk-
Treasurer.
(2) Certified mailing to the Administrator-Clerk-Treasurer or others is deemed filed on the date
of posting to the United States Postal Service.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005; Am. Ord. 300, 3rd Series, passed 6-6-2007)
§ 98.41 APPEALS.
(A) The property owner may appeal by filing written notice of objections with the City Council
within 48 hours of the notice, excluding weekends and holidays, if the property owner contests the
finding of the City Council. It is the property owner's responsibility to demonstrate that the matter is
question in shrubs, trees, cultivated plants or crops or is not otherwise in violation of this subchapter,
and should not be subject to destruction under the subchapter.
(B) An appeal by the property owner shall be brought before the City Council and shall be decided
by a majority vote of the Council Members in attendance and being at a regularly scheduled or special
meeting of the City Council.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005)
§ 98.42 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
In the event that the property owner shall fail to comply with the Destruction Order within 7 regular
business days and has not filed a notice within 48 hours to the Administrator-Clerk-Treasurer of an intent
to appeal, the City Council may employ the services of city employees or outside contractors and remove
the weeds to conform to this subchapter by all lawful means.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005)
§ 98.43 LIABILITY.
(A) The property owner is liable for all costs of removal, cutting or destruction of weeds as defined
by this subchapter.
(B) The property owner is responsible for all collection costs associated with weed destruction,
including but not limited to court costs, attorney's fees and interest on any unpaid amounts incurred by
the city. If the city uses municipal employees, it shall set and assign and appropriate per hour rate for
employees, equipment, supplies and chemicals which may be used.
(C) All sums payable by the property owner are to be paid to the Administrator-Clerk-Treasurer
and to be deposited in a general fund as compensation for expenses and costs incurred by the city.
2010 S-1
74 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
(D) All sums payable by the property owner may be collected as a special assessment as provided
by M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005)
CLANDESTINE DRUG LABS
§ 98.55 CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITES.
(A) Purpose. The City Council finds that the existence of clandestine drug lab sites and chemical
dump sites in the city pose a serious health and safety threat to members of the public, particularly
minors and person of child bearing age, through the exposure to hazardous chemical residue. The
Council has therefore determined that the regulation and proper removal of those sites is necessary for
the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare.
(B) Definitions. For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CHEMICAL DUMP SITE. Any place or location where chemicals and/or other hazardous waste
material used in a clandestine drug lab have been deposited.
CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL. The chief building official for the city or the official's designee.
CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB. The unlawful manufacture or attempt to manufacture controlled
substances.
CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITE. Any place or location where conditions associated with the
operation of a clandestine drug lab are found to exist and may include dwellings, accessory buildings or
structures, mobile homes, motorized vehicles, or any parcels of land.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES. Any drug, chemical, substance or immediate precursor thereto
ad defined by M.S. §152.02, Schedules I through V, as may be amended from time to time, but does
not include distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages, intoxicating liquors or tobacco.
HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any chemicals or other substances used in the manufacture of controlled
substances in a clandestine drug lab and the resulting by-products therefrom which pose a risk to the
health, safety, and welfare of occupants, visitors, or neighbors of the site.
MANUFACTURE. The production, cultivation, quality control, and standardization, in locations
other than a pharmacy, of controlled substances by mechanical, physical, chemical, or pharmaceutical
means, and the packing, repacking, tablet producing, encapsulating, labeling, refilling or other similar
process relating to such substances.
General Nuisances 75
MDH. The Minnesota Department of Health or any successor thereto.
MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
MPCA. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency or any successor thereto.
OWNER. Any person, firm, partnership, company, corporation, or other entity that owns or has
title to in full or in part, the land, buildings, structures, or other property associated with a clandestine
drug lab site or chemical dump site, a risk to the health, safety, and welfare exists for any persons who
occupy, visit, or neighbor on the location.
SITE. Any defined location including buildings, structures, or other property, where appropriate
tests have determined that, due to the existence of a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site, a
risk to the health, safety, and welfare exists for any persons who occupy, visit, or neighbor on the
location.
(C) Public nuisance. Existence and maintenance of a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site
in the city constitutes a public nuisance subject to the regulations of this chapter in addition to any and
all applicable federal, state or local laws and ordinances.
(D) Notice to other authorities. Law enforcement agencies that identified conditions associated with
a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site which place neighbors, visitors, or present and future
occupants of the site at risk for exposure to harmful chemical or other contaminants must promptly notify
the East Grand Forks Chief or Police, the Chief Building Official, appropriate child protection agencies,
and the appropriate health authorities. The notice must, at a minimum, identify the location of the site,
the site owner, if known, and the conditions found on the site.
(E) Notice to concerned parties.
(1) Upon receipt of the notice provided for in division (D), the Chief Building Official must
promptly notify the following parties by registered or certified mail:
(a) The owner of the property, if known;
(b) Occupants of the property;
(c) Any neighbors determined to be at risk;
(d) Other appropriate state and local authorities including, but not limited to, the MDH
and the MPCA, which are known to have applicable public and environmental protection responsibilities.
(2) The notice must, at a minimum, include the location of the site, the name of the property
owner, if known, the type and nature of the contamination, and the extent of the contamination.
76 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
(3) The Chief Building Official must also cause a copy of the notice to be posted at each
appropriate access point to the site.
(F) Issuance of order.
(1) In addition to the required notices, the Chief Building Official will issue an order to the
property owner to abate the public nuisance. The order must include at a minimum the following:
(a) A description of the site and all portions thereof that are determined to be
contaminated. The description may be in any form that readily identifies the contaminated portion of the
site.
(b) That all portions of the site that are determined to be contaminated and a risk to
occupants or visitors are immediately vacated.
(c) That the owner commence and complete all testing and clean up procedures and other
required remedial actions on the site by date specified in the order or such other dates agreed to by the
city.
(d) That the site may not be re-occupied or used in any manner until it has been completely
cleaned in accordance with the guidelines established by the MDH.
(e) That if the owner does not commence testing and complete the clean up procedures by
the dates established in the order, the city, its officials, employees, or agents will enter the property and
provide for the testing and clean up services at the owner's expense.
(f) That the owner is responsible for all costs associated with the clean up of the site
including all costs incurred by the city and other public agencies, and that if the owner does not promptly
pay those costs, they will be assessed again the property and collected in the manner of a special tax.
(2) The order must be served upon the owner by personal service or by registered mail and
posted at appropriate access points to the site. If, after due diligence, the owner cannot be located, the
order in addition to being posted, must be published once in the official newspaper of the city.
(G) Responsibilities of the owner.
(1) Upon receipt of the notice and order, the owner will be responsible for the following:
(a) Insure that the site and all surrounding areas determined to be at risk are properly
vacated.
General Nuisances 77
(b) Engage an appropriate environmental testing firm to assess the extent of the
contamination, monitor the clean up process, provide the follow up testing after the completion of the
clean up process, and certify that the risks of contamination have been sufficiently reduced to allow safe
occupancy of the site.
(c) Engage an appropriate contractor to properly clean the site in accordance with the
guidelines of the MDH.
(d) Provide the city with copies of all testing results and the clean up plan.
(e) Keep the city regularly advised through the process of the testing and clean up.
(f) Upon completion of the clean up process, provide the city with a copy of the final
certification from the testing firm that the site is fit for human habitation, and a written, signed statement
that the clean up met all MDH guidelines.
(2) If the owner, after due diligence, cannot be located or has not commenced appropriate
action toward the clean up of the site on or before the commencement date established by the order, or
has not completed the process by the completion date established by the order, the city, its officials,
employees and agents, are hereby authorized to enter the property for the purpose of abating the public
nuisance through vacating, testing and cleaning the site, or completing that process, in accordance with
the requirements of this section. When appropriate, the abatement process may include the demolition
and removal of any hazardous building or structure.
(H) Responsibility for costs.
(1) The owner of the site is responsible for any and all costs incurred in the clean up of that
site including, but not limited to, the cost of vacating the site and surrounding areas, testing, clean up
and public expenses.
(2) Public expenses will include all costs that may be incurred by the city and other public
agencies such as:
(a) Laboratory fees;
(b) Preparing and serving notices;
(c) Preparing and serving the order;
(d) Posting the site;
(e) Vacating the site and other necessary properties;
(f) Testing services;
78 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
(g) Clean up services;
(h) Expenses incurred in recovering costs including all special assessment expenses;
(i) Administrative fees; and
(j) All other costs associated with the clean up of the site.
(I) Recovery of city costs.
(1) Within 30 days after receipt of an invoice from the city, the owner will submit payment in
full of all city costs associated with the clean up project.
(2) If the city has been unable to locate the owner, or the owner fails to submit timely payment
to the city, the city is authorized to collect its costs by assessing those costs against the property in the
same manner as a special assessment which will be certified and collected in the manner of a special tax
in accordance with applicable law.
(J) Removal of public nuisance designation. Upon receipt of the appropriate certification that the
site has been clean in accordance with MDH guidelines and is not longer a risk to occupants of the site
or others, the Chief Building Official will remove the public nuisance designation of the site and will so
notify in writing the owner and all parties previously notified. The Chief Building Official will also
promptly cause all postings on the site to be removed.
(K) Violations. Any person who violates the provisions of this subchapter, including, but not
limited to, the unauthorized removal of any official postings at the site, is guilty of a misdemeanor in
an addition to any other sanctions and obligations imposed herein.
(L) Relationship to other laws and regulations. If any regulation, standard, condition, or
requirement imposed by this subchapter is determined to be either more or less restrictive than
comparable provisions of any other law, statute, ordinance, rule or regulations, whether Federal, state
or local, the more restrictive provision, or the 1 providing for the higher standards or requirements will
prevail.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005) Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
Violation of any provision of this chapter, including maintaining a nuisance after being notified in
writing by first class mail of a violation of any provision of this chapter, shall be a misdemeanor and
punished as provided in § 10.99.
(Ord. 288, 3rd Series, passed 11-1-2005)
CHAPTER 99: BACKGROUND CHECK; MUNICIPAL
EMPLOYEES AND APPOINTEES
Section
99.01 Criminal history background
99.02 Application for license or permit; issuance
§ 99.01 CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND.
The East Grand Forks Police Department is authorized to do a criminal history background
investigation on applicants for position with the city. This chapter applies only to applicants who are
finalists for paid positions. Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Police
Department in writing to undertake the investigation and to release the information to the City Council,
City Administrator and other city staff as appropriate. Except in the case of exceptions set forth in M.S.
§ 364.09, should the city reject the applicant's request for employment due partially or solely to the
applicant's prior conviction of a crime, the City Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the
following:
(A) The grounds and reasons for the denial;
(B) The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in M.S. § 364.06;
(C) The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment;
(D) That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication.
(Ord. 293, 3rd Series, passed 8-1-2006)
§ 99.02 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OR PERMIT; ISSUANCE.
Every applicant for a license shall submit an application to the Clerk on a form provided by the city.
It shall be accompanied by payment of the prescribed fee.
(A) Criminal history background. When applicable, the East Grand Forks Police Department is
authorized to do a criminal history background investigation on applicants for city licenses. Before the
79
2010 S-1
80 East Grand Forks - General Regulations
investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Police Department in writing to undertake
the investigation and to release the information to the City Council, City Administrator and other city
staff as appropriate.
(B) Issuance. If, after investigation, the Clerk is satisfied that all requirements of law and this code
have been met, the Clerk shall present the application to the Council for action, or, if the license or
permit does not require Council approval, the Clerk shall issue the license or permit.
(C) Denial for background. Except in the case of exceptions set forth in M.S. § 364.09, should the
city deny the applicant's request for a license, due partially or solely to the applicant's prior conviction
of a crime, the City Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
(1) The grounds and reason for denial;
(2) The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in M.S. § 364.06;
(3) The earliest date the applicant may reapply for a license;
(4) That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication.
(Ord. 293, 3rd Series, passed 8-1-2006)
2010 S-1
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING AND
REGULATIONS
111. AMUSEMENT CENTERS AND MACHINES
112. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
113. TAXICABS
114. MASSAGE PARLORS
115. ALARM SYSTEMS
116. TOBACCO PRODUCTS
117. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
1
2 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING AND REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
110.01 Definitions
110.02 Applications
110.03 Action on application for license
110.04 Carrying or posting
110.05 Penalty for property owners
110.06 Responsibility of licensee
110.07 Fixing license fees
110.08 Conditional licenses
110.09 License denial and fixing rates; hearing
110.10 Insurance requirements
Business Regulations
110.25 Shows
110.26 Tobacco
110.27 Junk dealers
110.28 Second hand dealers
110.29 Second hand auto dealers
110.30 Photographers
110.31 Vending wagons
110.32 Garbage and refuse haulers
110.33 Installation, alterations, servicing and repairing of gas and oil piping, appliances, and
appurtenances
110.34 Plumbers
110.35 Dances
3
4 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
APPLICANT. Any person making an application for a license under this title.
APPLICATION. A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in and completed by the
applicant as his or her request for a license, furnished by the city and uniformly required as a
prerequisite to the consideration of the issuance of a license for a business.
BOND. A corporate surety document in the form and with the provisions acceptable and specifically
approved by the city.
BUSINESS. Any activity, occupation, sale of goods or services, or transaction that is either
licensed or regulated, or both licensed and regulated, by the terms and conditions of this title.
LICENSE. A document issued by the city to an applicant permitting him or her to carry on and
transact a business.
LICENSE FEE. The money paid to the city pursuant to an application and prior to issuance of a
license to transact and carry on a business.
LICENSEE. An applicant who, pursuant to his or her application, holds a valid, current, unexpired
and unrevoked license from the city for carrying on a business.
SALE, SELL and SOLD. All forms of barter and all manner or means of furnishing merchandise
to persons.
(1981 Code, § 5.01)
§ 110.02 APPLICATIONS.
All applications shall be made as follows.
(A) All applications shall be made at the office of the City Administrator upon forms that have been
formulated by the city for such purposes.
General Business Licensing and Regulations 5
(B) All such applications must be subscribed, sworn to, and include, but not be limited to, the
following:
(1) Applicant’s name, age and citizenship;
(2) Applicant’s present address and length of time he or she has lived at that address;
(3) Applicant’s occupation and length of time so engaged;
(4) Applicant’s addresses and occupations for the 3 years next preceding the date of application;
(5) Names and addresses of applicant’s employers, if any, for the 3 years next preceding the
date of application;
(6) Whether or not applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor, or
misdemeanor, including violation of a municipal ordinance but excluding traffic violations, and if so the
date and place of conviction and the nature of the offense;
(7) Type of license and location of premises for which application is made;
(8) Such other information as the Council shall deem necessary considering the nature of the
business for which license application is made.
(C) It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false statement or omission upon any
application form. Any false statement in such application, or any wilful omission to state any
information called for on such application form, shall, upon discovery of the falsehood work an
automatic refusal of license, of if already issued, shall render any license or permit issued pursuant
thereto, void, and of no effect to protect the applicant from prosecution for violation of this title, or any
part hereof.
(D) The City Administrator shall, upon receipt of each application completed in accordance
herewith, forthwith investigate the truth of statements made therein and the moral character and business
reputation of each applicant for license to the extent as he or she deems necessary. For such
investigation the City Administrator may enlist the aid of the Chief of Police. The Council shall not
consider an application before the investigation has been completed.
(E) Applications for renewal licenses may be made in such abbreviated form as the Council may
by resolution adopt.
(1981 Code, § 5.02) Penalty, see § 10.99
2010 S-1 Repl.
6 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
§ 110.03 ACTION ON APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
(A) Granting. The Council may grant any application for the period of the remainder of the then
current calendar year or for the entire ensuing license year. All applications, including proposed license
periods, must be consistent with this title.
(B) Issuing. If an application is granted, the City Administrator shall forthwith issue a license
pursuant thereto in the form prescribed by the Council and upon payment of the appropriate license fee
and approval of the bond or insurance as to form and surety or carrier, if required. All licenses shall
be on a fiscal year basis. Unless otherwise herein specified, license fees shall not be pro rated on the
basis of 1/12 for each calendar month, or part thereof remaining in the then current license year.
Licenses shall be valid only at 1 location and on the premises therein described.
(C) Transfer. No license shall be transferable between persons. No license shall be transferable to
a different location without prior consent of the Council and upon payment of the fee for a duplicate
license. It is unlawful to make any transfer in violation of this division.
(D) Termination. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or revocation.
(E) Refusal and revocation. The Council may, for any reasonable cause, refuse to grant any
application or revoke any license. No license shall be granted to a person of questionable moral character
or business reputation. Before revocation of any license, the Council shall give notice to the licensee
and grant the licensee opportunity to be heard. Notice to be given and the exact time of hearing shall be
stated in the resolution calling for the hearing.
(F) Duplicate license. Duplicates of all original licenses may be issued by the City Administrator,
without action by the Council, upon licensee’s affidavit that the original has been lost and upon payment
of a fee of $2 for issuance of the duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked DUPLICATE.
(1981 Code, § 5.03) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.04 CARRYING OR POSTING.
All transient merchants, peddlers and solicitors shall at all times when so engaged carry their license
on their person. All other licensees shall post their licenses in their places of business near the licensed
activity. All licensees shall display their licenses upon demand by any officer or citizen.
(1981 Code, § 5.04)
§ 110.05 PENALTY FOR PROPERTY OWNERS.
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any real property owned or controlled by him or
her to be used, without a license, for any business for which a license is required by this title.
(1981 Code, § 5.05) Penalty, see § 10.99
General Business Licensing and Regulations 7
§ 110.06 RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE.
The conduct of agents and employees of a person to whom a license or permit is issued shall be
deemed the conduct of the licensee himself or herself.
(1981 Code, § 5.06)
§ 110.07 FIXING LICENSE FEES.
Except as otherwise herein provided, all fees for licenses under this title shall be fixed and
determined by the Council, adopted by resolution, and uniformly enforced. The license fees may, from
time to time, be amended by the Council by resolution. A copy of the resolution setting forth currently
effective license fees shall be kept on file in the office of the City Administrator and open to inspection
during regular business hours. For the purpose of fixing the fees, the Council may subdivide and
categorize licenses under a specific license requirement, provided, that any such subdivision or
categorization shall be included in the resolution authorized by this section.
(1981 Code, § 5.08)
§ 110.08 CONDITIONAL LICENSES.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Council may, upon a finding of the
necessity therefor, place conditions and restrictions upon a license as it, in its discretion, may deem
reasonable and justified.
(1981 Code, § 5.09)
§ 110.09 LICENSE DENIAL AND FIXING RATES; HEARING.
(A) Right to deny. The Council reserves to itself the right to deny any application for a license to
operate any business licensed or regulated under this title where the business involves service to the
public, rates charged for service, use of public streets or other public property by the applicant or the
public or the public health, safety and convenience. The Council may also consider the location of the
business in making the determination; provided, however, that before making the determination on
location, the Council shall hold a public hearing thereon pursuant to the notice to interested parties and
the public as it may deem necessary or proper in action calling for the hearing.
(B) Rates. Where, under specific provision of this title, the Council has reserved to itself the right
to fix or approve fees, rates or charges of a licensed or regulated business, the rates shall be uniform for
each category or class of service, and no licensee or proprietor of a regulated business shall claim or
demand payment in excess thereof.
8 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
(C) Hearing. Any applicant or licensee under this title who challenges denial of a license or rates
fixed or approved by the Council shall have a right to a hearing before the Council upon written request
therefor. Notice of time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be given to such persons and by such
means as the Council may determine in calling the hearing.
(1981 Code, § 5.10)
§ 110.10 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
Whenever insurance is required by a section of this title, after approval by the Council, but before
the license shall issue, the applicant shall file with the City Administrator a policy or certificate of public
liability insurance showing:
(A) That the limits are at least as high as required;
(B) That coverage is effective for at least the license term approved; and
(C) That the insurance will not be cancelled or terminated without 30-days’ written notice served
upon the City Administrator. Cancellation or termination of the coverage shall be grounds for license
revocation.
(1981 Code, § 5.11) (Ord. 5, 3rd Series, eff. 6-6-1981)
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
§ 110.25 SHOWS.
(A) License required. It is unlawful for any person to present any public show, caravan, circus,
carnival, theatrical or other performance or exhibition without first having obtained a license therefor
from the city.
(B) Exceptions.
(1) Performances presented in the local schools and colleges, under the sponsorship of schools
and colleges, and for the students thereof only, not open to the general public.
(2) Performances of athletic, musical or theatrical events sponsored by local schools or colleges
using student talent only.
(3) Any performance or event in, or sponsored by, bona fide local church and non profit
organizations, provided that the organization shall be incorporated.
(1981 Code, § 5.31) (Am. Ord. 5, 3rd Series, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see § 10.99
General Business Licensing and Regulations 9
§ 110.26 TOBACCO.
(A) Definition. As used in this section, the term TOBACCO means and includes tobacco in any
form, including but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, bagged, canned or packaged product.
(B) License required. It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, to keep for retail sale,
sell at retail, or otherwise dispose of any tobacco in any form unless a license therefor shall first be
obtained from the city.
(C) Restrictions.
(1) Separate licenses shall be issued for the sale of tobacco at each fixed place of business, and
no license shall be issued for a movable place of business.
(2) It is unlawful for any person to keep for sale, sell or dispose of any tobacco in any form
containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or any other
deleterious or poisonous drug except nicotine.
(1981 Code, § 5.32) (Am. Ord. 5, 3rd Series, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
Selling tobacco to minors, see § 131.02
§ 110.27 JUNK DEALERS.
(A) Definition. The term JUNK as used in this section means and includes, but is not limited to,
scrap of all kinds such as metal, paper, rags and wood.
(B) License required. It is unlawful for any person to deal in junk without having a license therefor
from the city.
(C) License restriction. The licensee shall keep the premises upon which the business of junk
dealing is to be conducted and where junk as herein defined is to be stored and handled entirely
surrounded by a substantial tight fence or wall of not less than 8 feet nor more than 10 feet in height.
The enclosure shall be maintained in good condition at all times and constructed so that no dust or other
material may pass through. Any such fence shall not have more than 1 opening upon any public street,
and the opening shall not be more than 10 feet wide and shall be equipped with a substantial, solid light
gate or door of the same height as the fence or wall, and the same shall be kept securely closed at all
times when the establishment is not open for business. No junk, motor vehicle or accessory of any
description shall be kept, displayed or exhibited on the outside or protrude above the fence. Not more
than 2 signs of any kind, whatsoever, shall be painted, posted or erected on the fence or walls, nor shall
both signs be painted or erected on any 1 side but shall, if 2 signs are used, be on separate faces or sides
of the fence or walls. Neither sign shall exceed in size 50 square feet. The wording of the sign shall
pertain only to the owner, firm name and the business conducted on such premises.
10 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
(D) Bond requirement. Before issuing a junk dealer’s license as provided for herein, the applicant
shall execute and deliver to the City Administrator a bond in the penal sum of $500 with sufficient
sureties approved by the Council and conditioned that the applicant will in every particular conform with
the requirements of any law relating to junk dealers.
(1981 Code, § 5.50) (Ord. 196, eff. 5-22-1969; Am. Ord. 5, 3rd Series, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty,
see § 10.99
§ 110.28 SECOND HAND DEALERS.
(A) Definition. The term SECOND HAND MERCHANDISE as used in this title means and
includes, but is not limited to, all used furniture, used clothing, used housewares, used appliances, used
plumbing and electrical fixtures and appurtenances, used building materials and bric-a-brac, excluding
motor vehicles, and also excluding such items as may have been taken in trade by a dealer in new
merchandise of the same or similar nature and also excluding items as may be occasionally sold by a
householder or an organization.
(B) License required. It is unlawful for any person to deal in second hand merchandise without
having a license therefor from the city.
(C) Bond required. Before issuing any license as provided for herein, the applicant shall execute
and deliver to the City Administrator a bond in the penal sum of $500 with sufficient sureties, approved
by the Council and conditioned that the applicant will in every particular conform with the requirements
of any law concerning second hand dealers.
(D) Unlawful acts.
(1) It is unlawful for a licensee to purchase second hand merchandise knowing or having reason
to believe that the same was stolen.
(2) It is unlawful for a licensee to purchase property from a person under lawful age without
the written consent of his or her parent or guardian.
(3) Every licensee shall prepare and deliver to the Chief of Police, before 12:00 noon on each
Monday, a legible and accurate list of all merchandise purchased during the preceding week, together
with the name and residence address of the seller.
(1981 Code, § 5.52) (Am. Ord. 5, 3rd Series, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see § 10.99
General Business Licensing and Regulations 11
§ 110.29 SECOND HAND AUTO DEALERS.
(A) License required. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of buying, selling or
trading in second hand automobiles without first having obtained a license therefor from the city.
(B) Restrictions.
(1) No license shall be issued to an applicant who shall have been convicted within 1 year of
the date of application of a violation of this section, nor to any person who has within the 5 preceding
years been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving stolen property.
(2) No licensee shall keep his or her place of business open between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
(3) No licensee shall sell, purchase, trade, or enter into any agreement therefor with a minor.
(4) Every licensee shall maintain a record of the name, residence address and personal
description of every person with whom a transaction is consummated, the date and hour thereof, a
description of the vehicle, including manufacturer’s numbers, serial numbers, body style, seating or
other capacity, color and license number of the automobile. The record shall be open for inspection by
the Police Department at all reasonable times.
(1981 Code, § 5.53) (Am. Ord. 5, 3rd Series, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.30 PHOTOGRAPHERS.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
STUDIO PHOTOGRAPHER. A person maintaining a studio within the city for the purpose
of taking photographs and making portraits, the studio being equipped for the finishing process or
processes.
TRANSIENT PHOTOGRAPHER. A person who does not maintain a studio within the city
equipped for finishing processes except an isolated case of making a portrait or taking a photograph, and
the isolated case shall involve no more than 1 order per calendar month.
(B) License required. It is unlawful for any person to engage in business as a studio photographer
or transient photographer without first having obtained a license therefor from the city.
(1981 Code, § 5.54) (Am. Ord. 41, 3rd Series, passed 5-17-1984) Penalty, see § 10.99
12 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
§ 110.31 VENDING WAGONS.
(A) Definition. The term VENDING WAGON means any vehicle or structure temporarily or
permanently placed upon any street for the purpose of selling or vending peanuts, popcorn, or other
confectionery.
(B) License required. It is unlawful for any person to operate a vending wagon without first having
obtained a license therefor from the city.
(C) Consideration of application. In addition to all other considerations the Council shall consider
traffic location and public convenience in determining whether or not to issue the license.
(1981 Code, § 5.56) (Am. Ord. 5, 3rd Series, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.32 GARBAGE AND REFUSE HAULERS.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
GARBAGE. All putrescible wastes, including animal offal and carcasses of dead animals but
excluding human excreta, sewage and other water carried wastes.
OTHER REFUSE. Ashes, glass, crockery, cans, paper, boxes, rags and similar
non-putrescible wastes.
(B) License required. It is unlawful for any person not acting within the course of a contract with
the city to haul garbage or other refuse without a license therefor from the city.
(C) Exception. Nothing in this section shall prevent persons from hauling garbage or other refuse
from their own residences or business properties, provided the following rules are observed:
(1) That all garbage is hauled in containers that are water tight on all sides and the bottom and
with tight fitting covers on top;
(2) That all other refuse is hauled in vehicles with leak proof bodies and completely covered
or enclosed by canvas or other means or material so as to completely eliminate the possibility of loss of
cargo; and
(3) That all garbage and other refuse shall be dumped or unloaded only at a sanitary landfill.
General Business Licensing and Regulations 13
(D) Hauler licensee requirements. Hauler licenses shall be granted only upon the condition that the
licensee have tight packer type vehicles in good condition to prevent loss in transit of liquid or solid
cargo and that the same be dumped or unloaded only at the designated city dump or sanitary landfill and
strictly in accordance with regulations relating thereto.
(1981 Code, § 5.57) (Am. Ord. 5, 3rd Series, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.33 INSTALLATION, ALTERATIONS, SERVICING AND REPAIRING OF GAS AND
OIL PIPING, APPLIANCES, AND APPURTENANCES.
(A) License required. It is unlawful for any person to install, alter, service or repair gas or oil
piping, appliances and appurtenances without having a license therefor from the city.
(B) Bond requirement. Before issuing a gas and oil installer’s license as provided for herein, the
applicant shall execute and deliver to the City Administrator a bond in the penal sum of $2,000,
conditioned to indemnify and save harmless the city from all liability and damages caused by the
negligence, of any nature, covering the work done under the license, and conditioned further that all
work shall be performed in accordance with regulations prescribed by law. The bond shall be approved
as to form by the City Attorney.
(1981 Code, § 5.58) (Am. Ord. 5, 3rd Series, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.34 PLUMBERS.
(A) License required. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the work or business of plumbing
or the installation of water or sewer pipes without a license therefor from the city, provided, however,
that no person shall be so licensed unless he or she shall have a master plumber’s license from the
Minnesota State Board of Health and any revocation or suspension by the State Board of Health shall
immediately revoke or suspend the license issued by the city.
(B) Bond required. Before a license shall be granted to any person as a plumber, the applicant shall
execute and deposit with the City Administrator a code compliance bond in the sum of $25,000,
conditioned to indemnify and save harmless the city from all liability and damage caused by the
negligence of any nature covering the work done under the license and conditioned further that all work
shall be performed in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Minnesota Department of Health.
The bond shall be approved as to the form by the City Attorney.
(1981 Code, § 5.59) (Ord. 68, eff. 4-29-1909; Ord. 74, eff. 5-6-1910; Ord. 148, eff. 11-11-1954; Ord.
200, eff. 7-8-1965; Am. Ord. 5, 3rd Series, passed 5-21-1981) Penalty, see § 10.99
14 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
§ 110.35 DANCES.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PUBLIC DANCE. Any dance wherein the public may participate by payment, directly or
indirectly, of an admission fee or price for dancing, which fee may be in the form of a club membership
or payment of money, directly or indirectly.
PUBLIC DANCING PLACE. Any room, place, or space open to public patronage in which
dancing, wherein the public may participate, is carried on and to which admission may be had by the
public by payment, directly or indirectly, of an admission fee or price for dancing.
(B) License required. It is unlawful for any person to operate a public dancing place, or hold a
public dance, without a license therefor from the city.
(C) License fee. The fee for the issuance of a license under this section shall be set by the Council
from time to time by resolution. The license fee may include the costs of investigating the applicant’s
character, reputation, past experience, and history.
(D) Application and license.
(1) A verified application for a dance license shall be filed with the city and shall specify the
names and addresses of the person, persons, committee or organization that is to hold the dance, time
and place thereof, and the area of the dance floor.
(2) All applications shall be accompanied by affidavits of 2 residents showing that the applicant
has not been convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor, or violation of any public dance laws within the
past 5 years. No license shall be issued to any person who has been so convicted.
(3) No license shall be granted by the Council for any place having so called private apartments
or private rooms furnished or used for any purpose other than a legitimate business purpose which
adjoins the dancing place or which may be reached by stairs, elevators, or passageway leading from the
dancing place. Nor shall a license be granted for any place which is not property ventilated and equipped
with necessary toilets, washrooms or lighting facilities.
(4) Applications may be referred by the Council to the Chief of Police for investigation and
report prior to being acted upon by the Council.
(5) The Council shall act upon all dance license applications at a regular meeting thereof,
whether or not it is included in the call or agenda of the meeting.
2010 S-1 Repl.
General Business Licensing and Regulations 15
(6) At least 1 security person shall be designated by the licensee, and the security person shall
be present at the dance site during the entire time that the dance is in progress. The licensee shall be
responsible for the security person’s acts and conduct.
(7) The dance license shall be posted in the public dancing place and shall state the name of
the licensee, the amount paid therefor, and the time and place licensed. The license shall also state that
the licensee is responsible for the manner of conducting the dance.
(8) No license shall be issued to any applicant under the age of 18 years.
(E) Dance regulations.
(1) Certain persons prohibited. No licensee shall permit any unmarried person under the age
of 16 years, unless the unmarried person is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, to remain in
a public dancing place. Nor shall any licensee permit any intoxicated person, or other person who
persists in violating the law, to be or remain in a public dancing place.
(2) Hours of dancing. No public dance shall be held on Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 12:00 noon. No public dance shall be held on any day between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
(1981 Code, § 5.62) (Am. Ord. 5, 3rd Series, passed 6-6-1981; Am. Ord. 104, 3rd Series, eff.
11-17-1989) Penalty, see § 10.99
16 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 111: AMUSEMENT CENTERS AND MACHINES
Section
111.01 Definitions
111.02 License required
111.03 Applications
111.04 Licenses
111.05 Inspection
111.06 Display of license
111.07 Location of machines
111.08 Use for gambling or payoffs
111.09 Restrictions
111.10 Certain machines not regulated
111.11 Locations where amusement centers permitted
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
AMUSEMENT CENTERS. The operation by any person of a business in which 1 of the sources
of income is derived from the operation of mechanical or electronic devices and consists of the operation
of 3 or more machines in 1 location and is open for public use and participation.
MACHINE. A table or a mechanical or electronic device of any of the following types: a pool,
billiard or snooker table or a machine or contrivance, including pinball machines, mechanical miniature
pool tables, bowling machines, shuffle boards, electric rifle or gun ranges, miniature mechanical devices,
electronic games and devices, and games or amusements patterned after baseball, basketball, hockey and
similar games and like devices, machines, or games which may be played solely for amusement and not
as a gambling device and which devices or games are played by the insertion of a coin or coins or at a
fee fixed and charged by the establishment in which the devices or machines are located, and which
contain no automatic payoff devices for the return of money, coins, merchandise, checks, tokens or any
other thing or item of value; provided, however, that the machine may be equipped to permit a free play
or game.
(1981 Code, § 5.33, Subd. 1)
17
18 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
§ 111.02 LICENSES REQUIRED.
(A) No person shall keep, operate, maintain or permit to be operated or maintained upon premises
within his or her direct or indirect control within the city any machine, unless the person shall have first
procured a license as hereinafter provided for each machine.
(B) No person shall own, operate or permit operation of an amusement center on premises owned,
leased, or operated by him or her or engage in the business of operating an amusement center in the city
unless an annual amusement center license has been obtained. The amusement center license shall be in
addition to any other license required by this chapter.
(C) It is further provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to require licensing of
coin-operated music boxes, more commonly known as jukeboxes.
(1981 Code, § 5.33, Subd. 2)
§ 111.03 APPLICATIONS.
All applications shall conform to the provisions of § 110.02, but shall also include a statement that
the applicant, if requested by the City Administrator, will permit a record of his or her fingerprints to
be made by the Police Department for the purpose of additional investigation to determine whether or
not the application should be granted.
(1981 Code, § 5.33, Subd. 3)
§ 111.04 LICENSES.
(A) Each applicant for a license to operate or maintain a machine or an amusement center, as said
terms are hereinbefore described, shall pay an annual license fee as established by the Council, pursuant
to § 110.07. A separate fee shall be established for each machine and for each amusement center
licensed. Licenses shall cover an annual period as established by the Council.
(B) The application for license shall be presented to the Council for consideration, and, if approved,
the City Administrator shall issue the license to the applicant.
(1981 Code, § 5.33, Subd. 4) (Ord. 16, 3rd Series, eff. 2-19-1982)
§ 111.05 INSPECTION.
(A) Applications for license for machines or amusement centers may be referred to the Chief of
Police, or his or her designated inspector, who shall then investigate the location wherein it is proposed
to operate the machine or machines, ascertain if the applicant is a person of good moral character, and
he or she shall either recommend approval or disapproval of the application. The location may also be
investigated
Amusement Centers and Machines 19
by the Fire Inspector and Building Official to ascertain whether the location is in compliance with all
codes and City Code provisions, determine the maximum capacity of the proposed location, and require
such improvements or changes as will bring the proposed location and structure in compliance with all
code requirements and City Code provisions.
(B) Each machine licensed under this section shall be inspected by the Police Department.
(1981 Code, § 5.33, Subd. 5) (Ord. 115, 3rd Series, eff. 5-4-1990)
§ 111.06 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
The license or licenses herein provided for shall be posted permanently and conspicuously at the
location and on each machine in the premises wherein the device is to be operated or maintained to be
operated.
(1981 Code, § 5.33, Subd. 6)
§ 111.07 LOCATION OF MACHINES.
(A) No machine shall be located, placed, maintained or operated on any public street, avenue,
boulevard, lane, alley, or other public ground within the city. No machine shall be so located that its
operation will create a nuisance.
(B) The maximum number of machines as defined in § 111.01 shall be limited to 2 in number at
any location of any 1 business establishment, unless the establishment is licensed as an amusement
center.
(1981 Code, § 5.33, Subd. 7)
§ 111.08 USE FOR GAMBLING OR PAYOFFS.
(A) It is unlawful for the owner of any such machine, or for the owner or operator of any
establishment where it is located, to permit the same to be used for gambling or for the making of bets
or wagers.
(B) It is unlawful for the licensee or for the owner or operator of the establishment where the
machine is located to give any money, token, merchandise or any other thing of value or any reward or
prize in lieu of free games registered on the machine, and all free games so registered shall be played
on the machine registering the free game or games.
20 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
(C) It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, sell, or permit to be operated in his or her place
of business any machine which has been converted into an automatic payoff device which shall
automatically award money, prizes, tokens, merchandise, gifts, or anything of value other than free
games to the operator or player of the machine. It is also unlawful for any person to convert any
machine into an automatic payoff device.
(1981 Code, § 5.33, Subd. 8) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.09 RESTRICTIONS.
(A) The licensee shall provide a responsible full time attendant upon the licensed premises during
business hours.
(B) No amusement center or establishment licensed for amusement devices or machines shall permit
any coin-operated musical device to be played or live entertainment or band or other type of live
entertainment to play at such a level of sound as to constitute a public nuisance.
(C) It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to see that the licensed premises do not become
overcrowded so as to constitute a hazard to the health or safety of persons therein. The Fire Chief, or
his or her designee, may designate the maximum number of persons to be permitted on the licensed
premises.
(D) Every licensee is made responsible for the conduct of his or her place of business and on the
premises thereof permitting no disorderly conduct on the premises. It is unlawful for any licensee to
permit any of the following in his or her place of business or on the premises thereof, to wit:
(1) Possession, use or sale of a controlled substance, as defined in M.S. § 152.02, as it may
be amended from time to time;
(2) Sale to, possession of, or use of tobacco-related devices (including cigarette papers or pipes
for smoking) for any person under 18 years of age;
(3) Liquor or beer:
(a) Minor to play any machine as herein defined, where liquor or beer, as those terms are
defined in Chapter 117, is sold or consumed, unless accompanied by his or her parent or guardian;
(b) Possession, consumption or sale of beer or liquor in any establishment licensed as an
amusement center or possessing machine licenses, which is not also licensed to sell beer or liquor;
(4) Fighting;
(5) Nudity or indecent or lewd behavior;
(6) Scattering or casting litter of any nature upon public or private property;
Amusement Centers and Machines 21
(7) Knowingly allow any other illegal activity not set forth above upon the licensed premises.
(E) The following hours of operation shall be complied with by amusement centers, except as
otherwise provided herein:
(1) Monday through Thursday, except when the public and private schools are not in session,
shall be from 3:00 p.m. until 10:00 p.m.;
(2) Friday, from 3:00 p.m. until 12:00 midnight;
(3) Saturdays, and during vacation periods of the public and private schools, from 9:00 a.m.
until 12:00 midnight, except on Sundays, as hereinafter provided;
(4) Sunday, from 12:00 noon until 10:00 p.m.;
(5) Storm days, holidays, or non-school days, in the public and private schools, from 9:00 a.m.
to 10:00 p.m.;
(6) Where any hours of operation set forth herein are in conflict with curfew hours as set forth
in the City Code, the curfew hours shall control;
(7) The above opening and closing hours shall not apply to amusement centers and
establishments possessing machine licenses that also possess on sale or off sale liquor licenses or beer
licenses.
(F) To facilitate the enforcement of the rules, regulations and restrictions contained herein, and to
further the intent of this chapter, attendance and use of the machines in amusement centers, other than
those amusement centers located in establishments possessing on sale liquor licenses, or on sale beer
licenses, shall be restricted to persons 18 years of age or younger. The above age restrictions shall not
apply to persons over 18 years of age who are present as employees of the establishment, law
enforcement personnel, persons present in an official capacity inspecting the premises, or parents or
guardians of persons 18 years of age or younger who are lawfully upon the premises.
(G) The rules and regulations or restrictions set forth in this chapter shall be conspicuously posted
in at least 1 prominent place in every amusement center and establishment possessing machine licenses.
(1981 Code, § 5.33, Subd. 9)
§ 111.10 CERTAIN MACHINES NOT REGULATED.
Nothing in this chapter shall be held to apply to any machine held or kept for storage for later sale
or distribution.
(1981 Code, § 5.33, Subd. 10)
22 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
§ 111.11 LOCATIONS WHERE AMUSEMENT CENTERS PERMITTED.
Amusement center licenses shall be permitted only in C-1 and C-2 zoning use districts.
(1981 Code, § 5.33, Subd. 11) (Ord. 16, 3rd Series, eff. 2-19-1982)
CHAPTER 112: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
112.01 Definitions
112.02 Exceptions to definitions
112.03 Licensing; exemptions
112.04 License ineligibility
112.05 License suspension and revocation
112.06 License transferability
112.07 Registration
112.08 Prohibited activities
112.09 Exclusion by placard
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their
commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business,
street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or
exposing for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares,
products, merchandise or other personnel property that the person is carrying or otherwise transporting.
The term peddler shall mean the same as the term hawker.
PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation, partnership or association.
As applied to groups, organizations, corporations, partnerships and associations, the term shall include
each member, officer, partner, associate, agent or employee.
REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the city hall is normally open for the purpose
of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law shall not be counted as regular business
days.
SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business,
street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain
orders for goods, wares, products, merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she
23
24 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by other means, and
for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall
not remove a person from the scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person's activity is to
obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above. The term shall mean the same as the term
CANVASSER.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a vehicle, trailer,
boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store front for the purpose of exposing or displaying for
sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal
property and who does not remain or intend to remain in any 1 location for more than 14 consecutive
days.
§ 112.02 EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.
(A) For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, and
TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to any person selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any
goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold by
the wholesaler. The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes initial contacts with other
people for the purpose of establishing or trying to establish a regular customer delivery route for the
delivery of perishable food and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any
person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the customers on his or her established
regular delivery route.
(B) In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as garage sales, rummage
sales, or estate sales, as well as those persons participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea
market, shall be exempt from the definitions of PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, and TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS, as shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer, or any
officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. Exemption from the definitions for the scope of this
chapter shall not excuse any person from complying with any other applicable statutory provision or
local ordinance.
§ 112.03 LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.
(A) County license required. No person shall conduct business as a peddler, solicitor or transient
merchant within the city limits without first having obtained the appropriate license from the county as
required by M.S. Ch. 329 as it may be amended from time to time.
(B) City license required. Except as otherwise provided for by this chapter, no person shall conduct
business as either a peddler or a transient merchant without first having obtained a license from the city.
Solicitors need not be licensed, but are still required to register pursuant to § 112.07.
Peddlers and Solicitors 25
(C) Application. Application for a city license to conduct business as a peddler or transient
merchant shall be made at least 14 regular business days before the applicant desires to begin conducting
business. Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the City Council and available
from the office of the City Clerk. All applications shall be signed by the applicant. All applications
shall include the following information:
(1) Applicant's full legal name.
(2) All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to which applicant officially
answers.
(3) A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color, height, weight, distinguishing
marks and features, and the like).
(4) Full address of applicant's permanent residence.
(5) Telephone number of applicant's permanent residence.
(6) Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed or operated by
applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or agent.
(7) Full address of applicant's regular place of business (if any).
(8) Any and all business related telephone numbers of the applicant.
(9) The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a license.
(10) Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license.
(11) The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business, and if the applicant is
applying for a daily license, the number of days he or she will be conducting business in the city
(maximum 14 consecutive days).
(12) Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant can be reached while
conducting business within the city, including the location where a transient merchant intends to set up
business.
(13) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted within the last 5 years
of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor for violation of any state or federal statute or any
local ordinance, other than traffic offenses.
(14) A list of the 3 most recent locations where the applicant has conducted business as a peddler
or transient merchant.
26 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
(15) Proof of any requested county license.
(16) Written permission of the property owner or the property owner's agent for any property
to be used by a transient merchant.
(17) A general description of the items to be sold or services to be provided.
(18) All additional information deemed necessary by the City Council.
(19) The applicant's driver's license number or other acceptable form of identification.
(20) The license plate number, registration information and vehicle identification number for
any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the licensed business and a description of the vehicle.
(D) Fee. All applications for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by the fee
established by the City Council.
(E) Procedure. Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of the license fee, the City
Administrator, within 2 regular business days, must determine if the application is complete. An
application is determined to be complete only if all required information is provided. If the City
Administrator determines that the application is incomplete, the City Administrator must inform the
applicant of the required necessary information that is missing. If the application is complete, the City
Administrator must order any investigation, including background checks, necessary to verify the
information provided with the application. Within 10 regular business days of receiving a complete
application the City Administrator must issue the license unless there exist grounds for denying the
license under § 112.04, in which case the Clerk must deny the license. If the City Administrator denies
the license, the applicant must be notified in writing of the decision, the reason for denial, and of the
applicant's right to appeal the denial by requesting, within 20 days of receiving notice of rejection, a
public hearing before the City Council. The City Council shall hear the appeal within 20 days of the date
of the request. The decision of the City Council following the public hearing can be appealed by
petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a Writ of Certiorari.
(F) Duration. An annual license granted under this chapter shall be valid for 1 calendar year from
the date of issue. All other licenses granted under this chapter shall be valid only during the time period
indicated on the license.
(G) License exemptions.
(1) No license shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to sell, or to take or attempt
to take orders for, any product grown, produced, cultivated, or raised on any farm.
2010 S-1 Repl.
Peddlers and Solicitors 27
(2) No license shall be required of any person going from house-to-house, door-to-door,
business-to-business, street-to-street, or other type of place-to-place when the activity is for the purpose
of exercising that person's State or Federal Constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech, press,
religion and the like, except that this exemption may be lost if the person's exercise of Constitutional
rights is merely incidental to a commercial activity.
(3) Professional fundraisers working on behalf of an otherwise exempt person or group shall
not be exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.04 LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.
The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:
(A) The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having obtained any required county
license.
(B) The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the information requested by the city
as a part of the application, or the failure to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee
at the time of application.
(C) The conviction of the applicant within the past 5 years from the date of application for any
violation of any federal or state statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects
on the person's ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an honest and
legal manner. Those violations shall include but not be limited to burglary, theft, larceny, swindling,
fraud, unlawful business practices, and any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another
person.
(D) The revocation within the past 5 years of any license issued to the applicant for the purpose of
conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant.
(E) The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of a bad business reputation
shall include, but not be limited to, the existence of more than 3 complaints against the applicant with
the Better Business Bureau, the Attorney General's Office, or other similar business or consumer rights
office or agency, within the preceding 12 months, or 3 complaints filed against the applicant within the
preceding 5 years.
28 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
§ 112.05 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
(A) Generally. Any license issued under this section may be suspended or revoked at the discretion
of the City Council for violation of any of the following:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements on the application form.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course of the licensed activity.
(3) Conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could have been denied under
§ 112.04.
(4) Violation of any provision of this chapter.
(B) Multiple persons under 1 license. The suspension or revocation of any license issued for the
purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf
of the licensee shall serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person's authority to conduct
business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee whose license is suspended or
revoked.
(C) Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this chapter, the city shall
provide the license holder with written notice of the alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or
her right to a hearing on the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the
permanent residential address listed on the license application, or if no residential address is listed, to
the business address provided on the license application.
(D) Public hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in division (C) of this section, the licensee
shall have the right to request a public hearing. If no request for a hearing is received by the City Clerk
within 10 regular business days following the service of the notice, the city may proceed with the
suspension or revocation. For the purpose of mailed notices, service shall be considered complete as
of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a public hearing is requested within the stated timeframe,
a hearing shall be scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request. Within 3 regular business days
of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee of its decision.
(E) Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to the health or safety of
the public may occur because of the actions of a peddler or transient merchant licensed under this
chapter, the City Council may immediately suspend the person's license and provide notice of the right
to hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in division (C) of this section.
(F) Appeals. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this section shall have the
right to appeal that decision in court.
Penalty, see § 10.99
Peddlers and Solicitors 29
§ 112.06 LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person other than the person to
whom the license was issued.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.07 REGISTRATION.
All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter under
§ 112.03, shall be required to register with the city. Registration shall be made on the same form
required for a license application, but no fee shall be required. Immediately upon completion of the
registration form, the City Clerk shall issue to the registrant a Certificate of Registration as proof of the
registration. Certificates of Registration shall be non-transferable.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.08 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall conduct business in any of the following manners:
(A) Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means of blowing any horn or
whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an
enclosed structure.
(B) Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk
or other public right-of-way.
(C) Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health, safety and welfare of any
individual or the general public.
(D) Conducting business before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
(E) Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and identification, when requested; or using
the license or registration of another person.
(F) Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service being sold, including
untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall claim to have the
endorsement of the city solely based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to
that person.
(G) Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to otherwise conduct business
in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive.
Penalty, see § 10.99
30 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
§ 112.09 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the property owner or tenant,
shall enter the property of another for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or
transient merchant when the property is marked with a sign or placard at least inches long and 4 inches
wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating No Peddlers, Solicitors or Transient Merchants, or
Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants Prohibited, or other comparable statement. No person
other than the property owner or tenant shall remove, deface or otherwise tamper with any sign or
placard under this section.
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 113: TAXICABS
Section
113.01 Definitions
113.02 License required
113.03 License issuance and display and vehicle marking
113.04 Insurance required
113.05 Rates and hours of operation
113.06 Mechanical condition
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
DRIVER. The person driving and having physical control over a taxicab whether he or she be the
licensee or in the employ of the licensed operator.
OPERATOR. A licensee owning or otherwise having control of 1 or more taxicabs.
TAXICAB. Any passenger conveyance being driven, on call or traversing a scheduled route for
public use or hire upon payment of a fare or at regular fare rates, but not including such as are designed
for mass transportation as buses, trains or streetcars.
(1981 Code, § 5.55, Subd. 1)
§ 113.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
It is unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab business with its principal offices and
headquartered in the city without a license therefor from the city.
(1981 Code, § 5.55, Subd. 2) Penalty, see § 10.99
31
32 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
§ 113.03 LICENSE ISSUANCE AND DISPLAY AND VEHICLE MARKING.
All licenses shall be issued for specific conveyances, except as otherwise herein provided. License
tags, including number and year for which issued, shall be plainly visible from the front of the
conveyance. Both sides of every licensed taxicab, when in use, shall be plainly and permanently marked
as such with a painted sign or appurtenance showing the full or abbreviated name of the licensed
operator.
(1981 Code, § 5.55, Subd. 4)
§ 113.04 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
Before a taxicab license is issued by the Council, and at all times effective during the licensed
period, the licensee shall have and maintain public liability and bodily injury insurance in the amount
of $50,000 for any 1 person and $100,000 for 2 or more persons injured in any 1 accident, as well as
$25,000 property damage insurance. The insurance shall cover all passengers carried by the insured
licensee and shall be for public taxicab purposes.
(1981 Code, § 5.55, Subd. 6) (Ord. 41, 3rd Series, eff. 6-1-1984)
§ 113.05 RATES AND HOURS OF OPERATION.
Each applicant shall file with the City Administrator, before a taxicab license is issued or renewed,
a schedule of proposed maximum rates to be charged by him or her during the license period for which
the application is made. The schedule of proposed maximum rates, hours of operation, or a compromise
schedule of rates and hours shall be approved by the Council before granting the license. The schedule,
at least 4 inches by 6 inches in size, shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the taxicab in full view of
passengers riding therein. Nothing herein shall prevent a taxicab licensee from petitioning the Council
for review of the rates during the license period, and the Council may likewise consider the petition and
make new rates effective at any time. No taxicab licensee shall charge rates in excess of maximum rates
approved by the Council.
(1981 Code, § 5.55, Subd. 7)
§ 113.06 MECHANICAL CONDITION.
Before issuing a taxicab license, the applicant shall present to the Council a certificate signed by a
competent and experienced mechanic showing that the taxicab conveyance is in good mechanical
condition, that it is thoroughly safe for transportation of passengers and that it is in neat and clean
condition. A similar certificate may be required from time to time during the licensed period. In lieu
of the certificate the Council may accept the report of the Chief of Police relative thereto.
(1981 Code, § 5.55, Subd. 8)
CHAPTER 114: MASSAGE PARLORS
Section
114.01 Definitions
114.02 License
114.03 Qualifications
114.04 Construction requirements
114.05 Health and disease control
114.06 Maintenance of facilities
114.07 Business hours and inspection
114.08 Liquor
114.09 Solicitation
114.10 Licensing, suspended or revoked
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
MASSAGE, MASSEUR and MASSEUSE. The term MASSAGE means the rubbing, stroking,
kneading, tapping or rolling of the body with the hands for the exclusive purposes of relaxation, physical
fitness, or beautification and for no other purposes; the term MASSEUR means a male person and the
term MASSEUSE a female person, who practices massage. The practice of massage is distinct from the
practice of medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry and persons duly
licensed or registered in this state to practice medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical
therapy, or podiatry, nurses who work solely under the directions of any such persons, athletic directors
and trainers are expressly excluded from the provisions of this chapter. Beauty culturists and barbers
who do not give, or hold themselves out to give, massage treatments, as defined herein, other than is
customarily given in such shops or places of business, for the purposes of beautification only, are also
excluded from the provisions of this chapter.
MASSAGE PARLOR. Any room or rooms wherein a person for a fee may receive from another
person a massage.
33
34 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
SANITARY. Free from the vegetative cells of pathogenic microorganisms.
SANITIZE. Adequate treatment of surfaces by a process that is effective in destroying vegetative
cells of pathogenic bacteria and substantially reducing other microorganisms.
STEAM BATH, HEAT BATHING ROOM and SAUNA. A room or rooms used for the purpose
of bathing, reducing body weight or relaxation, which utilize steam or hot air as a cleaning, weight
reducing or relaxing agent.
(1981 Code, § 5.60, Subd. 1) (Am. Ord. 66, 3rd Series, passed 5-16-1986)
§ 114.02 LICENSE.
(A) Any person or corporation engaged in the operating, conducting, or keeping of the business of
steam baths, heat bathing rooms, massage parlors and saunas shall obtain, from the City Council, a
license before engaging in the operating, conducting or keeping of the business. The annual fee for the
license shall be determined and set by the City Council by resolution.
(B) All persons engaged in the operation, conducting or keeping of steam baths, heat bathing rooms,
massage parlors and saunas, either as an owner or employee or volunteer, shall in addition to any other
license required by this chapter obtain an individual license from the City Council before engaging in
the work. The annual fee for the license shall be determined and set by the City Council by resolution.
(C) Every application for a license under this section shall be filed with the City Administrator and
at the time of each original application for a business of steam bath, heat bathing rooms, massage parlors
and saunas, there shall be paid in full an investigation fee of $100. No investigation fee shall be
refunded. All applications shall be referred to the Chief of Police and to such other city departments as
the Council shall deem necessary for verification and investigation of the facts set forth in the
application. The Chief of Police and other department heads shall make a written recommendation to
the Council as to the issuance or non-issuance of the license. The Council may order and conduct such
additional investigation as it deems necessary.
(D) Applications shall be made upon forms supplied by the City Administrator which may require
information deemed appropriate by the Council and among other items of information, the following:
(1) The name, address, age and telephone number of each person who shall be employed in
the establishment;
(2) A list of prior employers of each employee and a short resume of their prior experience in
the field of massage;
(3) A statement that the applicant and any employee has not been convicted for any offense
punishable by more than 90-days’ imprisonment and if, however, there have been such convictions, a
list of such offenses, and the county and state in which prosecution was had;
Massage Parlors 35
(4) A description of the formal training or apprenticeship, if any, in which the applicant or any
of his or her employees has been involved, together with the name or names of any instructors or
masters.
(1981 Code, § 5.60, Subd. 2) (Ord. 126, 2nd Series, eff. 6-19-1976; Ord. 5, 3rd Series, passed
5-21-1981; Ord. 66, 3rd Series, eff. 5-16-1986; Am. Ord. 197, 3rd Series, passed 5-16-1996; Am. Ord.
233, 3rd Series, passed 11-5-1998)
§ 114.03 QUALIFICATIONS.
Any person who is 18 years of age or over and who possesses the necessary educational or practical
qualifications therefor, as determined by an interview administered by the Council, shall be eligible for
licensing under the provisions of this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 5.60, Subd. 3)
§ 114.04 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
(A) All public steam baths, heat bathing rooms, massage parlors and saunas shall be constructed of
materials which are impervious to moisture, bacteria, mold or fungus growth. The floor to wall and wall
to wall joists shall be constructed to provide a sanitary cover with a minimum radius of 1 inch.
(B) A minimum of 15 foot-candles of illumination shall be supplied in all work areas. A hand
washing sink equipped with hot and cold running water under pressure and a sanitary towel dispenser
shall be provided for personnel.
(C) All other equipment used in connection with public steam baths, heat bathing rooms, massage
parlors and saunas shall be of sanitary design and construction which will permit frequent and thorough
cleaning and sanitizing.
(D) All public steam baths, heat bathing rooms, massage parlors and saunas shall be equipped with
a floor drain and shall conform to all applicable city and state codes and ordinances and statutes relating
to gas, electrical and plumbing installation.
(1981 Code, § 5.60, Subd. 4)
§ 114.05 HEALTH AND DISEASE CONTROL.
(A) It is unlawful for any person, while afflicted with any disease in a communicable form, or while
a carrier of the disease, or while afflicted with boils, infected wounds, sores or an acute respiratory
infection, to work in or use the services of any public steam bath, heat bathing room, massage parlor or
sauna in any capacity in which there is a likelihood of the person contaminating surfaces with pathogenic
micro organisms or transmitting disease to other individuals; and no person known or suspected of being
afflicted with any such disease or condition shall be employed or permitted in such an area or capacity.
2010 S-1 Repl.
36 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
(B) All employees shall wear light colored outer garments, maintain a high degree of personal
cleanliness and conform to approved hygienic practices while on duty. They shall wash their hands
thoroughly in an approved hand-washing facility before starting work and as often as may be necessary
to remove soil and contamination.
(C) Linen shall be clean and laundered, handled and stored in an approved manner. All linens shall
be white with no markings or names thereon.
(1981 Code, § 5.60, Subd. 5) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.06 MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES.
Floors, walls, ceilings, water closets, hand-washing sinks and urinals shall be in good repair and
maintained in a clean, sanitary condition at all times. Sanitary hand cleaning agents, sanitary towels and
toilet tissue shall be provided at all times and adequate refuse receptacles shall be provided and emptied
and cleaned as required.
(1981 Code, § 5.60, Subd. 6) (Ord. 126, 2nd Series, eff. 6-19-1976)
§ 114.07 BUSINESS HOURS AND INSPECTION.
All steam baths, heat bathing rooms, massage parlors and saunas shall open for business no sooner
than 8:00 a.m. and close for business no later than 10:00 p.m. During business hours, all steam baths,
heat bathing rooms, massage parlors and saunas shall be open to inspection by the Building Official or
his or her agents and to the Police Department.
(1981 Code, § 5.60, Subd. 7) (Ord. 66, 3rd Series, eff. 5-16-1986)
§ 114.08 LIQUOR.
Intoxicating or 3.2% malt liquors shall not be allowed on any premises licensed under this chapter.
A violation of this chapter shall be grounds for the immediate revocation of the license.
(1981 Code, § 5.60, Subd. 8)
§ 114.09 SOLICITATION.
Licensees and their employees under this chapter shall not solicit business in any public place or in
any licensed intoxicating liquor establishment.
(1981 Code, § 5.60, Subd. 9)
Massage Parlors 37
§ 114.10 LICENSING, SUSPENDED OR REVOKED.
(A) The Council may by resolution suspend, revoke, condition, limit, qualify, restrict or refuse to
renew any license issued under this chapter upon the grounds of:
(1) Fraud or deception in connection with the securing of the license;
(2) Habitual drunkenness or intemperance in the use of drugs, including but not limited to
controlled substances as defined by laws of the state, barbiturates, hallucinogenic drugs, amphetamines,
Benzedrine, Dexedrine or other sedatives, depressants, stimulants or tranquilizers;
(3) Conduct unbecoming to a person licensed to practice massage or inimical to the best interest
of the public;
(4) Violation of any of the provisions;
(5) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude.
(B) Before the Council shall order any such suspension, revocation, condition, limitation,
qualification or restriction of a license, or refusal to renew, the holder thereof shall be entitled to a
statement of the charges upon which the action is based, together with a right of hearing before the
Council, as is made and provided under the statutes of the state.
(1981 Code, § 5.60, Subd. 10) (Ord. 126, 2nd Series, eff. 6-19-1976)
38 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 115: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
115.01 Purpose
115.02 Definitions
115.03 Permit required; exceptions
115.04 Fire alarms
115.05 Permit fees
115.06 Application for alarm business permit
115.07 Application for alarm agent permit
115.08 Application for alarm user permit
115.09 Person ineligible for permit
115.10 Investigation and issuance
115.11 Suspension or revocation of permit
115.12 Appeal from denial, suspension or revocation
115.13 Charges for false alarms
115.14 Permit not assignable
115.15 Emergency reporting system; prohibitions
115.16 Possession, display and surrender of permits
115.17 Prohibitions
115.18 Limitation of liability
§ 115.01 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the sale, installation and use of fire, burglar, and other
emergency alarm systems by requiring alarm businesses, agents, and users to obtain a permit; to provide
regulations for the issuance of the permits; and to provide for penalties for initiators of repeated false
alarms.
(1981 Code, § 5.64, Subd. 1) (Ord. 128, 3rd Series, eff. 7-12-1991)
39
40 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
§ 115.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALARM AGENT. Any person who is employed by an alarm business, either directly or indirectly,
whose duties include but are not necessarily limited to any of the following: selling, maintaining, leasing,
servicing, repairing, replacing, moving or installing on any building, place or premise any alarm system.
ALARM BUSINESS. Any person, or if the business is a corporation, any person who is an officer,
director, shareholder or employee of the corporation, engaged in selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing or monitoring any alarm system or causing any alarm
system to be sold, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved, installed or monitored in
or on any building, place or premises.
ALARM SYSTEM. An assembly of equipment and devices (including a single device such as a solid
state unit which plugs directly into a 110-volt AC line or is designed to transmit by air waves) designed
to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which Police Department and/or Fire
Department personnel are expected to respond. In this chapter, the term ALARM SYSTEM shall include
the terms AUTOMATIC HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM, BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM, HOLDUP
ALARM SYSTEM, and WATERFLOW ALARM SYSTEM as those terms are hereinafter defined.
ALARM USER. Any person using an alarm system, as herein defined.
AUDIBLE ALARM. A device designed for detection of an unauthorized entry or fire on or in
premises, which when activated generates an audible sound on the premises.
AUTOMATIC HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM. An alarm system in which the signal transmission
is initiated by the action of a robber.
BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM. An alarm system signaling an entry or an attempted entry into the
area protected by the system.
CENTRAL STATION or CENTRAL STATION SYSTEM. A place where alarm systems are
monitored by a private organization (such as an alarm company or an answering service). It shall not
mean or have any reference to the monitoring of alarms at the dispatch centers operated by the Police
Department and/or the Fire Department.
DIGITAL DIALER. All alarms connected to a central station, answering service or other place
from where calls will be placed to the Police Department or Fire Department informing the department
that an alarm has been received from the establishment or residence utilizing the alarm with the intent
that a police or fire unit be dispatched to answer the alarm.
Alarm Systems 41
DISPATCH CENTER. The dispatch center located in the police station at 303 4th Street Northwest
and operated by the Police Department and/or the dispatch center located in the fire station at 415 4th
Street Northwest and operated by the Fire Department.
FALSE ALARM. The malicious activation of an alarm system when no emergency exists, or the
activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, improper
maintenance, or the negligence of the owner or occupant of the building where the alarm system is
located, or by the negligence of the employees, agents, or guests of the owner or occupant. The
terminology does not include, for example, alarms caused by tornadoes, earthquakes, or other violent
weather conditions, or alarms caused by utility company power outages or telephone company line
problems.
FALSE ALL CALL ALARM. A false alarm as defined herein to any building known to usually be
occupied by many persons such as hotels, motels, nursing homes, public and private schools, grain
elevators, and any church during normal hours of service.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM or WATER FLOW ALARM SYSTEM. Those systems that signal the
likelihood of fire or smoke within a building or area or the flow of water through a sprinkler system or
some like system.
HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM. An alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery.
MANUAL HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM. An alarm system in which the signal transmission is
initiated by the direct action of the person attacked or by an observer of the attack.
PROPRIETOR ALARM. An alarm which is not serviced by an alarm business and which when
activated does not alert a central station, central station system, or dispatch center.
(1981 Code, § 5.64, Subd. 2) (Ord. 128, 3rd Series, eff. 7-12-1991)
§ 115.03 PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to work as an alarm agent; to own, manage, conduct, or carry on
an alarm business or to own, use, or possess an alarm system without first complying with the provisions
of this chapter and without first obtaining the proper permit as required by this chapter.
(B) The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to the following:
(1) Audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles as allowed by law;
(2) Strictly proprietary systems which are not connected to the dispatch center, any central
station or other business or place intended for the receiving of alarms and which do not generate any
audible sound which is intended to be heard off the premises of the owner;
42 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
(3) Strictly proprietary systems which create any signal, light or device intended to be heard
or seen off the premises of the owner and intended to elicit a response by someone hearing or seeing the
alarm, signal or light;
(4) The officers, agents and employees of the city in the performance of their official duties.
(1981 Code, § 5.64, Subd. 3) (Ord. 128, 3rd Series, eff. 7-12-1991) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.04 FIRE ALARMS.
Any exceptions listed in § 115.03 shall not apply to fire alarm systems. All fire alarm systems, fire
extinguishing systems (including automatic sprinklers), and other fire protection systems and
appurtenances thereof which are designed to alert someone of the danger of fire or smoke or waterflow
shall meet the approval of the Chief of the Fire Department as to installation and location and shall be
subject to such periodic tests as required by the Chief. Plans and specifications shall be submitted to the
Chief for review and approval prior to construction or installation and shall meet all provisions of the
Uniform Fire Code as adopted by the city. Any system not meeting the Code or approval of the Fire
Chief shall not be installed and shall be deemed a violation of this chapter if installed without written
approval of the Chief.
(1981 Code, § 5.64, Subd. 4) (Ord. 128, 3rd Series, eff. 7-12-1991)
§ 115.05 PERMIT FEES.
The Council shall, from time to time by resolution, set the fee to be paid by the applicant to the city
for the issuance or renewal of an alarm business permit, an alarm agent permit, an alarm user permit,
or the owner or user of a digital dialer or similar device. The fees shall be on an annual basis and shall
be paid in advance on or before January 1 of each year covered by the permit. The fees for permits
issued in the middle of a year shall be pro rated through and including the entire month in which the
permit is first issued. No refunds for disconnects or for permits forfeited or turned in during any year
shall be given.
(1981 Code, § 5.64, Subd. 5) (Ord. 128, 3rd Series, eff. 7-12-1991)
§ 115.06 APPLICATION FOR ALARM BUSINESS PERMIT.
(A) Applicants for a permit under this section shall file with the City Administrator a sworn
application in writing on a form to be furnished by the City Administrator.
(B) The application shall give the following information:
(1) A full description of the exact nature of the business;
Alarm Systems 43
(2) Whether the business is a sole proprietorship, a partnership, a corporation, or other type
of business entity;
(3) The names, complete residence addresses and residence telephone numbers of all owners
of the business; and if any such owner is a corporation, the principal officers, directors and shareholders
of the corporation and the names of all alarm agents employed by the alarm business;
(4) The names under which the business is conducted;
(5) The location of the proposed business for which the license is sought, the business mailing
address if different from the location of business and the telephone number of the establishment where
the business is to be conducted;
(6) Whether any license or permit to engage in the type of business for which the permit is
sought has previously been denied to the applicant or suspended or revoked from the applicant; and if
so the circumstances of the denial, suspension or revocation;
(7) The brand names of all equipment to be sold, serviced, maintained and used by the
applicant;
(8) The application may include such other information as the Chief of Police finds reasonably
necessary to determine the qualifications of the applicant for the permit.
(1981 Code, § 5.64, Subd. 6) (Ord. 128, 3rd Series, eff. 7-12-1991)
§ 115.07 APPLICATION FOR ALARM AGENT PERMIT.
(A) Applicants for a permit under this section shall file with the City Administrator a sworn
application in writing on a form to be furnished by the City Administrator.
(B) The application shall give the following information:
(1) The application for an alarm agent permit shall include the personal history of the applicant.
The applicant shall present, with the application, 2 recent photographs (1½ inches by 1½ inches), 1 to
be filed with the application and 1 to be permanently attached to the alarm agent permit when issued.
Each alarm agent permit must set forth the name and address of the applicant and, if the applicant is
employed by an alarm business, the application shall include all of the information required by § 115.07;
(2) The application may include such other information as the Chief of Police finds reasonably
necessary to determine the qualifications of the applicant for the permit.
(1981 Code, § 5.64, Subd. 7) (Ord. 128, 3rd Series, eff. 7-12-1991)
44 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
§ 115.08 APPLICATION FOR ALARM USER PERMIT.
(A) Applicants for a permit under this section shall file with the City Administrator a sworn
application in writing on a form to be furnished by the City Administrator.
(B) The application shall give the following information:
(1) The application for an alarm user permit shall state the name, address, and telephone
number of the applicant’s property serviced by an alarm system or by a central station system and the
name, address, and telephone number of the applicant’s residence if other than the property serviced by
the alarm. If the applicant’s alarm system or central station system is serviced by an alarm business, the
applicant shall include the name and address of the alarm business. It shall also contain the names,
addresses and current telephone numbers of at least 2 agents of the applicant for responses to alarm calls
when the applicant is not present to respond. The agents shall have keys and possess the necessary
knowledge to reset or take any action necessary with the alarm;
(2) The application may include such other information as the Chief of Police finds reasonably
necessary to determine the qualifications of the applicant for the permit.
(1981 Code, § 5.64, Subd. 8) (Ord. 128, 3rd Series, eff. 7-12-1991)
§ 115.09 PERSON INELIGIBLE FOR PERMIT.
No permit shall be issued to any applicant for an alarm agent permit or an alarm business permit
who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of this state or any other state or federal law of the
United States within 5 years of the date of application; or if after investigation by the Chief of Police,
applicant’s character, reputation, experience or other record is determined to be inimical to the safety
or the general welfare of the community.
(1981 Code, § 5.64, Subd. 9) (Ord. 128, 3rd Series, eff. 7-12-1991)
§ 115.10 INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE.
(A) Upon receipt of each application, the City Administrator shall refer the application to the Chief
of Police who shall immediately institute an investigation of the applicant’s business and moral character
as the Chief of Police deems necessary for the protection of the public good and shall endorse the
application in the manner prescribed in this chapter within 10 days after it has been filed by the applicant
with the City Administrator. An application shall be denied if the applicant willfully falsifies any
information on the application.
Alarm Systems 45
(B) If, as a result of the investigation, the applicant’s character or business reputation is found to
be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse on the application his or her recommendations for
disapproval and his or her reasons for the same and shall return the application to the City Administrator
who shall present the application to the Council for its consideration at its next regularly scheduled
meeting.
(C) If, as a result of the investigation, the applicant’s character or business reputation is found to
be satisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse on the application his or her recommendation for
approval and shall return the application to the City Administrator who shall present the application to
the Council for its consideration at its next regularly scheduled meeting. If the application is granted by
the Council, a permit shall be issued by the City Administrator. The permit shall exhibit the signature
of the City Administrator and shall list at a minimum the name and address of the permittee, the date of
issuance and the term of the permit which shall not exceed 1 year and any other information as may be
required by the Council by resolution.
(1981 Code, § 5.64, Subd. 10) (Ord. 128, 3rd Series, eff. 7-12-1991)
§ 115.11 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
(A) An alarm business permit, an alarm agent permit, or an alarm user permit shall be revoked or
suspended for a period of time by the Chief of Police for any reason for which the granting of the permit
might be lawfully denied or for a violation of any provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation
made in implementation thereof by the Chief of Police under this chapter. Suspension or revocation of
an alarm user permit shall result in disconnection of the alarm system at the discretion of the Chief of
Police.
(B) An alarm user permit may be revoked or suspended:
(1) When the alarm user or his or her agent fails to respond to his or her activated alarm within
a reasonable time when requested to do so;
(2) When the alarm user is not available in person or by his or her representative, employee
or alarm company to be contacted regarding an alarm;
(3) When an alarm user’s alarm system has signaled an excessive number of false alarms as
defined herein;
(4) When an alarm user fails to pay fees charged under this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 5.64, Subd. 11) (Ord. 128, 3rd Series, eff. 7-12-1991)
46 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
§ 115.12 APPEAL FROM DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
Every applicant for, or holder of, an alarm business permit, an alarm agent permit, or an alarm user
permit shall have the right to appeal to the Council upon a denial of the application or upon a suspension
or revocation of the permit. The appeal shall be made in writing to the Council within 15 days from the
date of the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit. The written appeal shall be filed in the office
of the City Administrator, shall be addressed to the Council, and shall state the basis of the appeal. The
City Administrator shall then arrange to have the appeal heard within 30 days of the time of filing with
the City Administrator. The City Administrator shall cause the applicant or holder to be given notice of
the hearing by certified mail at least 7 days in advance of the date of the hearing. The applicant or holder
may appear before the Council and the applicant or holder, or his or her designated representative, may
make an oral presentation of his or her appeal or he or she may make the appeal through a written
statement or he or she may do both. The Council shall rule on the appeal within 20 days after it is heard.
(1981 Code, § 5.64, Subd. 12) (Ord. 128, 3rd Series, eff. 7-12-1991)
§ 115.13 CHARGES FOR FALSE ALARMS.
(A) Penalty charges for false alarms. Any alarm business or alarm user who maintains or has an
alarm system which signals a false alarm which in the opinion of the police officers or firefighter who
responded to the alarm is caused by the negligence of the owner or occupant of the building where the
alarm system is located or the employees, agents, or guests of the owner or occupant shall pay a penalty
charge to the city as shall be determined from time to time by the Council by resolution. The Police and
Fire Departments shall keep records of all false alarms received by the Departments and the explanation
for the false alarms. These records shall be available for inspection by alarm users and alarm businesses.
If no cause for the false alarms is determined, it shall be the duty and responsibility of the alarm user
to ascertain what the cause is and to take steps to prevent the signaling of additional false alarms to the
dispatch center and to pay necessary charges for excessive false alarms.
(1981 Code, § 5.64, Subd. 13)
(B) Penalty charges for false all call fire alarms. Any alarm user who maintains or has a fire alarm
system which signals a false all call fire alarm which in the opinion of the firefighters who responded
to the alarm is caused by the negligence of the owner or occupant of the building where the alarm system
is located, or the employees, agents, or guests of the owner or occupant, shall pay a penalty charge to
the city as shall be determined from time to time by the Council by resolution. The Fire Department
shall keep records of all false all call alarms received by the Department and the explanation for the false
all call alarms. These records shall be available for inspection by alarm users and alarm businesses. If
no cause for the false all call alarms is determined, it shall be the duty and responsibility of the alarm
user to ascertain what the cause is and to take steps to prevent the signaling of additional false all call
alarms to the dispatch center and to pay necessary charges for excessive false alarms to all call alarms.
This chapter shall not apply to single-family residences and small businesses which typically do not
Alarm Systems 47
require an all call response consisting of all available firefighters and equipment. It shall apply to
locations which typically do require an all call response, including, but not limited to hotels, motels,
nursing homes, public and private schools, grain elevators, and any church during normal hours of
service.
(1981 Code, § 5.64, Subd. 14)
(C) Penalty charges for false alarms received from digital dialing equipment. Since digital dialing
equipment is becoming more prevalent in the alarm business industry, and since the alarm may be
transmitted long distances to a central station or other answering point, and since these central stations
or answering points telephone the dispatch center reporting a burglar alarm, fire alarm, or other
emergency at certain locations, and since these alarms must be answered by police and/or fire personnel
as would those transmitted directly to the dispatch center, the penalties of division (A) of this section
shall be applicable to those alarms telephoned in by a central station or answering point as a result of
receiving an alarm signal from such a digital dialer.
(1981 Code, § 5.64, Subd. 15)
(Ord. 128, 3rd Series, eff. 7-12-1991)
§ 115.14 PERMIT NOT ASSIGNABLE.
No permit issued under the provisions contained herein shall be assignable.
(1981 Code, § 5.64, Subd. 16) (Ord. 128, 3rd Series, eff. 7-12-1991)
§ 115.15 EMERGENCY REPORTING SYSTEM; PROHIBITIONS.
It is unlawful for any permittee to install, or cause to be used, any automatic dialing service or
attachment to any telephone that reproduces any taped or pre-recorded message to report a fire, burglary,
robbery, or other emergency which utilizes public emergency call number 911.
(1981 Code, § 5.64, Subd. 17) (Ord. 128, 3rd Series, eff. 7-12-1991) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.16 POSSESSION, DISPLAY, AND SURRENDER OF PERMITS.
The alarm business permits shall be conspicuously displayed at the principal place of business, and
every alarm agent permit shall be carried by the alarm agent while he or she is working and shall be
displayed upon request by any police officer. Any permit hereunder shall be surrendered to the Chief
of Police upon suspension or revocation, and thereafter the suspended or revoked permit shall be
delivered to the City Administrator.
(1981 Code, § 5.64, Subd. 18) (Ord. 128, 3rd Series, eff. 7-12-1991)
48 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
§ 115.17 PROHIBITIONS.
It is unlawful for any person to activate any police or fire alarm system except in the event of what
is reasonably believed to be an emergency or unlawful act and/or an unauthorized entry on premises.
Whenever a police or fire alarm system has been designed and commonly understood to alert others of
an emergency or of the commission of a particular crime, it is unlawful for anyone to activate such an
alarm system except in the event of what is reasonably believed to be an emergency or the commission
of the particular crime. It is unlawful to install or use an alarm system which upon activation emits a
sound similar to sirens in use on emergency vehicles or for civil defense purposes.
(1981 Code, § 5.64, Subd. 19) (Ord. 128, 3rd Series, eff. 7-12-1991) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.18 LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.
The city shall be under no duty or obligation to a permittee or to any other person hereunder by
reason of any provision of this chapter or the exercise of privileges of a permittee hereunder, including
but not limited to any defects in an alarm system or any delays in transmission of response to any alarm,
and the decision to respond to any alarm is declared to be a discretionary function or duty. The city is
not responsible for any expansion of its existing facility and does reserve the right to reject applications.
(1981 Code, § 5.64, Subd. 20) (Ord. 128, 3rd Series, eff. 7-12-1991)
CHAPTER 116: TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Section
116.01 Purpose
116.02 Definitions
116.03 License
116.04 Fees
116.05 Basis for denial of license
116.06 Prohibited sales
116.07 Vending machines
116.08 Self-service sales
116.09 Responsibility
116.10 Compliance checks and inspections
116.98 Violations
116.99 Penalty
§ 116.01 PURPOSE.
Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 18 years purchase or otherwise
obtain, possess, and use tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices, and such sales,
possession, and use are violations of both state and federal laws; and because studies, which are accepted
and adopted, have shown that most smokers begin smoking before they have reached the age of 18 years
and that those persons who reach the age of 18 years without having started smoking are significantly
less likely to begin smoking; and because smoking has been shown to be the cause of several serious
health problems which subsequently place a financial burden on all levels of government; this chapter
shall be intended to regulate the sale, possession, and use of tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco
related devices for the purpose of enforcing and furthering existing laws, to protect minors against the
serious effects associated with the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco related devices,
and to further the official public policy of the state in regard to preventing young people from starting
to smoke as stated in M.S. § 144.391, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 263, 3rd Series, passed 1-7-2003)
49
50 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
§ 116.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that those authorized
to sell tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices are following and complying with the
requirements of this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall involve the use of minors as authorized
by this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall also mean the use of minors who attempt to purchase
tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices for educational, research, and training purposes
as authorized by state and federal laws. COMPLIANCE CHECKS may also be conducted by other units
of government for the purpose of enforcing appropriate federal, state, or local laws and regulations
relating to tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices.
INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED. The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco product wrapped
individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco products shall include, but are not
limited to, single cigarette packs, single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or
other packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a single
pack or other container as described in this section shall not be considered individually packaged.
LOOSIES. The common term used to refer to a single or individually packaged cigarette.
MINOR. Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years.
MOVABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated out of a truck, van,
automobile, or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a fixed address store front or other
permanent type of structure authorized for sales transactions.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco
related devices are available for sale to the general public. Retail establishments shall include, but not
be limited to, grocery stores, convenience stores, and restaurants.
SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other consideration.
SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco
related devices in any manner where any person shall have access to the tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices without the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee’s employee.
The assistance or intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product,
or tobacco related device between the customer and the licensee or employee. Self-service merchandising
shall not include vending machines.
Tobacco Products 51
TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Any substance or item containing tobacco leaf, including
but not limited to, cigarettes; cigars; pipe tobacco; snuff, fine cut or other chewing tobacco; cheroots;
stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff
flower; cavendish; shorts, plug and twist tobaccos; dipping tobaccos; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings,
and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco leaf prepared in such a manner as to
be suitable for chewing, sniffing, or smoking of tobacco or tobacco products.
TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES. Any tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling papers, or other
device intentionally designed or intended to be used in a manner which enables the chewing, sniffing,
or smoking of tobacco or tobacco products.
VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of device which
dispenses tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices upon the insertion of money, tokens, or
other form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco
product, or tobacco related device.
(Ord. 263, 3rd Series, passed 1-7-2003)
§ 116.03 LICENSE.
It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related
device without first having obtained a license to do so from the city.
(A) Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related
devices shall be made on a form provided by the city. The application shall contain the full name of the
applicant, the applicant’s residential and business addresses and telephone numbers, the name of the
business for which the license is sought, and any additional information the city deems necessary. Upon
receipt of a completed application, the City Administrator shall forward the application to the Council
for action at its next regularly scheduled Council meeting. If the City Administrator shall determine that
an application is incomplete, he or she shall return the application to the applicant with notice of the
information necessary to make the application complete.
(B) Action. The Council may either approve or deny the license, or it may delay action for such
reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any investigation of the application or the applicant
it deems necessary. If the Council shall approve the license, the City Administrator shall issue the
license to the applicant. If the Council denies the license, notice of the denial shall be given to the
applicant along with notice of the applicant’s right to appeal the Council’s decision.
(C) Term. The term of all license issued under this chapter shall be from January 1 through
December 31 of the year of issuance.
(D) Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended
as provided in the § 116.99.
52 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
(E) Transfers. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid only on the premises for which
the license was issued and only for the person to whom the license was issued. No transfer of any
license to another location or person shall be valid without the prior approval of the Council.
(F) Movable place of business. No license shall be issued to a movable place of business. Only fixed
locations businesses shall be eligible to be licensed under this chapter.
(G) Displays. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of the general public on the
licensed premise.
(H) Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this chapter shall be handled in the same
manner as the original application. The request for a renewal shall be made at least 30 days but not more
than 60 days before the expiration of the current license.
(Ord. 263, 3rd Series, passed 1-7-2003) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.04 FEES.
No license shall be issued under this chapter until the appropriate license fee shall be paid in full.
The fee for a license under this chapter shall be set and may from time to time be amended by the
Council by resolution.
(Ord. 263, 3rd Series, passed 1-7-2003)
§ 116.05 BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this chapter;
however, except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any particular ground for denial
does not mean that the city must deny the license. If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a
person, it shall be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under this
chapter.
(A) The applicant is under the age of 18 years.
(B) The applicant has been convicted within the past 5 years of any violation of a federal, state or
local law or City Code provision, or other regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco products or tobacco
related devices.
(C) The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices
revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date of application.
(D) The applicant fails to provide any information required on the application or provides false or
misleading information.
Tobacco Products 53
(E) The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or local law, City Code provision or other
regulation from holding such a license.
(Ord. 263, 3rd Series, passed 1-7-2003)
§ 116.06 PROHIBITED SALES.
It is a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco product,
or tobacco related device:
(A) To any person under the age of 18 years;
(B) By means of any type of vending machine, except as may otherwise be provided in this section;
(C) By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need to make verbal or written
request to any employee of the licensed premise in order to receive the tobacco, tobacco related product,
or tobacco related device and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product,
or tobacco related device between the licensee or the licensee’s employee and the customer;
(D) By means of loosies as defined herein;
(E) Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or other
deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic, or controlled substances except nicotine and other substances found
naturally in tobacco or added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process;
(F) By any other means, or to any other person, or in any other manner or form prohibited by
federal, state or other local law, city code provision, or other regulations.
(Ord. 263, 3rd Series, passed 1-7-2003)
§ 116.07 VENDING MACHINES.
It is unlawful for any person licensed under this chapter to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco related devices by the means of a vending machine unless minors are at all times
prohibited from entering the licensed establishment.
(Ord. 263, 3rd Series, passed 1-7-2003) Penalty, see § 116.99
§ 116.08 SELF-SERVICE SALES.
It is unlawful for a licensee under this chapter to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices by any means whereby the customer may have access to the items without having
to request the item from the licensee or the licensee’s employee and whereby there is not a physical
54 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, or the tobacco related device between the licensee or his or
her clerk and the customer. All tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices shall either be
stored behind a counter or other area not freely accessible to customers or in a case or other storage unit
not left open and accessible to the general public. Any retailer selling tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices at the time this chapter is adopted shall comply with this chapter within 90 days
following the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 263, 3rd Series, passed 1-7-2003) Penalty, see § 116.99
§ 116.09 RESPONSIBILITY.
All licensees under this chapter shall be responsible for the actions of their employees in regard to
the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices on the licensed premises, and the sale
of such an item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed as prohibiting the city from also subjecting the clerk to whatever penalties are
appropriate under this chapter, state or federal law, or other applicable law or regulation.
(Ord. 263, 3rd Series, passed 1-7-2003)
§ 116.10 COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.
All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the city law enforcement or other authorized
city official during regular business hours. From time to time, but at least once per year, the city shall
conduct compliance checks by engaging, with the written consent of their parents or guardians, minors
over the age of 15 years but less than 18 years to enter the licensed premise to attempt to purchase
tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices. Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks
shall be supervised by designated law enforcement officers or other designated personnel. Minors used
for compliance checks shall not be guilty of unlawful purchase or attempted purchase, nor the unlawful
possession of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices when such items are obtained or
attempted to be obtained as a part of the compliance check. No minor used in compliance checks shall
attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the minor’s age and all minors lawfully engaged in
a compliance check shall answer all questions about the minor’s age asked by the licensee or his or her
employee and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he or she is asked. Nothing in
this chapter shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by state or federal laws for educational,
research, or training purposes or required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal law.
(Ord. 263, 3rd Series, passed 1-7-2003)
Tobacco Products 55
§ 116.98 VIOLATIONS.
(A) Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged violator shall be issued, either
personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged violation and which shall inform the alleged
violator of his or her right to be heard on the accusation.
(B) Hearing. If a person accused of violating this chapter so requests, a hearing shall be scheduled,
the time and place of which shall be published and provided to the accused violator.
(C) Hearing officer. A person(s) designated by the Council shall serve as the hearing officer.
(D) Decision. If the hearing officer determines that violation of this chapter did occur, that
decision, along with the hearing officer’s reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed
under § 116.99 shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the accused violator.
Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any
penalty, the findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted accused violator.
(E) Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer shall be filed in the District Court
for the jurisdiction of the city in which the alleged violation occurred.
(F) Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from seeking
prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of this chapter. If the city elects to seek
misdemeanor prosecution, no administrative penalty shall be imposed.
(G) Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or continues,
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 263, 3rd Series, passed 1-7-2003)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
(A) Licensees. Any licensee found to have violated this chapter, or whose employee shall have
violated this chapter, shall be charged an administrative fine in an amount set by City Council for a first
violation of this chapter; a fine in an amount set by City Council for a second offense at the same
licensed premises within a 2-month period; and a fine in an amount set by City Council for a third or
subsequent offense at the same location within a 24-month period. In addition, after the third offense,
the license shall be suspended for not less than 7 days.
(B) Other individuals. Other individuals, other than minors regulated elsewhere in this code, found
to be in violation of this chapter shall be charged an administrative fee in an amount set by City Council.
(C) Misdemeanor. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a
misdemeanor for any violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 263, 3rd Series, passed 1-7-2003)
56 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 117: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions and Regulations
117.01 Definitions
117.02 Applications and licenses; procedure and administration
117.03 License restrictions
117.04 Unlawful acts
117.05 Conduct on licensed premises
117.06 Sale by employee
117.07 License condition and unlawful act
117.08 Insurance certificate requirements
117.09 Financial responsibility of licensees
117.10 Gambling prohibited
117.11 Unlawful acts of minors
117.12 Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages on streets, public property, and
private parking lots to which the public has access
117.13 Alcoholic beverages in certain buildings and grounds
117.14 Sports or convention facilities license
117.15 Temporary intoxilyzing liquor license
117.16 Consumption and display
117.17 Nudity or obscenity prohibited
3.2% Malt Liquor
117.30 License required
117.31 License fees
117.32 Temporary 3.2% malt liquor license
117.33 Restrictions and regulations
117.34 Hours and days of sales
117.35 Unlawful acts
Intoxicating Liquor
117.45 License required
117.46 License fees
117.47 Restrictions and regulations
57
58 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
117.48 Hours and days of sales
117.49 Sunday sales
117.50 Unlawful acts
On-Sale Wine
117.65 On-sale wine
117.66 Hours and days of sales by on-sale wine licenses
117.67 Unlawful acts
Mandatory Alcohol Server Training
117.80 Employee requirements; alcohol server training required; renewal; grandfather clause
117.81 Employer requirements; hiring of certified employees; record keeping
117.82 Application
117.83 Training programs; tests
117.84 Issuance of certificates
117.85 Fees
117.98 Administrative offenses, suspension or revocation of license
117.99 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND REGULATIONS
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
3.2% MALT LIQUOR. Malt liquor containing not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume nor more than
3.2% alcohol by weight. (This definition includes so called MALT COOLERS with the alcoholic content
limits stated herein.)
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any beverage containing more than 0.5% alcohol by volume.
APPLICANT. Any person making an application for a license under this chapter.
APPLICATION. A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in and completed by the
applicant as his or her request for a license, furnished by the city and uniformly required as a
prerequisite to the consideration of the issuance of a license for a business.
2010 S-1
Alcoholic Beverages 59
BREWER. A person who manufactures malt liquor for sale.
CLUB. An incorporated organization organized under the laws of the state for civic, fraternal,
social, or business purposes, for intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports or a
congressionally chartered veterans’ organization, which:
(1) Has more than 30 members;
(2) Has owned or rented a building or space in a building for more than 1 year that is suitable
and adequate for the accommodation of its members;
(3) Is directed by a board of directors, executive committee, or other similar body chosen by
the members at a meeting held for that purpose. No member, officer, agent, or employee shall receive
any profit from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club, or their guests, beyond
a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each year by the governing body. The club or
congressionally chartered veterans’ organization must have been in existence for at least 3 years.
COMMISSIONER. The Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety.
DESIGNATED AGENT. The manager or other designated individual appointed by the licensee to
take full responsibility for the conduct of the licensed premises and for service of process relating to the
license.
(Ord. 308, 3rd Series, passed 3-3-2009)
EXCLUSIVE LIQUOR STORE. An establishment used exclusively for the sale of liquor except
for the incidental sale of ice, tobacco, beer, beverages for mixing with liquor, and soft drinks may also
be sold, and the establishment may offer recorded or live entertainment and make available coin-operated
amusement devices. EXCLUSIVE LIQUOR STORE also includes an on-sale or combination on-sale
and off-sale liquor establishment which sells food for on-premise consumption when authorized by the
city issuing the license.
HOTEL. An establishment where food and lodging are regularly furnished to transients and which
has:
(1) A resident proprietor or manager;
(2) A dining room serving the general public at tables and having facilities for seating at least
30 guests at 1 time; and
(3) At least 10 guest rooms.
LICENSE. A document, issued by the city, to an applicant permitting him or her to carry on and
transact the business stated therein.
2010 S-1
60 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
LICENSE FEE. The money paid to the city pursuant to an application and prior to issuance of a
license to transact and carry on the business stated therein.
LICENSED PREMISES. The space or structure described in the issued license. In the case of a
restaurant or a club licensed for on-sales of alcoholic beverages and located on a golf course,
LICENSED PREMISES means the entire golf course except for areas where motor vehicles are
regularly parked or operated.
LICENSEE. An applicant who, pursuant to his or her approved application, holds a valid, current,
unexpired license, which has neither been revoked nor is then under suspension from the city for
carrying on the business stated therein.
INTOXICATING LIQUOR. Ethyl alcohol and distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous and malt
beverages containing in excess of 3.2% of alcohol by weight. (This definition includes so called WINE
COOLERS and MALT COOLERS with the alcoholic content limits stated herein.)
MALT LIQUOR. Any beer, ale, or other beverage made from malt by fermentation and containing
not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume.
MANUFACTURER. Every person who, by any process of manufacture, fermenting, brewing,
distilling, refining, rectifying, blending, or by the combination of different materials, prepares or
produces alcoholic beverages for sale.
MINOR. With respect to purchasing, possessing, consuming, selling, furnishing, and serving
alcoholic beverages, a person is not 21 years of age until 8:00 a.m. on the day of that person’s 21st
birthday.
(Am. Ord. 287, 3 Series, passed 8- rd 16-2005; Am. Ord. 297, 3rd Series, passed 2-2-2007)
OFF-SALE. The sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for consumption off the licensed
premises only.
ON-SALE. The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed premises only.
SALE, SELL and SOLD. All barters and all manners or means of furnishing 3.2% malt liquor,
wine or intoxicating liquor to persons, including such furnishing in violation or evasion of law.
PACKAGE and ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any container or receptacle holding alcoholic beverages,
which container or receptacle is corked, capped or sealed by a manufacturer or wholesaler.
RESTAURANT. An establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of a single proprietor or
manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the premises and served at tables to the general public
and having seating capacity for at least 30 guests.
2010 S-1
Alcoholic Beverages 61
WHOLESALER. Any person engaged in the business of selling alcoholic beverages to a licensee
from a stock maintained in a warehouse.
WINE. The product made from the normal alcoholic fermentation of grapes, including still wine,
sparkling and carbonated wine, wine made from condensed grape must, wine made from other
agricultural products than sound, ripe grapes, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider,
perry and sake. (This definition includes WINE COOLERS with the alcoholic content limits stated
herein.) For purposes of on-sale wine licenses, WINE may contain up to 14% alcohol by volume for
consumption with the sale of food. For all other purposes, WINE is a product containing not less than
0.5% nor more than 24% alcohol be volume for nonindustrial use.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 117.02 APPLICATIONS AND LICENSES; PROCEDURE AND ADMINISTRATION.
(A) Application. All applications shall be made at the office of the City Administrator upon forms
prescribed by the city, or if by the Commissioner, then together with such additional information as the
Council may desire. Information required may vary with the type of business organization making
application. All questions asked or information required by the application forms shall be answered
fully and completely by the applicant. Every application for the issuance or renewal of a intoxicating
liquor, 3.2% malt liquor, or wine license must include a copy of each summons and complaint received
by the applicant during the preceding year under M.S. § 340A.802, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(B) False statements. It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false statement or
omission upon any application form. Any false statement in such application, or any willful omission
to state any information called for on the application form shall, upon discovery of the falsehood, work
an automatic refusal of license, or if already issued, shall render any license issued pursuant thereto void
and of no effect to protect the applicant from prosecution for violation of this chapter, or any part
thereof.
(C) Application and investigation fees. At the time of the initial application, an applicant for an
on-sale or off-sale 3.2% malt liquor, intoxicating liquor license or on-sale wine license shall pay to the
city the sum of $50 if a natural person, and $75 if a partnership, or $150 if a corporation, which fee shall
be considered an application and investigation fee, not refundable to applicant, to cover the costs of the
city in processing the application and investigation thereof. No fee shall be required of an applicant for
a temporary beer license.
(D) Action.
(1) Granting. The Council may approve any application for the period of the remainder of the
then current license year or for the entire ensuing license year. All applications including proposed
license periods must be consistent with this chapter. Prior to consideration of any application for a
2010 S-1
62 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
license, the applicant shall pay the license fee, and if applicable, pay the investigation fee. Upon rejection
of any application for a license, or upon withdrawal of an application before approval of the issuance
by the Council, the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. Failure to pay any portion of a fee
when due shall be cause for revocation.
(2) Issuing. If an application is approved, the City Administrator shall forthwith issue a license
pursuant thereto in the form prescribed by the city or the proper agency of the state, as the case may be.
All licenses shall be on a fiscal year basis, July 1 to June 30. For licenses issued and which are to
become effective other than on the first day of the licensed year, the fee to be paid with the application
shall be a pro rata share of the annual license fee. Licenses shall be valid only at 1 location and on the
premises therein described.
(3) License refundment in certain cases. In the event that, during the license year, the licensed
premises shall be destroyed or so damaged by fire, or otherwise, that the licensee shall cease to carry
on the licensed business, or in case the business of the licensee shall cease by reason of his or her illness
or death, or if it shall become unlawful for the licensee to carry on the licensed business under his or her
license, except when the license is revoked, the city shall, upon the happening of any such event, refund
to the licensee, or to his or her estate, such part of the license fee paid by him or her as corresponds to
the time the license had yet to run. In the event of death of the licensee, his or her personal
representative is authorized to continue operation of the business for not more than 90 days after the
death of the licensee.
(4) Transfer. Each license shall be issued only to the applicant and for the premises described
in the license. No license may be transferred to another person or place without Council approval. Any
transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed a transfer of the license. Any application for transfer
of license, either to another person or place, or transfer of stock in corporate licensee, shall be
accompanied by a payment of a fee of $25. It is unlawful to make any transfer in violation of this
subsection, and any such transfer shall also be grounds for revocation of the license.
(5) Refusal and termination. The Council may, in its sole discretion and for any reasonable
cause, refuse to grant any application. No license shall be granted to a person of questionable moral
character or business reputation. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or revocation.
(6) Revocation or suspension. For any license granted under the provisions of this chapter, the
Council shall revoke or suspend, for a period not to exceed 60 days, impose a civil fine not to exceed
$2,000, or any combination of these sanctions, for each violation on a finding that the licensee has failed
to comply with a statute, regulation or provision of the City Code relating to alcoholic beverages. The
Council shall revoke the license upon conviction of any licensee or agent or employee of a licensee for
violating any law relating to the sale or possession of alcoholic beverages upon premises of the licensee
or if the revocation is mandatory by statute. If it shall be made to appear at the hearing thereon that the
violation was not willful, the Council may order suspension; provided that revocation shall be ordered
upon the third violation or offense. No suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has
2010 S-1
Alcoholic Beverages 63
been afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the Council, a committee of the Council, or a hearing
under the Administrative Procedures Act, as may be determined by the Council in action calling the
hearing. The hearing shall be called by the Council upon written notice to the licensee served in person
or by certified mail not less than 15 nor more than 30 days prior to the hearing date, stating the time,
place and purpose thereof. As additional restrictions or regulations on licensees under this chapter, and
in addition to grounds for revocation or suspension stated in the City Code or statute, the following shall
also be grounds for the action:
(a) That the licensee suffered or permitted illegal acts upon licensed premises unrelated
to the sale of alcoholic beverages;
(b) That the licensee had knowledge of the illegal acts upon licensed premises, but failed
to report the same to police;
(c) That the licensee failed or refused to cooperate fully with police in investigating the
alleged illegal acts the licensed premises; or
(d) That the activities of the licensee created a serious danger to public health, safety, or
welfare.
(7) Corporate applicants and licensees. A corporate applicant, at the time of application, shall
furnish the city with a list of all persons that have an interest in the corporation and the extent of the
interest. The list shall name all shareholders and show the number of shares held by each, either
individually or beneficially for others. It is the duty of each corporate licensee to notify the City
Administrator of any change in legal ownership or beneficial interest in the corporation or in the shares.
Any change in the ownership or beneficial interest in the shares entitled to be voted at a meeting of the
shareholders of a corporate licensee, which results in the change of voting control of the corporation by
the persons owning the shares therein, shall be deemed equivalent to a transfer of the license issued to
the corporation, and any such license shall be revoked 30 days after any such change in ownership or
beneficial interest of shares unless the Council has been notified of the changes in writing and has
approved it by appropriate action. The Council, or any officer of the city designated by it, may at any
reasonable time examine the stock transfer records and minute books of any corporate licensee in order
to verify and identify the shareholders, and the Council or its designated officer may examine the
business records of any other licensee to the extent necessary to disclose the interest which persons other
than the licensee have in the licensed business. The Council may revoke any license issued upon its
determination that a change of ownership of shares in a corporate licensee or any change of ownership
of any interest in the business of any other licensee has actually resulted in the change of control of the
licensed business so as materially to affect the integrity and character of its management and its
operation, but no action shall be taken until after a hearing by the Council on notice to the licensee.
2010 S-1
64 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
(E) Duplicate licenses. Duplicates of all original licenses under this chapter may be issued by the
City Administrator, without action by the Council, upon licensee’s affidavit that the original has been
lost, and upon payment of a fee in an amount set by City Council for issuance of the duplicate. All
duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked DUPLICATE.
(F) Posting. All licensees shall conspicuously post their licenses in their places of business.
(G) Designated agent. The manager or other designated individual shall, by the terms of his or her
written consent take full responsibility for the conduct of the licensed premises; and serve as designated
agent for service of process relating to the license. The appointed individual must be a person who, by
reason of age, character, reputation and other attributes, could qualify individually as a licensee. If the
appointed designated agent ceases to act in such capacity for the licensee without appointment of a
successor, the license issued pursuant to the appointment shall be subject to revocation or suspension.
(H) Persons disqualified.
(1) No license under this chapter may be issued or renewed to:
(a) A person who within 5 years of the license application has been convicted of any felony
or a willful violation of a federal or state law, or local ordinance governing the manufacture, sale,
distribution, or possession for sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages;
(b) A person who has had an alcoholic beverage license revoked within 5 years of the
license application, or to any person who at the time of the violation owns any interest, whether as a
holder of more than 5% of the capital stock of a corporate licensee, as a partner or otherwise, in the
premises or in the business conducted thereon, or to a corporation, partnership, association, enterprise,
business, or firm in which any such person is in any manner interested; or
(c) A person under the age of 21 years; or
(d) A person not of good moral character and repute.
(2) No person holding a license from the Commissioner as a manufacturer, brewer or
wholesaler may have any ownership, in whole or in part, in a business holding an alcoholic beverage
license from the city.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004; Am. Ord. 308, 3rd Series, passed 3-3-2009) Penalty, see
§ 117.99
2010 S-1
Alcoholic Beverages 65
§ 117.03 LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.
(A) Renewal of licenses. Applications for renewal of all licenses under this chapter shall be made
at least 45 days prior to the date of expiration of the license and shall contain such information as is
required by the city. This time requirement may be waived by the Council for good and sufficient cause.
(B) Delinquent taxes and charges. No license under this chapter shall be granted for operation on
any premises upon which taxes, assessments, or installments thereof, or other financial claims of the city
are owed by the applicant and are delinquent and unpaid. For the purpose of this section APPLICANT
includes persons, and related persons:
(1) Owning at least a 50% beneficial interest in the proposed license or in the entity making
the application; and
(2) At least an undivided 1/2 interest in the premises proposed to be licensed or at least a 50%
beneficial interest in the entity owning the premises.
(C) Limitation on ownership. No person shall be granted intoxicating liquor, 3.2% malt liquor or
wine licenses at more than 1 location, with the exception that a person may be granted up to 2 on-sale
liquor licenses for 2 separate locations. For the purpose of this division, any person owning an interest
of 10%, or more, of the entity to which the license is issued, or such ownership by a member of his or
her immediate family, shall be deemed to be a licensee.
(D) Conditional licenses. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Council may,
upon a finding of the necessity therefor, place special conditions and restrictions, in addition to those
stated in this chapter, upon any license as it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and justified.
(E) Premises licensed. A license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid only for
the premises described in the license, and all transactions relating to a sale under the license must take
place within the space or structure.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 117.04 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
(A) Consumption. It is unlawful for any person to consume, or any licensee to permit consumption
of, alcoholic beverages on licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the hour when a sale thereof
can legally be made.
(B) Removal of containers. It is unlawful for any on sale licensee to permit any glass, bottle or other
container, containing alcoholic beverages in any quantity, to remain upon any table, bar, stool or other
place where customers are served more than 30 minutes after the hour when a sale thereof can legally
be made.
2010 S-1
66 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
(C) Closing. It is unlawful for any person, other than an on-sale licensee’s bona fide employee
actually engaged in the performance of his or her duties, to be on premises licensed under this chapter
more than 30 minutes after the legal time for making licensed sales; provided, however, that this division
shall not apply to licensees, employees of licensees and patrons on licensed premises for the sole purpose
of preparing, serving or consuming food or beverages other than alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004) Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.05 CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES.
Except as herein provided, every licensee under this chapter shall be responsible for the conduct of
his or her place of business and shall maintain conditions of sobriety and order therein.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 117.06 SALE BY EMPLOYEE.
(A) Any sale of an alcoholic beverage in or from any premises licensed under this chapter by any
employee authorized to make the sale in or from the place is the act of the employer as well as of the
person actually making the sale; and every employer is liable to all of the penalties, except criminal
penalties, provided by law for the sale, equally with the person actually making the sale.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004)
(B) A police officer may charge any licensee's employee who makes an illegal sale of an alcoholic
beverage with a crime, and/or in the charging police officer's discretion may levy a civil monetary
penalty against the offending employee according to the following schedule:
(1) First offense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $75
(2) Second offense within a 12-month period. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $150
(3) Third offense within a 12-month period. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $300
(4) Every subsequent offense within a 12-month period. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $300
§ 117.07 LICENSE CONDITION AND UNLAWFUL ACT.
(A) All premises licensed under this chapter shall at all times be open to inspection by any police
officer to determine whether or not this chapter and all other laws are being observed. All persons, as
a condition to being issued the license, consent to the inspection by the officers and without a warrant
for searches or seizures.
2010 S-1
Alcoholic Beverages 67
(B) It is unlawful for any licensee, or agent or employee of a licensee, to hinder or prevent a police
officer from making the inspection.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004) Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.08 INSURANCE CERTIFICATE REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Whenever an insurance certificate is required by this chapter the applicant shall file with the
City Administrator a certificate of insurance showing:
(1) That the limits are at least as high as required;
(2) That coverage is effective for at least the license term approved; and
(3) That the insurance will not be cancelled or terminated without 30-days’ written notice
served upon the City Administrator.
(B) Cancellation or termination of the coverage shall be grounds for license revocation.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 117.09 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEES.
(A) Proof. No 3.2% malt liquor, wine or intoxicating liquor license shall be issued or renewed
unless and until the applicant has provided proof of financial responsibility imposed by Minnesota
Statutes, by filing with the city:
(1) A certificate that there is in effect an insurance policy or pool providing minimum coverage
of:
(a) Fifty thousand dollars because of bodily injury to any 1 person in any 1 occurrence,
and, subject to the limit for 1 person, in the amount of $100,000 because of bodily injury to 2 or more
persons in any 1 occurrence, and in the amount of $10,000 because of injury to or destruction of
property of others in any occurrence; and
(b) Fifty thousand dollars for loss of means of support of any 1 person in any 1
occurrence, and, subject to the limit for 1 person, $100,000 for loss of means of support of 2 or more
persons in any 1 occurrence; an annual aggregate of $300,000 may be included in the insurance
coverage; or
(2) A bond of a surety company with minimum coverage as provided in subsection (1) above;
or
2010 S-1
68 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
(3) A certificate of the State Treasurer that the licensee has deposited with him or her $100,000
in cash or securities which may legally be purchased by savings banks or for trust funds having a market
value of $100,000.
(B) Exception. This section does not apply to on-sale 3.2% malt liquor licensees with sales of
3.2% malt liquor of less than $25,000 for the preceding year, nor to off-sale 3.2% malt liquor licensees
with sales of 3.2% malt liquor of less than $50,000 for the preceding year, nor does it apply to holders
of on-sale wine licenses with sales of wine of less than $25,000 for the preceding year. An affidavit of
the licensee shall be required to establish the exemption under this division.
(C) Documents submitted to Commissioner. All proofs of financial responsibility and exemption
affidavits filed with the city under this section shall be submitted by the city to the Minnesota
Commissioner of Public Safety.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 117.10 GAMBLING PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any licensee to keep, possess, or operate, or permit the keeping, possession, or
operation on licensed premises of dice or any other gambling device, or permit raffles to be conducted,
except as are licensed by the Charitable Gambling Control Board and then only except as it complies
with the established policy of the city, statute or the City Code.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004) Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.11 UNLAWFUL ACTS OF MINORS.
(A) Consumption. It is unlawful for any:
(1) Licensee to permit any minor to consume alcoholic beverages on licensed premises;
(2) Minor to consume alcoholic beverages except in the household of the minor’s parent or
guardian and then only with the consent of the parent or guardian.
(B) Purchasing. It is unlawful for any person:
(1) To sell, barter, furnish, or give alcoholic beverages to a minor unless the person is the
parent or guardian of the minor and then only for consumption in the household of the parent or
guardian;
(2) Minor to purchase or attempt to purchase any alcoholic beverage;
2010 S-1
Alcoholic Beverages 69
(3) To induce a minor to purchase or procure any alcoholic beverage.
(C) Possession. It is unlawful for a minor to possess any alcoholic beverage with the intent to
consume it at a place other than the household of the minor’s parent or guardian. Possession of an
alcoholic beverage by a minor at a place other than the household of the parent or guardian is prima facie
evidence of intent to consume it at a place other than the household of his or her parent or guardian.
(D) Entering licensed premises.
(1) It is unlawful for any minor, as defined in this chapter, to enter licensed premises for the
purpose of purchasing or consuming any alcoholic beverage. It is not unlawful for any person who has
attained the age of 18 years to enter licensed premises for the following purposes:
(a) To perform work for the establishment, including the serving of alcoholic beverages,
unless otherwise prohibited by statute;
(b) To consume meals; and
(c) To attend social functions that are held in a portion of the establishment where liquor
is not sold.
(2) It is unlawful for a licensee to permit a person under the age of 18 years to enter licensed
premises unless attending a social event at which alcoholic beverages are not served, or in the company
of a parent or guardian.
(E) Misrepresentation of age. It is unlawful for a minor to misrepresent his or her age for the
purpose of purchasing an alcoholic beverage.
(F) Proof of age. Proof of age for purchasing or consuming alcoholic beverages may be established
only by a valid driver’s license or identification card issued by Minnesota, another state, or a province
of Canada, and including the photograph and date of birth of the licensed person; or by a valid military
identification card issued by the United States Department of Defense; or, in the case of a foreign
national, from a nation other than Canada, by a valid passport.
(G) Qualification for license. No minor shall qualify for a license.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004) Penalty, see § 117.99
2010 S-1
70 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
§ 117.12 CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON
STREETS, PUBLIC PROPERTY, AND PRIVATE PARKING LOTS TO WHICH THE
PUBLIC HAS ACCESS.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to consume, or possess in an unsealed container, any alcoholic
beverage, as that term is defined in this chapter, on any:
(1) City park;
(2) Street;
(3) Public property; or
(4) Private parking lot to which the public has access, except on such premises when and where
permission has been specifically granted or licensed by the Council.
(B) Provided, that this section shall not apply to the possession of an unsealed container in a motor
vehicle when the container is kept in the trunk of the vehicle if it is equipped with a trunk, or kept in
some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if the motor vehicle
is not equipped with a trunk.
(C) For the purpose of this section, a utility or glove compartment shall be deemed to be within the
area occupied by the driver or passengers.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004) Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.13 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN CERTAIN BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS.
It is unlawful for any person to introduce upon, or have in his or her possession upon, or in, any
public elementary or secondary school ground, or any public elementary or secondary school building,
any alcoholic beverage, except for experiments in laboratories and except for those organizations who
have been issued temporary licenses to sell alcoholic beverages, and for any person to possess alcoholic
beverages as a result of a purchase from those organizations holding temporary licenses.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004) Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.14 SPORTS OR CONVENTION FACILITIES LICENSE.
The Council may authorize any holder of an on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued by the city
to sell intoxicating liquor at any convention, banquet, conference, meeting or social affair conducted on
the premises of a sports or convention facility owned by the city, or instrumentality thereof having
independent policy-making and appropriating authority and located within the city. The licensee must
2010 S-1
Alcoholic Beverages 71
be engaged to sell intoxicating liquor at such an event by the person or organization permitted to use the
premises and may sell intoxilyzing liquor only to persons attending the event. The licensee shall not sell
intoxilyzing liquor to any person attending or participating in any amateur athletic event. The sales may
be limited to designated areas of the facility. All such sales shall be subject to all laws relating thereto.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 117.15 TEMPORARY INTOXILYZING LIQUOR LICENSE.
(A) License authorized. Notwithstanding any provision of the City Code to the contrary, the
Council may issue a license for the temporary on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social
event sponsored by the licensee. The license may provide that the licensee may contract with the holder
of a full year on-sale license, issued by the city, for intoxicating liquor catering services.
(B) Applicant. The applicant for a license under this section must be a club or charitable, religious,
or other non-profit organization in existence for at least 3 years.
(C) Terms and conditions of license.
(1) No license is valid until approved by the Commissioner.
(2) No license shall be issued for more than 3 consecutive days.
(3) All licenses and licensees are subject to all provisions of statutes and the City Code relating
to intoxicating liquor sale and licensing except those relating to financial responsibility and insurance,
and except those which by their nature are not applicable.
(4) Licenses may authorize sales on-premises other than those owned or permanently occupied
by the licensee.
(5) Not more than 3 temporary licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages may be issued to
any 1 organization or for any 1 location within a 12-month period.
(D) Insurance required. The Council may, but at no time shall it be under any obligation
whatsoever to, grant a temporary liquor license on premises owned or controlled by the city. Any such
license may be conditioned, qualified or restricted as the Council sees fit. If the premises to be licensed
are owned or under the control of the city, the applicant shall file with the city, prior to issuance of the
license, a certificate of liability insurance coverage in at least the sum of $50,000 for injury to any 1
person, $100,000 for injury to more than 1 person, and $10,000 for property damage, naming the city
as an insured during the license period.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004)
2010 S-1
72 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
§ 117.16 CONSUMPTION AND DISPLAY.
(A) Generally.
(1) State permit required. It is unlawful for any person or business establishment, directly or
indirectly, or upon any pretense or by any device, to allow the consumption or display of intoxicating
liquor or the serving of any liquid for the purpose of mixing of intoxicating liquor without first having
obtained a permit therefor from the state. The state permit shall expire on March 31 of each year.
(2) Special conditions. The following special conditions, limitations, and restrictions shall
apply to and shall be met prior to the city’s approving the issuance by the state of a permit hereunder.
(a) The premises wherein the permit is used shall have a minimum seating capacity for 600
people; and
(b) The premises shall have a restaurant serving steak, seafood or similarly menued items
and having a seating capacity for at least 150 or more people.
(3) Right to charge for ‘mixes’ brought onto premises. Any person, firm or corporation meeting
the requirements and criteria as set forth herein shall be allowed to sell and serve soft drinks, mixes and
ice, or otherwise charge patrons for the bringing of soft drinks, mixes and ice onto the premises.
(4) Fee. In addition to the state permit fee, the annual license fee payable to the city is $300
in accordance with M.S. § 340A.414, as it may be amended from time to time.
(5) Hours and days. It is unlawful to consume or allow consumption or display of liquor in
any bottle club or business establishment between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday
through Saturday, nor between 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday.
(Am. Ord. 287, 3 Series, passed 8- rd 16-2005; Am. Ord. 297, 3rd Series, passed 1-2-2007)
(B) One-day license.
(1) License required. Any non-profit organization desiring to serve liquids for the purpose of
mixing with liquor and permitting the consumption and display of liquor in conjunction with a social
activity sponsored by it shall first obtain a license therefor from the city. It is unlawful for any such
organization to fail to obtain the license.
(2) Term. The term of the license shall be 1 day only.
(3) Limitation on number. No more than 10 licenses shall be issued in any calendar year.
2010 S-1
Alcoholic Beverages 73
(4) License fee. The fee for such 1-day license is $25 in accordance with M.S. § 340A.414,
as it may be amended from time to time.
(5) Approval. In addition to Council approval, the license must be approved by the
Commissioner of Public Safety.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 117.17 NUDITY OR OBSCENITY PROHIBITED.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
NUDITY. Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal human genitals, pubic
areas, the post-pubertal human breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or the
covered human male genital in a discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this definition, a female breast
is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the areola only are covered.
(B) Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any licensee issued a license provided for in this chapter to
permit upon licensed premises any nudity or deviate sexual conduct by any agent, employee, patron or
other person.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004) Penalty, see § 117.99
3.2% MALT LIQUOR LICENSE
§ 117.30 LICENSE REQUIRED.
It is unlawful for any person to sell, or keep or offer for sale, any 3.2% malt liquor without a license
therefor from the city. This subchapter shall not apply to sales by manufacturers to wholesalers or to
sales by wholesalers to persons holding on sale or off-sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses from the city.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004) Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.31 LICENSE FEES.
(A) The annual on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license fee is $275.
2010 S-1
74 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
(B) The annual off-sale 3.2% malt liquor license fee is $137.50.
(C) The daily temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license fee is $25 per day.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 117.32 TEMPORARY 3.2% MALT LIQUOR LICENSE.
(A) Applicant. A club or charitable, religious, or non-profit organization, duly incorporated as a
non-profit or religious corporation under the laws of the state, and having its registered office and
principal place of activity within the city shall qualify for a temporary on-sale malt liquor license for
serving 3.2% malt liquor on and off school grounds and in and out of school buildings.
(B) Conditions.
(1) An application for a temporary license shall state the exact dates and place of proposed
temporary sale.
(2) Not more than 3 temporary licenses shall be issued to any 1 organization or for any 1
location in a 12-month period, nor shall the licenses for any organization total more than 7 days in any
calendar year.
(3) The Council may, but at no time shall it be under any obligation whatsoever to, grant a
temporary 3.2% malt liquor license on premises owned or controlled by the city. Any such license may
be conditioned, qualified or restricted as the Council sees fit. If the premises to be licensed are owned
or under the control of the city, the applicant shall file with the city, prior to issuance of the license, a
certificate of liability insurance coverage in at least the sum of $10,000 for injury to any 1 person and
$20,000 for injury to more than 1 person, naming the city as an insured during the license period.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 117.33 RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.
(A) No licensee shall, during the effective period of the license, be the owner or holder of a federal
retail liquor dealer’s tax stamp for the sale of intoxicating liquor, unless the owner or holder also holds
a liquor license from the city and ownership or holding thereof shall be grounds for immediate revocation
without a hearing.
(B) No license shall be granted to a wholesaler or manufacturer of malt liquor or to anyone holding
a financial interest in such manufacture or wholesaling, unless otherwise authorized by Minnesota law.
(C) No person under 18 years of age may sell or serve alcoholic beverages on licensed premises.
2010 S-1
Alcoholic Beverages 75
(D) On-sale licenses shall be granted only to bona fide clubs, exclusive liquor stores, drug stores,
restaurants, bowling centers and hotels.
(E) Every license shall be granted subject to the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable
provisions of the City Code and other laws relating to the operation of the licensee’s business.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 117.34 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALES.
No sale of 3.2% malt liquor shall be made between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days
of Monday through Saturday, nor between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sunday.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004; Am. Ord. 287, 3rd Series, passed 8-16-2005; Am. Ord. 297,
3rd Series, passed 2-2-2007)
§ 117.35 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
It is unlawful for any:
(A) Person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal sale or purchase of 3.2% malt liquor;
(B) Licensee to sell or serve 3.2% malt liquor to any person who is obviously intoxicated;
(C) Licensee to sell a 3.2% malt liquor any day, or during any hour, when such sales are not
permitted by law;
(D) Licensee to allow consumption of a 3.2% malt liquor on licensed premises on any day when
sales are not permitted by law;
(E) Person to purchase a 3.2% malt liquor on any day, or during any hour, when sales of alcoholic
beverages are not permitted by law.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004) Penalty, see § 117.99
INTOXICATING LIQUOR
§ 117.45 LICENSE REQUIRED.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to sell, or keep or offer for sale, any intoxicating liquor without
a license therefor from the city.
2010 S-1
76 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
(B) This subchapter shall not apply:
(1) To possession or handling for sale or otherwise of sacramental wine or any representative
of any religious order or for use in connection with a legitimate religious ceremony;
(2) To such potable liquors as are prescribed by licensed physicians and dentists for therapeutic
purposes;
(3) To industrial alcohol and its compounds not prepared or used for beverage purposes;
(4) To wine in the possession of a person duly licensed under this chapter as an on-sale wine
licensee; or
(5) To sales by manufacturers to wholesalers duly licensed as such by the state and to sales by
wholesalers to persons holding on sale or off sale licenses from the city.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004) Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.46 LICENSE FEES.
(A) The annual on-sale intoxicating liquor license fee is $3,800.
(B) The annual off-sale intoxicating liquor license fee is $150.
(C) The annual Sunday intoxicating liquor license fee is $200.
(D) The annual fraternal club on-sale liquor license fee is $300 for a club with a membership of 200
or less; $500 for a club with a membership of between 201 and 500; $650 for a club with a membership
of between 501 and 1,000; $800 for a club with a membership of between 1,001 and 2,000; $1,000 for
a club with a membership of between 2,001 and 4,000; $2,000 for a club with a membership of between
4,001 and 6,000; and $3,000 for a club with a membership of more than 6,000.
(E) The daily sports or convention facilities intoxicating liquor license fee is $75.
(F) The temporary intoxicating liquor license fee is $100 per day.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 117.47 RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.
(A) No license shall be granted to a wholesaler or manufacturer of liquor, or to anyone holding a
financial interest in manufacture or wholesaling, unless otherwise permitted by Minnesota law.
2010 S-1
Alcoholic Beverages 77
(B) No license shall be effective until a permit shall be issued to a licensee under the laws of the
United States, if the permit be required under the laws or the state.
(C) Every license shall be granted subject to the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable
provisions of the City Code and other laws relating to the operation of the licensed business.
(D) No person under 18 years of age may sell or serve liquor on licensed premises.
(E) No licensee shall sell, offer for sale, or keep for sale liquor in any original package which has
been refilled or partly refilled.
(F) No licensee shall display intoxicating liquor to the public during hours when the sale of liquor
is prohibited.
(G) On-sale licenses shall be granted only to exclusive liquor stores, hotels, restaurants, bowling
centers and bona fide clubs.
(H) It is lawful for an off-sale licensee to provide samples of wine, liqueurs, and cordials which the
licensee currently has in stock and is offering for sale to the general public without obtaining an
additional license, provided the wine, liqueur, and cordial samples are dispensed at no charge and
consumed on the licensed premises during the permitted hours of off-sale in a quantity less than 50
milliliters of wine per variety per customer and 25 milliliters of liqueur or cordial per variety per
customer.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 117.48 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALES.
No sale of an intoxicating liquor may be made between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the
days of Monday through Saturday, nor between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sunday, nor
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. on December 24 and 8:00 a.m. on December 25. No off-sale shall be
made on Sundays, nor before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday, nor on
Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day, December 25. (Note: this section does not prohibit sales during
hours when on-sale is permitted on Sunday as stated in § 117.49.)
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004; Am. Ord. 287, 3rd Series, passed 8-16-2005; Am. Ord. 297,
3rd Series, passed 1-2-2007)
§ 117.49 SUNDAY SALES.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, a Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor license may
be issued to hotels, motels, restaurants, bowling centers, or clubs, as herein defined, which have been
2010 S-1
78 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
issued on-sale licenses and which also have a seating capacity and facilities for serving not less than 30
persons at 1 time. Such establishments may sell intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises in
conjunction with the sale and serving of food between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on Sundays and 2:00 a.m.
on Mondays.
(Ord. 278, 3 Series, passed 2-17-2004; Am. O rd rd. 287, 3rd Series, passed 8-16-2005; Am. Ord. 297,
3rd Series, passed 1-2-2007)
§ 117.50 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
It is unlawful for any:
(A) Person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal sale or purchase of intoxicating liquor;
(B) Licensee to sell an alcoholic beverage on any day, or during any hour, when sales of liquor are
not permitted by law;
(C) Person to purchase liquor on any day, or during any hour, when sales of liquor are not
permitted by law;
(D) Licensee to sell or serve intoxicating liquor to any person who is obviously intoxicated.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004) Penalty, see § 117.99
ON-SALE WINE
§ 117.65 ON-SALE WINE.
(A) On-sale wine license required. It is unlawful for any person to sell, or keep or offer for sale,
any wine without a license therefor from the city. This subchapter shall not apply:
(1) To possession or handling for sale or otherwise of sacramental wine or any representative
of any religious order or for use in connection with a legitimate religious ceremony;
(2) To sales by manufacturers to wholesalers duly licensed as such by the state;
(3) To sales by wholesalers to persons holding on-sale or off-sale liquor licenses from the city;
or
2010 S-1
Alcoholic Beverages 79
(4) To sales by wholesalers to persons holding on-sale wine licenses from the city.
(B) On-sale wine license fee. The annual on sale wine license fee is $550.
(C) On-sale wine license restrictions and regulations.
(1) No license shall be granted to a wholesaler or manufacturer of wine, or to anyone holding
a financial interest in such manufacture or wholesaling, unless otherwise authorized by Minnesota law.
(2) No license shall be effective until a permit shall be issued to a licensee under the laws of
the United States, if the permit be required under the laws or the state.
(3) Every license shall be granted subject to the provisions of this chapter and all other
applicable provisions of the City Code and other laws relating to the operation of the licensed business.
(4) No person under 18 years of age may sell or serve wine on licensed premises.
(5) No licensee shall display wine to the public on days or during hours when the sale of wine
is prohibited.
(6) On-sale wine licenses may be granted only to restaurants as defined in this chapter;
provided, however, for purposes of this subchapter, the restaurant shall have appropriate facilities for
seating not less than 30 guests at 1 time.
(7) The city may authorize a holder of an on-sale wine license who also is licensed to sell 3.2%
malt liquor at on-sale and whose gross receipts are at least 60% attributable to the sale of food to sell
intoxicating malt liquor at on-sale without an additional licenses.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004) Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.66 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALES BY ON-SALE WINE LICENSES.
No sale of wine shall be made between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through
Saturday, nor between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday, nor between the hours of 8:00
p.m. on December 24 and 8:00 a.m. on December 25.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004; Am. Ord. 287, 3rd Series, passed 8-16-2005; Am. Ord. 297,
3rd Series, passed 1-2-2007)
2010 S-1
80 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
§ 117.67 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
It is unlawful for any:
(A) Person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal sale or purchase of wine;
(B) Licensee to sell wine on any day, or during any hour, when sales of wine are not permitted by
law;
(C) Person to purchase wine on any day, or during any hour, when sales of wine are not permitted
by law;
(D) Licensee to sell or serve wine to any person who is obviously intoxicated;
(E) Licensee to sell wine except in conjunction with the sale of food.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004) Penalty, see § 117.99
MANDATORY ALCOHOL SERVER TRAINING
§ 117.80 EMPLOYEE REQUIREMENTS; ALCOHOL SERVER TRAINING REQUIRED;
RENEWAL; GRANDFATHER CLAUSE.
(A) No person shall work in any premise licensed under this chapter for the sale of alcoholic
beverages, whether on or off-sale, as a manager, bartender, waiter, waitress, or in any other capacity
where such person may sell, serve or deliver alcoholic beverages in or from premises licensed under this
chapter or whose job description entails the checking of identification for the purchase of alcoholic
beverages or admittance into the licensed premise unless such person shall either:
(1) Possess a certificate of training issued by the East Grand Forks Police Department; or
(2) Successfully complete server training presented by the East Grand Forks Police Department
or a trainer approved by the East Grand Forks Police Department and obtain a certificate of training
within 45 days after the first day of active employment.
(B) All certificates of training issued under this chapter shall be valid for 3 years from the date of
issuance. The certificate of training may be renewed by its holder prior to its expiration as provided
herein.
2010 S-1
Alcoholic Beverages 81
(C) Persons having completed an alcohol serving training program sponsored by the East Grand
Forks Police Department prior to December 31, 2005 shall be exempt from certification requirements
hereunder provided, however, that such persons shall renew such training and certification no later than
December 31, 2008 and every 3 years thereafter.
(Ord. 291, 3rd Series, passed 6-20-2006)
§ 117.81 EMPLOYER REQUIREMENTS; HIRING OF CERTIFIED EMPLOYEES;
RECORD KEEPING.
(A) All persons licensed under this chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages, whether on or
off-sale, shall require all employees engaged in the sale, service, delivery, or management of the sale
or service of alcoholic beverages, or the checking of identification for the purchase of alcoholic
beverages or admittance into the licensed premise to possess or timely obtain certification required
hereunder.
(B) Each licensee under this chapter shall maintain on file at its licensed premises a listing of each
person employed by the licensee, identifying all employees required to obtain training under this chapter,
and those employees that have successfully completed the training required hereunder.
(Ord. 291, 3rd Series, passed 6-20-2006)
§ 117.82 APPLICATION.
Application for certificate of server training shall be submitted to the East Grand Forks or Grand
Forks Police Department upon forms provided by the Police Department and such application shall be
verified under oath and shall contain such information as determined to be reasonably required for the
purposes of determining competency and eligibility.
(Ord. 291, 3rd Series, passed 6-20-2006)
§ 117.83 TRAINING PROGRAMS; TESTS.
(A) All training programs and instructors must be approved by the East Grand Forks Police
Department.
(B) All training programs shall minimally include the following topics:
(1) Laws and ordinances regarding the sale of alcohol;
(2) Verification of age, forms of false or misleading age identification;
2010 S-1
82 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
(3) The effect of alcohol in humans and the physiology of alcohol intoxication;
(4) Recognition of the signs of intoxication;
(5) Strategies for intervention to prevent intoxicated persons from consuming further alcohol;
(6) Alcoholic beverage laws such as prohibition of sale to minors and sale to intoxicated
persons, sale for on-premise or off-premise consumption, hours of operation and penalties for violation
of alcoholic beverage laws;
(7) Driving under the influence laws.
(C) The East Grand Forks Police Department or an approved trainer shall establish and administer
a test for those persons completing the training program and for those seeking to renew a certificate of
training.
(D) Any person having completed the approved training must attain a minimum score of 75% on
a test administered by or under the direction of the East Grand Forks Police Department in order to
successfully complete the training and obtain or renew a certificate.
(Ord. 291, 3rd Series, passed 6-20-2006)
§ 117.84 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES.
(A) Each person successfully completing the training and test will be issued a certificate establishing
the date of successful completion of training.
(B) Each certificate shall expire three years from the date of issuance.
(Ord. 291, 3rd Series, passed 6-20-2006)
§ 117.85 FEES.
Each applicant for training provided by the East Grand Forks Police Department or approved trainer
shall pay, in advance, all fees established by the Police Department for the provision of training and
issuance of a certificate upon successful completion.
(Ord. 291, 3rd Series, passed 6-20-2006)
2010 S-1
Alcoholic Beverages 83
§ 117.98 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
(A) Administrative offense defined. An administrative offense is any 1 of the offenses listed and
identified in division (I) of this section.
(B) Event defined. An EVENT is a determination that a licensee has committed an administrative
offense. A licensee can never be found to have committed more than 1 event per business day, regardless
of the number of administrative offenses committed. However, the number of administrative offenses
committed within an event may be taken into consideration when determining the appropriate penalty.
(C) Administrative penalties for non-compliance. For any license granted under the provisions of
this chapter, the City Council may suspend such a license for up to 60 days, may revoke such a license,
and/or may impose on a licensee a civil fine not to exceed $2,000 for each event on a finding that the
licensee or its employee has failed to comply with a statute, regulation, or provision of the City Code
relating to alcoholic beverages.
(D) Notice. Any officer of the Police Department or any other person authorized to enforce this
code, upon making a determination that an event has occurred, shall so notify the offender. The notice
shall set forth the nature, date and time of offense, and the amount of the scheduled penalty.
(E) Payment of civil monetary penalty without suspension or revocation. Once such notice is given,
the alleged offender may, within 7 days of the time of issuance of the notice, pay the amount set forth
in the notice or may request in writing a hearing, as provided for in division (F) of this section. The
penalty may be paid in person or by mail, and payment shall be deemed to be an admission of the
offense.
(F) Hearing prior to imposition of civil monetary penalty. Any person contesting the determination
of an event pursuant to this section may, within 7 days of the time of issuance of the notice, request in
writing a hearing by the Public Safety Committee which shall forthwith conduct an informal hearing to
determine if a violation has occurred. The Public Safety Committee shall have authority to dismiss the
violation or reduce or waive the penalty. If the violation is sustained by the Public Safety Committee,
the violator shall pay the penalty imposed.
(G) Failure to pay.
(1) In the event a party charged with an event fails to pay the penalty, a misdemeanor or petty
misdemeanor charge may be brought against the alleged violator in accordance with applicable statutes.
If the penalty is paid or if an individual is found not to have committed the event by the Public Safety
Committee, no such charge may be brought by the city for the same violation.
2010 S-1
84 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
(2) In the event a party participates in the administrative offense procedures but does not pay
the monetary penalty which may be imposed, the city may seek to collect the costs of the administrative
offense procedures as part of the subsequent criminal sentence in the event the party is charged and is
convicted guilty of the criminal violation.
(H) Disposition of penalties. All penalties collected pursuant to this section shall be paid to the
Clerk-Treasurer.
(I) Minimum penalty. In no event shall a penalty be less than the following:
Administrative Offense
Events Within a 12-Month Period
1st Event 2nd Event 3rd Event 4th Event
1. Commission of a felony related to the
licensed activity
Revocation NA NA NA
2. Sale of alcoholic beverages while license is
under suspension.
Revocation NA NA NA
3. Sale/purchase of alcoholic beverages to/by
under age person
$250 $500 and 3-day
suspension
$750 and 18-day
suspension
Revocation
4. Sale of alcoholic beverages to obviously
intoxicated person
$250 $500 and 3-day
suspension
$750 and 18-day
suspension
Revocation
5. After hours sale of alcoholic beverages $250 $500 and 3-day
suspension
$750 and 18-day
suspension
Revocation
6. After hours display or consumption of
alcoholic beverages
$250 $500 and 3-day
suspension
$750 and 18-day
suspension
Revocation
7. Refusal to allow city inspectors or police
admission to inspect premises
$250 $500 and 3-day
suspension
Revocation NA
8. Illegal gambling on premises $250 $500 and 3-day
suspension
$750 and 18-day
suspension
Revocation
9. Failure to take reasonable steps to stop
person from leaving premises with
alcoholic beverages
$250 $500 and 3-day
suspension
$750 and 18-day
suspension
Revocation
Note: A day shall be defined as a business day.
(J) Hearing prior to suspension or revocation. No suspension or revocation shall take effect until
the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the Council, a committee of the
Council, or a hearing under the Administrative Procedures Act, as may be determined by the Council
2010 S-1
Alcoholic Beverages 85
in action calling the hearing. Such hearing shall be called by the Council upon written notice to the
licensee served in person or by certified mail not less than 15 nor more than 30 days prior to the hearing
date, stating the time, place and purpose thereof.
(1981 Code, § 3.02)
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
(A) Every person violates a section, division, subsection or provision of this chapter when he or she
performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is thereby
prohibited or declared unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
(Ord. 278, 3rd Series, passed 2-17-2004)
(B) (1) Any person violating the provisions of § 117.80 shall be subject to a fine as follows:
(a) A fine not exceeding $50 for a first violation;
(b) A fine not exceeding $100 for a second violation within 1 year of the first violation;
(c) A fine not exceeding $200 for each violation within 1 year of the second violation.
(2) Any person violating the provisions of § 117.91 shall be subject to a fine not exceeding
$500 for each violation.
(Ord. 291, 3rd Series, passed 6-20-2006)
2010 S-1
86 East Grand Forks - Business Regulations
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
130. GENERAL OFFENSES
131. DRUG-RELATED OFFENSES
132. DANGEROUS WEAPONS
1
2 East Grand Forks - General Offenses
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
130.01 Disorderly conduct
130.02 Curfew
130.03 Noisy parties
130.04 Roller blades, roller skates, and skateboards
130.05 Open pits, basements and other excavations
130.06 Household furnishings and appliances stored on private property
130.07 Anti-scavenging
130.99 Penalty
§ 130.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
It is unlawful for any person, in a public or private place, knowing, or having reasonable grounds
to know, that it will, or will tend to, alarm, anger or disturb others or provoke any assault or breach of
the peace, to do the following:
(A) Engage in brawling or fighting; or
(B) Disturb an assembly or meeting, not unlawful in its character; or
(C) Engage in offensive, obscene or abusive language or in boisterous and noisy conduct inherently
likely to provoke a violent reaction or tending to incite an immediate breach of the peace; or
(D) Willfully and lewdly expose his or her person or the private parts thereof or procure another
to so expose himself or herself; and any open or gross lewdness or lascivious behavior, or any act of
public indecency; or
(E) Whether or not posted with signs so prohibiting, voluntarily enter the water of any river or
public swimming pool at any time when the waters are not properly supervised by trained life saving
personnel in attendance for that purpose or enter the waters without being garbed in a bathing suit
sufficient to cover his or her person and equal to the standards generally adopted and accepted by the
public; or
3
2010 S-1 Repl.
4 East Grand Forks - General Offenses
(F) Urinate or defecate in a place other than:
(1) If on public property then in a plumbing fixture provided for that purpose; or
(2) If on the private property of another then in a plumbing fixture provided for that purpose;
or
(3) If on private property not owned or controlled by another, then within a building; or
(G) Cause the making or production of an unnecessary noise by shouting or by any other means or
mechanism, including the blowing of an automobile or other vehicle horn; or
(H) Use a sound amplifier upon streets and public property without prior written permission from
the city; or
(I) Use a flash or spotlight in a manner so as to annoy or endanger others; or
(J) Cause defacement, destruction or otherwise damage to any premises or any property located
thereon; or
(K) Strew, scatter, litter, throw, dispose of or deposit any refuse, garbage, or rubbish onto any
premises except into receptacles provided for such purpose; or
(L) Enter any motor vehicle of another without the consent of the owner or operator; or
(M) Fail or refuse to vacate or leave any premises after being requested or ordered, whether orally
or in writing, to do so, by the owner, or person in charge thereof or by any law enforcement agent or
official; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any person who is owner or tenant of
the premises involved nor to any law enforcement or other government official who may be present
thereon at that time as part of his or her official duty, nor shall it include the wife, children, employee
or tenant of such owner or occupier.
(1981 Code, § 9.27) (Ord. 9, 3 Series, eff. 6 rd -6-1981; Am. Ord. 161, 3rd Series, eff. 12-24-1993)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.02 CURFEW.
(A) Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is maintained for 4 primary reasons:
(1) To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed during the curfew hours;
(2) To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the curfew hours, including
involvement with gangs;
General Offenses 5
(3) To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the curfew hours; and
(4) To help parents control their minor children.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens the health, safety,
or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor's household. The term shall include, but shall not
be limited to, seeking urgent medical treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or fire
department personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a utility company
due to a natural or human-made calamity.
OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to the master clock used
by the Police Department.
PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT. Those places that
include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping malls, nightclubs catering to
minors, restaurants, and pool halls.
PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for providing
food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the minor. The person providing primary care or
custody to the minor shall not be another minor.
SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by public or
parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
(C) Hours.
(1) Minors under the age of 16 years. No minor under the age of 16 years shall be in or upon
the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings;
nor in or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot,
between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official city time.
(2) Minors ages 16 years to 18 years. No minor of the ages of 16 or 17 years shall be in or
upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public
buildings; nor in or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant
lot, between the hours of 12 midnight and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official city time.
(D) Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
give a minor the right to stay out until the curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed
by a parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor; nor shall
this section be construed to diminish or impair the control of the adult person having the primary care
or custody of the minor.
6 East Grand Forks - General Offenses
(E) Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the following situations:
(1) To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor;
(2) To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of his or her parent, guardian,
or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;
(3) To a minor who is in any of the places described in this section if in connection with or as
required by an employer engaged in a lawful business, trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor
traveling directly to or from the location of the business trade, profession, or occupation and the minor's
residence. Minors who fall within the scope of this exception shall carry written proof of employment
and proof of the hours the employer requires the minor's presence at work.
(4) To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from an event which has been
officially designated as a school activity by public or parochial school authorities; or who is participating
in or traveling directly to or from an official activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a
civic organization, school, religious institution, or similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor
and with the permission of the minor's parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care
and custody of the minor.
(5) To a minor who is passing through the city in the course of interstate travel during the
hours of curfew.
(6) To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the
exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion.
(7) To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence or abutting the residence of a
next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not complain to the city's designated law enforcement provider
about the minor's presence.
(8) To a minor who is married or has been married, or is otherwise legally emancipated.
(F) Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent, guardian, or other adult having the
primary care or custody of any minor shall permit any violation of the requirements of this section by
the minor.
(G) Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of any place of amusement,
entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or remain in his or her place of business
during the hours prohibited by this section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent,
guardian or other adult person having primary care or custody of the minor, or unless 1 of the exceptions
to this section apply.
General Offenses 7
(H) Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the owner, operator, or
employee of an establishment promptly notified the city's designated law enforcement provider that a
minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
Penalty, see § 130.99
(I) Penalty.
(1) Minors. Any minor found to be in violation of this section may be adjudicated delinquent
and shall be subject to the dispositional alternatives set forth in M.S. § 260.185, as it may be amended
from time to time.
(2) Adults. Any adult person found to be in violation of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
§ 130.03 NOISY PARTIES.
(A) It is unlawful for any person or persons to congregate on any private lands because of, or
participate in, any party or gathering of people from which noise emanates of a sufficient volume or of
such nature as to disturb the peace, quiet or repose of other persons. Any owner or tenant of the private
lands who has knowledge of the disturbance and fails to immediately abate the disturbance shall be guilty
of a violation of this section.
(B) It is unlawful for any person or persons to congregate on any private lands of another because
of, or participate in, any party or gathering of people in the absence of the owner of the private lands
being present, without first having obtained written permission from the land owner. The written
permission shall at all times be in the possession of 1 or more persons at the site of the congregation.
The document containing the written permission must bear the signature of the land owner and date of
the permitted use. Failure to display written permission upon request shall be considered prima facie
evidence of an absence of permission from the owner or tenant.
(Ord. 45, 3rd Series, eff. 6-1-1984)
(C) A violation of divisions (A) or (B) of this section shall give a police officer the authority to
order all persons present other than persons identifying themselves as the land owner or owners to
immediately disperse. Any person who shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by the police
officer shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
(Ord. 9, 3rd Series, eff. 6-1-1981)
(1981 Code, § 9.33) Penalty, see § 130.99
8 East Grand Forks - General Offenses
§ 130.04 ROLLER BLADES, ROLLER SKATES, AND SKATEBOARDS.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
OPERATE. To ride on or upon or control the operation of roller blades, roller skates, or a
skateboard.
OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control or roller blades, roller
skates, or a skateboard.
ROLLER BLADES/ROLLER SKATES. A shoe with wheels attached or a device with wheels
which is designed to be attached to a shoe.
SKATEBOARD. A device for riding upon, usually while standing, consisting of an oblong
piece of wood, or of other composition, mounted on skate wheels.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to operate roller blades, roller skates, or a skateboard under the
circumstances set forth hereafter:
(1) On private property of another without the express permission to do so by the owner or
occupant of the property;
(2) In any careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger
the safety of another person or property of any other person.
(C) Any person operating roller blades, roller skates, or a skateboard shall yield the right-of-way
to all pedestrians and all vehicles at all times.
(D) It is unlawful for any person operating roller blades, roller skates, or a skateboard to attach the
same, or the person of the operator, to any vehicle upon the roadway.
(E) Every person operating roller blades, roller skates, or a skateboard upon a roadway shall ride
as close as possible to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(F) It is unlawful for any person to use roller blades, roller skates, or a skateboard upon a public
street, sidewalk, parking lot, or other public roadway between sunset and sunrise, except on private
property with express permission of the owner.
(G) A person apprehended by a police officer in violation of the provisions of this section does by
his or her use of the public sidewalks, streets, and public parking lots consent to the impoundment by
a police officer of the roller blades, roller skates, or skateboard for a period of 3 days upon first offense,
a week upon second offense, and 30 days upon a third or additional offense. Any operator aggrieved
General Offenses 9
by the impoundment of the operator’s roller blades, roller skates, or skateboard may petition the Council
for a hearing thereon at the next regular Council meeting following impoundment. This provision is in
addition to the provisions for fines and penalties as set forth in § 130.99.
(1981 Code, § 9.36) (Ord. 157, 3rd Series, eff. 6-4-1993) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.05 OPEN PITS, BASEMENTS, AND OTHER EXCAVATIONS.
It is unlawful for any person owning or in control of real estate to have any pit, basement, well,
septic tank, cesspool or other excavation on the premises open and without protection for the public.
(A) If the excavation is open for 72 hours or less, it shall be protected by use of flares or lights at
night and a railing or other temporary protection during the day.
(B) If it shall be permanently installed, it shall be protected with a chain link fence at least 48 inches
high, night and day.
(1981 Code, § 9.70) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.06 HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS AND APPLIANCES STORED ON PRIVATE
PROPERTY.
It is unlawful to store any household furnishings or appliances on private property, unless housed
within a lawfully erected building, and any violation is declared to be a nuisance. The city may, where
there is a violation of this section, remove material constituting the offense, dispose of the material, and
certify all costs thereof to the County Auditor to be entered upon the tax records of the offending party
as a special assessment.
(1981 Code, § 9.83) (Ord. 138, 3rd Series, eff. 9-11-1992) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.07 ANTI-SCAVENGING.
Ownership of all trash, garbage, refuse, recyclables and separated materials set out for collection
by the city or its assignees shall be vested in the city. It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation
to pick up the materials for their or its own use, except the owner, lessee or occupant of a residential
dwelling may take back materials set out at that particular dwelling.
(1981 Code, § 9.90) (Ord. 166, 3rd Series, eff. 5-1-1994) Penalty, see § 130.99
2010 S-1 Repl.
10 East Grand Forks - General Offenses
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this code for which another
penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty
which may be imposed for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days or a fine of not
more than $1,000, or both.
(B) Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon
conviction be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense
which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
(C) In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of prosecution may be
added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs
or continues.
(D) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any official duty imposed by this
code shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.
(E) In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or in § 10.98, if any person, firm or
corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code, the Council or any city official designated
by it, may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation.
CHAPTER 131: DRUG-RELATED OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
131.01 Unlawful use and furnishing of tobacco
131.02 Tobacco and minors
Drug Paraphernalia
131.20 Purpose and intent
131.21 Definitions
131.22 Unlawful acts
131.23 Evidence
131.24 Offenses
131.25 Civil forfeiture
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01 UNLAWFUL USE AND FURNISHING OF TOBACCO.
(A) It is unlawful for any person, under the age of 18 years, to use tobacco in any form.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to furnish tobacco, by any manner or means and in any form, to
any person under the age of 18 years.
(1981 Code, § 9.35) (Ord. 118, 3rd Series, eff. 5-4-1990) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 131.02 TOBACCO AND MINORS.
(A) Minor defined. MINOR means any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years.
(B) Possession by minor. It is unlawful for any minor to have in his or her possession any tobacco,
tobacco products, or tobacco related device. This division shall not apply to minors lawfully involved
in a compliance check on behalf of the city.
11
12 East Grand Forks - General Offenses
(C) Use by minor. It is unlawful for any minor to smoke, chew, sniff, or otherwise use any
tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device.
(D) Procurement by or for minor. It is unlawful:
(1) For any minor to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco related device;
(2) For any person to purchase or otherwise obtain such items on behalf of a minor;
(3) For any person to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco
related device to any minor; and
(4) For any person to coerce or attempt to coerce a minor to illegally purchase or otherwise
obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device;
(5) This subdivision shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check on
behalf of the city.
(E) False identification. It is unlawful for any minor to attempt to disguise their true age by the use
of a false form of identification, whether the identification is that of another person or 1 in which the age
of the person has been modified or tampered with to represent an age older than the actual age of the
person.
(F) Exceptions and defenses. Nothing in this section shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco related devices to a minor as part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual, or
cultural ceremony. It is an affirmative defense to the violation of this section for a person to have
reasonably relied on proof of age as described by state law.
(G) Penalty. Minors found in unlawful possession of, or who unlawfully purchase or attempt to
purchase, tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices shall be directed to participate in
counseling or other remedial programs as set forth and determined by the Council by resolution.
(Ord. 264, 3rd Series, passed 1-7-2003) Penalty, see § 130.99
Drug-Related Offenses 13
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 131.20 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The purpose of this section is to regulate the possession, manufacture, advertisement and delivery
of drug paraphernalia and thereby deter the use of controlled substances in the city by controlling certain
kinds of equipment and paraphernalia indigenously associated with the abuse of prohibited drugs and
controlled substances. This section is not intended to allow what the Minnesota Statutes prohibit nor to
prohibit what the Minnesota Statutes expressly allow. They are intended to prevent drug abuses.
(1981 Code, § 9.34, Subd. 1) (Ord. 20, 3rd Series, eff. 6-13-1982)
§ 131.21 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
(A) All equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or
designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human
body a controlled substance in violation of Minnesota Statutes or this section. It includes, but is not
limited to:
(1) Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived;
(2) Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances;
(3) Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency
of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
(4) Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing
the strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled substances;
(5) Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring
controlled substances;
14 East Grand Forks - General Offenses
(6) Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and
lactose used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;
(7) Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs
and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana;
(8) Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used, intended for use, or
designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
(9) Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for
use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;
(10) Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or
concealing controlled substances;
(11) Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for
use in parenterally injected controlled substances into the human body;
(12) Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
(a) Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens,
permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
(b) Water pipes;
(c) Carburetion tubes and devices;
(d) Smoking and carburetion masks;
(e) Roach clips meaning objects used to hold burning material such as a marijuana cigarette
which has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;
(f) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
(g) Chamber pipes;
(h) Carburetor pipes;
(i) Electric pipes;
(j) Air driven pipes;
(k) Chilums;
Drug-Related Offenses 15
(l) Bongs;
(m) Ice pipes or chillers.
(B) DRUG PARAPHERNALIA does not include the possession, manufacture, delivery, or sale of
hypodermic needles or syringes in accordance with M.S. § 151.40, Subd. 2, as it may be amended from
time to time.
(1981 Code, § 9.34, Subd. 2) (Ord. 20, 3rd Series, eff. 6-13-1982)
§ 131.22 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
It is unlawful for any person to possess, have under his or her control, manufacture, sell, furnish,
dispense, or otherwise dispose of hypodermic syringes or needles or any instrument or implement which
can be adapted for subcutaneous injections, except by persons possessing the same pursuant to an order
or direction from a licensed doctor of medicine, acting in the course of his or her practice or
employment, or by the following persons when acting in the course of their practice or employment:
licensed practitioners, registered pharmacies and their employees or agents, registered pharmacists,
licensed doctors of veterinary medicine or their assistants, registered nurses, registered medical
technologists, medical interns, registered drug wholesalers, their employees or agents, licensed hospitals,
licensed nursing homes, bona fide hospitals where animals are treated, laboratories, persons engaged in
bona fide research or education or industrial use of hypodermic syringes and needles, provided such
persons cannot use hypodermic syringes and needles for the administration of drugs to human beings
unless the drugs are prescribed, dispensed, and administered by a person lawfully authorized to do so,
persons who administer drugs pursuant to an order or direction of a licensed doctor of medicine or of
a licensed doctor of osteopathy duly licensed to practice medicine.
(1981 Code, § 9.34, Subd. 3) (Ord. 20, 3rd Series, eff. 6-13-1982) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 131.23 EVIDENCE.
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider,
in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:
(A) Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;
(B) Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or anyone in control of the object under state or federal
law relating to any controlled substance;
(C) The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this subchapter;
(D) The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
(E) The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
16 East Grand Forks - General Offenses
(F) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or anyone in control of the object
to deliver it to persons who he/she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to
facilitate a violation of this subchapter; the innocence of an owner or anyone in control of the object as
a direct violation of this subchapter should not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use or
designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
(G) Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use;
(H) Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;
(I) National and local advertising concerning its use;
(J) The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
(K) Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related
items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
(L) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the
business enterprise;
(M) The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community;
(N) Expert testimony concerning its use.
(1981 Code, § 9.34, Subd. 4) (Ord. 20, 3rd Series, eff. 6-13-1982)
§ 131.24 OFFENSES.
(A) Possession. It is unlawful for any person to use or to possess with intent to use drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise
introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this subchapter.
(B) Manufacture or delivery. It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver,
or manufacture with intent to deliver drug paraphernalia knowing, or under circumstances where one
reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal,
inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of
this subchapter.
(C) Minors. Any person 18 years of age or over who violates division (B) of this section by
delivering drug paraphernalia and the delivery is to a person who is under 18 years of age and at least
3 years his or her junior shall also be violating this section.
Drug-Related Offenses 17
(D) Advertisement. It is unlawful for any person to place in, any newspaper, magazine, handbill,
or other publication any advertisement knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should
know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects
designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
(1981 Code, § 9.34, Subd. 5) (Ord. 20, 3rd Series, eff. 6-13-1982) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 131.25 CIVIL FORFEITURE.
All drug paraphernalia as hereinbefore defined in § 131.20 is subject to forfeiture, subject to the
provisions set forth in M.S. § 152.19, subdivisions 2 and 4, as they may be amended from time to time,
in the same manner as if the forfeiture were pursuant to M.S.§ 609.5311, as it may be amended from
time to time.
(1981 Code, § 9.34, Subd. 6) (Ord. 20, 3rd Series, eff. 6-13-1982)
18 East Grand Forks - General Offenses
CHAPTER 132: DANGEROUS WEAPONS
Section
132.01 Definitions
132.02 Possession prohibited
132.03 Transportation of an assault weapon or firearm
132.04 Discharging firearms
132.05 Confiscation
132.06 Use of bow and arrow
§ 132.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ASSAULT WEAPON. Any of the following objects:
(1) Dagger, dirk or stiletto;
(2) Sabre or sword;
(3) Switchblade knife, spring blade knife or any knife the blade of which can be opened by
gravity or a flick of the wrist;
(4) Blackjack, sand club, sap, pipe club, or bludgeon;
(5) Chain club or chains assembled or used as an assault weapon;
(6) Artificial knuckles or other objects designed to be worn over the fist or knuckles;
(7) Throwing devices with cutting or pointed edges;
(8) Japanese or other night sticks, nutcracker, nanchaki, chaka, flail, karate stick, morning star;
(9) Sling shots;
(10) Spears, lances.
19
20 East Grand Forks - General Offenses
FIREARM. Any weapon from which is propelled any missile, projectile, or bullet by means of
explosives, gas or compressed air, springs, or elastic material and shall include air and BB guns. This
definition does not include handguns or pistols as defined and regulated by statute.
PUBLIC PLACE. Any area, building or structure which is open and accessible to the public.
(1981 Code, § 9.20, Subd. 1) (Ord. 34, 3rd Series, eff. 12-16-1983)
§ 132.02 POSSESSION PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession, custody or control in a public place,
in the residence of another without their permission, or in the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle
within the city any assault weapon or firearm, as hereinbefore defined.
(1981 Code, § 9.20, Subd. 2) (Ord. 34, 3rd Series, eff. 12-16-1983) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 132.03 TRANSPORTATION OF AN ASSAULT WEAPON OR FIREARM.
An assault weapon or firearm may be transported in a motor vehicle if it is:
(A) In a secured container; and
(B) In the locked trunk of the vehicle or, if the vehicle does not have a trunk, in the farther rear
portion of the vehicle in an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers.
(C) A firearm may be transported pursuant to divisions (A) and (B) of this section, if it is unloaded.
(1981 Code, § 9.20, Subd. 3) (Ord. 34, 3rd Series, eff. 12-16-1983)
§ 132.04 DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
(A) Shooting upon, over or near a cemetery. No person shall, without permission from the proper
officials, discharge a firearm upon or over a cemetery or within 100 yards thereof, unless the person is
upon his or her or her own land.
(B) Hunting near a city park. No person shall hunt, shoot, or kill game within ½ mile of a city
park unless the City Council has granted permission to kill game not desired within the limits prohibited
by this division.
(C) Discharge of firearms prohibited in certain places. No person shall discharge a firearm on a
lawn, park, playground, orchard, or other ground appurtenant to a school, church, or an inhabited
dwelling, the property of another, or a charitable institution. This section does not prevent or prohibit
the owner thereof from discharging firearms upon his or her own land.
Dangerous Weapons 21
(D) Discharging firearms on highways prohibited. No person shall discharge a firearm upon or over
a public road or highway.
(E) Exceptions. This section shall not prohibit the firing of a military salute or the firing of
weapons by persons of the nation's armed forces acting under military authority, and shall not apply to
law enforcement officials in the proper enforcement of the law, or to any person in the proper exercise
of the right of self defense, or to any person otherwise lawfully permitted by proper federal, state or
local authorities to discharge a firearm in a manner contrary to the provisions of this section.
(F) If any of the above provisions are found to be in conflict with M.S. § 624.717, as it may be
amended from time to time, the provisions of that statute shall prevail.
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 132.05 CONFISCATION.
Any assault weapon or firearm duly adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to have been
worn, carried, possessed, used or handled in violation of any City Code provision or state statute may
be confiscated and disposed of by the Chief of Police who may provide for its sale, destruction or other
disposition.
(1981 Code, § 9.20, Subd. 5) (Ord. 34, 3rd Series, eff. 12-16-1983)
§ 132.06 USE OF BOW AND ARROW.
It is unlawful for any person to shoot a bow and arrow except in the Physical Education Program
in a school supervised by a member of its faculty, or a community wide supervised class or event
specifically authorized by the Chief of Police.
(1981 Code, § 9.20, Subd. 6) (Ord. 34, 3rd Series, eff. 12-16-1983) Penalty, see § 130.99
22 East Grand Forks - General Offenses
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
150. BUILDING REGULATIONS
151. SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
152. ZONING CODE
153. STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
1
2010 S-1
2 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
150.01 Building Code adopted
150.02 Fees
150.03 Permits and special requirements for moving buildings
150.04 Adoption of the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code
150.05 Plumbing permits and inspections
150.06 Plumbing permit fees
150.07 Housing Code adopted
150.08 Fence regulations
150.09 Rental Dwelling Code
150.10 Contractor's license required
150.11 Manufactured homes
150.12 Amateur radio support towers
150.13 Location of sexually oriented businesses
150.14 Compliance with code
§ 150.01 BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
The Minnesota State Building Code (SBC), and the Individual Sewage Treatment Standards, Minn.
Rule 7080, are adopted by reference as though set forth verbatim herein. One copy of the Code shall be
marked CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS – OFFICIAL COPY and kept on file in the office of the City
Administrator where they shall be open to inspection and use by the public. The Building Official is
authorized and directed to enforce the adopted provisions of the Codes. For such purposes, the Building
Official shall have the power to issue citations to those who are in violation of the adopted provisions
of the Codes.
(1981 Code, § 4.01) (Am. Ord. 189, 3rd Series, passed 12-5-1995; Am. Ord. 221, 3rd Series, passed
2-3-1998)
3
2010 S-1 Repl.
4 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
§ 150.02 FEES.
(A) Permits, inspections and fees. Fees for building permits and inspections shall be adopted by
resolution of the Council and may be amended from time to time in the same manner; provided, that a
schedule of the fees, together with the date of adoption of each fee, shall be kept on file in the office of
the City Administrator and available for distribution upon request therefor. The fees shall be uniformly
enforced upon the adoption or amendment.
(B) Surcharge. In addition to the permit fee required by division (A) of this section, and the fee
required in § 150.06, the applicant shall pay a surcharge to be remitted to the Minnesota Department of
Administration as prescribed by M.S. § 16B.70, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 85, 3rd Series, eff. 11-26-1987)
(1981 Code, § 4.03)
§ 150.03 PERMITS AND SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MOVING BUILDINGS.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMBINED MOVING PERMIT. A permit to move a building on both a street and a highway.
(Ord. 93, 3rd Series, eff. 6-24-1988)
FOUNDATION. A permanent solid base on which a building is raised, prepared from
concrete, masonry, or treated wood extending below the frost line and constructed in compliance with
the Building Code.
(Ord. 121, 3rd Series, eff. 10-12-1990)
HIGHWAY. A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic which is a state trunk highway, county
state-aid highway, or county road.
HIGHWAY MOVING PERMIT. A permit to move a building on a highway for which a fee
is charged which does not include route approval, but does include regulation of activities which do not
involve the use of the highway; which activities include, but are not limited to, repairs or alterations to
a municipal utility required by reason of the movement.
MOVING PERMIT. A document allowing the use of a street or highway for the purpose of
moving a building.
STREET. A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic which is not a state trunk highway,
county state-aid highway or county road.
Building Regulations 5
STREET MOVING PERMIT. A permit to move a building on a street for which a fee is
charged which does include route approval, together with use of the street and activities, including, but
not limited to, repairs or alterations to a municipal utility required by reason of the movement.
(B) Application. The application for a moving permit shall state the dimensions, weight, and
approximate loaded height of the structure or building proposed to be moved, the places from which and
to which it is to be moved, the route to be followed, the dates and times of moving and parking, the
name and address of the mover, and the municipal utility and public property repairs or alterations that
will be required by reason of the movement. All applications shall be referred to the Building Official.
All applications for street and combined moving permits shall also be referred to the Police Department
and the Water and Light Department and no such permits shall be issued until route approval has been
obtained from all the Departments.
(C) Permit and fee.
(1) The moving permit shall state date or dates of moving, hours, routing, movement and
parking. Permits shall be issued only for moving buildings by building movers licensed by the state.
Fees to be charged shall be separate for each of the following:
(a) A moving permit fee to cover use of streets and route approval; and
(b) A fee equal to the anticipated amount required to compensate the city for any municipal
utility and public property (other than streets) repairs or alterations occasioned by such movement.
(2) All permit fees shall be paid in advance of issuance.
(D) Building permit and code compliance. Before any building is moved from 1 location to another
within the city, or from a point of origin without the city to a destination within the city, regardless of
the route of movement, it shall be inspected and a building permit shall have been issued for at least the
work necessary to bring it into full compliance with the State Building Code.
(E) Unlawful acts.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to move a building on any street without a moving permit from
the city.
(2) It is unlawful to move any building (including a manufactured home) if the point of origin
or destination (or both) is within the city, and regardless of the route of movement, without having paid
in full all real and personal property taxes, special assessments and municipal utility charges due on the
premises of origin and filing written proof of the payment with the city.
(Ord. 93, 3rd Series, eff. 6-24-1988)
6 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(3) It is unlawful for any person to move a building to a destination within the city, without
first having constructed a foundation for the building at the point of destination. The foundation must
be laid in compliance with the Building Code and must be inspected and approved by the Building
Inspector before the building is moved to its point of destination.
(Ord. 121, 3rd Series, eff. 10-12-1990)
(1981 Code, § 4.04) (Am. Ord. 219, 3rd Series, passed 1-6-1997)
(F) Relocated residential structures.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to move or to contract to move any residential structure from
1 location to another within the city or from a point of origin without the city to a destination within the
city without first meeting the requirements of this section.
(2) An energy audit shall be performed and submitted to the Building Official.
(3) The Building Official shall inspect the structure to determine code compliance.
(a) The residential structure shall be made available for inspection during normal duty
hours.
(b) The applicant shall pay an inspection fee prior to the Building Official’s inspection.
The fee for this inspection shall be adopted by resolution of the Council and may be amended from time
to time in the same manner. This fee is not a part of any additional required permit fees.
(c) The inspection report shall be based on code items that are visible. Other corrections
may be required after this inspection.
(Ord. 153, 3rd Series, eff. 8-25-1994)
(d) Based upon the inspection, a demolition cost shall be computed by the Building Official
by using a formula adopted by resolution of the Council. The formula may be amended from time to
time in the same manner.
(4) The city shall be provided with security in the form of a compliance bond (license or
permit) in an amount of at least $5,000, or a guaranteed irrevocable line of credit assigned to the city,
or cash deposited prior to the issuance of a moving permit for a relocated residential structure. The bond,
guaranteed irrevocable line of credit or cash deposit shall be in an amount equal to the demolition cost
as determined by the Building Official. If the structure is not completed and ready for occupancy within
1 year after the date of the issuance of the moving permit, the city may raze the structure, level the
foundation and fill the excavation, if any, to grade. The city shall deduct its actual costs incurred in the
razing of the structure, the leveling of the foundation, and the filling of the excavation from the bond
proceeds after making claim to the surety for that amount, or from the irrevocable line of credit or cash
deposit and shall refund from the balance, if any, to the appropriate party. The total liability of the surety
Building Regulations 7
for all claims, regardless of the number of claims made against the bond or how long the bond remains
in force shall in no event exceed the amount of the bond. Any revision of the bond amount shall not be
cumulative. The surety shall not be liable for any punitive damages or civil or criminal penalties which
may be asserted against the principal on the bond. The bond may be terminated at any time by the surety
upon sending notice in writing to the city and to the principal by first class U.S. mail, and at the
expiration of 30 days from the mailing of the notice, the bond shall terminate and the surety shall be
relieved from any liability for any acts or omissions of the principal subsequent to that date.
(Ord. 168, 3rd Series, eff. 6-2-1994)
(5) Variances from divisions (A), (B) and (C) may be granted by the City Council up to and
including but not after June 30, 1998.
(1981 Code, § 4.06) (Am. Ord. 219, 3rd Series, passed 1-6-1997) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.04 ADOPTION OF THE MINNESOTA UNIFORM FIRE CODE.
(A) Adoption. The Minnesota Uniform Fire Code is adopted as though set forth verbatim herein.
One copy of the Code shall be marked CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS - OFFICIAL COPY and kept
on file in the office of the City Administrator where it shall be open to inspection and use by the public.
The Chief of the Fire Department is authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of the Code.
For such purposes, the Chief of the Fire Department shall have the power to issue citations to those who
are in violation of the Code. In the case of an emergency, the Chief of the Fire Department shall also
have the power to arrest those who are in violation of the Code. The power to arrest shall not be
delegated by the Chief of the Fire Department and shall not be extended to his designees.
(B) Storage of flammable and explosive material. No bulk plants for storage of flammable or
combustible liquids, or bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas, not established on the effective date of
this section, shall be permitted. No storage of explosives or blasting agents shall be permitted.
(1981 Code, § 4.05) (Ord. 89, 3rd Series, eff. 3-4-1988; Ord. 114, 3rd Series, eff. 5-4-1990)
§ 150.05 PLUMBING PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS.
(A) Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to commence any plumbing construction,
remodel, replacement, or repair, except minor repair work as the same may be defined by rule or
regulation without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city and payment of the required fees.
(B) Application. Any licensed plumber, or other persons specifically excepted by law from licensing
provisions, may apply for the permit.
(C) Issuance of permit. The plumbing permit shall issue upon approval of plans and specifications
relating to the proposed construction.
8 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(D) Unlawful acts. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly and willfully commit, or to order,
instruct, or direct another to commit, any of the following acts:
(1) To make a false statement in an application for inspection or permit, certificate or other
lawfully authorized or required form or statement;
(2) To perform plumbing work for another without a proper license to perform the work;
(3) To fail to file a request for inspection when required;
(4) To interfere with, or refuse entry to, an inspector lawfully engaged in the performance of
his duties;
(5) To violate any lawful rule or regulation relating to plumbing.
(1981 Code, § 4.10) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.06 PLUMBING PERMIT FEES.
Fees for plumbing permits and inspection shall be adopted by resolution of the Council and may be
amended from time to time in the same manner; provided, that a schedule of the fees, together with the
date of adoption of each fee, shall be kept on file in the office of the City Administrator and available
for distribution upon request therefor. The fees shall be uniformly enforced upon the adoption or
amendment.
(1981 Code, § 4.11)
§ 150.07 HOUSING CODE ADOPTED.
(A) Housing Code adopted. The Uniform Housing Code (UHC), 1982 Edition, published by the
International Conference of Building Officials, is adopted by reference as though set forth verbatim
herein. One copy of the Code shall be marked CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS - OFFICIAL COPY
and kept on file in the office of the City Administrator and open to inspection and use by the public.
(B) Amendments to Uniform Housing Code. The Uniform Housing Code (UHC), 1982 Edition, shall
be subject to the following amendments, to-wit:
(1) Wherever the term “Health Officer” appears in this Code the words “Building Official”
shall be substituted therefor.
Building Regulations 9
(2) Section 203 of the Uniform Housing Code, 1982 Edition, is amended to read as follows:
Section 203. In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and methods of
construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of this code, hearings may be
held subject to § 30.06 of the City Code. The Building Official shall be an ex officio
member and shall act as secretary of the board. Appeals to the board shall be processed in
accordance with the provisions contained in Section 1201 of this Housing Code. Copies
of all rules or regulations adopted by the board shall be delivered to the Building Official,
who shall make them freely accessible to the public.
(3) The following definitions as found in Section 401 of the Uniform Housing Code, 1982
Edition, are amended or added, to read as follows, to-wit:
(a) BUILDING CODE is the Uniform Building Code, 1982 Edition, promulgated by the
International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted by the Minnesota State Building Code and the
city.
(b) HEALTH OFFICER is deleted in its entirety.
(4) The following definition is added as follows:
BUILDING OFFICIAL is the officer or other designated authority charged with the
administration and enforcement of this code, or his duly authorized representative.
(C) The Uniform Housing Code, 1982 Edition, Chapter 13 is deleted in its entirety.
(1981 Code, § 4.20) (Ord. 35, 3rd Series, eff. 12-16-1983)
§ 150.08 FENCE REGULATIONS.
(A) Definition. For purposes of this section, the term FENCE means any partition, structure or gate
erected as a dividing marker, barrier or enclosure.
(B) Application. Except as otherwise provided in § 110.27, it is unlawful for any person to
construct or cause to be constructed or erected any fence without first obtaining a permit therefor from
the city.
(Ord. 221, eff. 5-22-1969)
(C) Application for permit. Every application for a fence permit shall be submitted to the Building
Official and shall set forth the type of fence, the material to be used in the construction thereof, its
height, and its location, particularly as to its proximity to the lot lines of the applicant. The fee shall be
10 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
as required in § 150.02. If the Building Official determines that a variance from this section will be
necessary before the permit can be issued, the Building Official will submit the application to the
Planning Commission for its review and recommendation to the City Council.
(Ord. 85, 3rd Series, eff. 11-26-1987)
(D) Standards. All fences erected or maintained in the city shall meet and comply with the
following requirements:
(1) All fences closer to the street line than the average set back in the area shall not exceed 3
feet in height, and all other fences shall not exceed 6 feet in height, and be placed not less than 1 foot
from the respective property lines;
(2) All fences bordering the sides of any property and not facing or fronting on a street or alley
shall be placed no less than 1 foot from the property line on which it borders and shall be no more than
6 feet in height;
(3) No fence shall be allowed to be constructed with solid sheeting and the Building Inspector’s
approval of the material and manner of construction and appearance shall be obtained;
(4) The Council shall have the power upon application, for cause shown, to waive the strict
application of the preceding requirements and compliance therewith.
(E) Barbed wire and other fences. It is unlawful for any person to construct and maintain or allow
to be constructed or maintained upon any property a barbed wire fence or any fence charged or
connected with any electrical current in such a manner as to transmit the current to persons, animals or
things which intentionally or unintentionally come in contact with same. Upon application duly made
therefor to the Council, the Council may in its discretion permit the applicant upon proper showing to
construct a barbed wire fence which will meet applicant’s requirements for the purposes intended.
(F) Maintenance. All fences shall be painted and maintained so that the exposed, outer-face shall
be smooth and in neat condition and appearance and so maintained at all times. In all cases the side of
the fence facing the street or abutting property shall be finished as immediately above set forth.
(G) Location. All fences must be located entirely upon the private property of the person
constructing the same or causing the fence to be so constructed and erected; provided, however, that
adjoining property owners may agree in writing that the fence shall be located on the division line of
their properties, and if such an agreement be made, the abutting property owners shall file an executed
copy of the agreement with the Building Inspector, before the Building Inspector shall issue a permit
therefor.
(H) Construction. Every fence, whensoever and howsoever constructed, shall be constructed in a
substantial manner and of a substantial material reasonably suitable for the purpose for which the fence
is proposed to be used. Every fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and shall not
Building Regulations 11
by reason of age, decay, accident or other cause be allowed to become and remain in a state of disrepair
so as to be or tend to be a nuisance to the injury of the public or any abutting property owner. Any fence
which is dangerous by reason of its construction or state of disrepair or is in any other way injurious to
public safety, health or welfare, is a nuisance; the Building Inspector shall notify the owner of the
property on which the fence is located, in writing, of the existence of the nuisance, and the nuisance shall
be abated and corrected within 14 days after receiving the notice from the Building Inspector.
(1981 Code, § 4.30) (Ord. 221, eff. 5-22-1969; Am. Ord. 250, 3rd Series, passed 8-8-2000) Penalty,
see § 10.99
§ 150.09 RENTAL DWELLING CODE.
(A) General provisions.
(1) Statement of purpose.
(a) The purpose of the Rental Dwelling Code is to protect the public health, safety and
general welfare of the people of this city. These objectives include, among others, the following:
1. To protect the character and stability of residential areas within the city;
2. To correct and prevent housing conditions that adversely affect or are likely to
adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare and health of the people of this city;
3. To prevent the overcrowding of dwellings;
4. To preserve the value of land and buildings throughout the city;
(b) With respect to disputes between owners and occupants, and except as otherwise
specifically provided by the terms of this section, the City Council or city staff will not intrude upon the
accepted contractual relationships between owners and occupants. The City Council or city staff will not
advocate on behalf of either party, nor will it be an arbiter, nor will it be receptive to complaints from
owners or occupants, which are not specifically and clearly relevant to the provisions of this section. In
the absence of such relevancy with regard to rental disputes, it is intended that the contracting parties
exercise such legal sanctions as are available to them without the intervention of city government, in
enacting this section, the City Council does not intend to interfere or permit interference with legal rights
to personal privacy.
(c) This section is governed by and complies with all provisions of the Housing Code,
Building Code, and Fire Code, as adopted by the city, and all relevant Minnesota State statutes. If there
is a violation of any of the codes or state statutes, the penalties as listed under division (H) of this section
will be administered.
2010 S-1
12 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(B) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this
section.
APARTMENT. A room or group of rooms located within a building which form a single
habitable unit with facilities which are used or are intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or
eating.
APPROVED. An indication that an item is in compliance with Building and Fire Codes.
BUILDING. Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or enclosure for persons,
animals, or chattels, and, when said structure is divided by party walls without openings, each portion
of such building so separated shall be deemed a separate building.
BUILDING OFFICIAL and/or FIRE MARSHAL. Agent designated by the City Council to
enforce provisions of this section.
CLEAN. The absence of rubbish, garbage, vermin, or other unsightly, offensive or extraneous
matter.
DWELLING. A structure or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential occupancy,
including boarding and lodging houses, but not including hotels and motels.
DWELLING UNIT. Dwelling unit has the same meaning as APARTMENT defined above.
DISORDERLY CONDUCT. For the purposes of this section, disorderly conduct in the
registered rental dwelling unit shall mean disorderly conduct in the particular rental dwelling unit by the
renters, occupants, or guests, and/or conduct which constitutes disorderly conduct anywhere on the
property in which the rental dwelling unit is situated. DISORDERLY CONDUCT includes the following
conduct:
(a) Conduct which constitutes a violation of M.S. §§ 609.74 and/or 609.745 relating to
a public nuisance;
(b) Conduct which constitutes a violation of § 130.01 and/or M.S.§ 609.72 relating to
disorderly conduct;
(c) Conduct which constitutes a violation of § 130.03 relating to noisy parties;
(d) Conduct which constitutes a violation of §§ 131.20 through 131.25 for other laws
relating to the possession of drug paraphernalia and/or controlled substances as defined in M.S.
§§ 152.01 et. seq.;
2010 S-1
Building Regulations 13
(e) Conduct which constitutes a violation of this code and/or M.S. § 340A.503 relating
to the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors; or a violation of M.S. §§ 340A.701,
340A.702, or 340A.703 relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor;
(f) Conduct which constitutes a violation of laws relating to prostitution or acts related to
prostitution as defined in M.S. § 609.321, Subd. 9;
(g) Conduct which constitutes a violation of laws relating to weapons, or laws relating to
unlawful use or possession of a firearm as defined in M.S. § 609.66 et. seq., on the registered premises;
(h) Conduct which constitutes a violation of laws relating to assaults, including domestic
assaults, as defined in M.S. § 604.224;
(i) Conduct which constitutes a violation of laws relating to contributing to the need for
protection or services or delinquency of a minor, as defined in M.S. § 260.315;
(j) Conduct which constitutes a violation of any other federal law, state law or local
ordinance which would be likely to threaten, annoy or harass other tenants or other neighbors to the
rental dwelling unit.
FIRE MARSHAL. See BUILDING OFFICIAL and/or FIRE MARSHAL.
HABITABLE ROOM. Any room used for sleeping, living, cooking or dining purposes,
excluding such enclosed places as closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, hallways, laundries, storage
spaces, utility rooms, and similar spaces.
KITCHEN. A room within a dwelling unit intended to be used for the cooking of food or
preparation of meals.
OCCUPANT. Any individual living, sleeping, cooking or eating within a dwelling unit listed
on the rental contract.
OWNER. Any person, firm or corporation who, alone, jointly or severally with others, shall
be in actual possession of, or have charge, care, control of any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit
within the city as owner, employee or agent of the owner, or as trustee or guardian of the estate or
person of the title holder. Also, any person, firm or corporation who has the right to determine who
occupies a rental dwelling unit (even though that right may be subject to a lease or rental agreement),
or person, firm, corporation who shall have the power to rent or let to another for purpose of this
section. The owner shall be the individual responsible for registration of the building and rental dwelling
units.
2010 S-1
14 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or a joint
venture or organization of any kind.
RENTAL CONTRACT. A written lease between the owner and occupant containing and listing
the names of all permissible occupants of the dwelling unit.
RENTAL DWELLING UNIT. Any dwelling for hire which includes apartment, dwelling unit,
and rooming houses. RENTAL DWELLING UNIT for purposes of this section does not include hotels,
motels, hospitals, homes for the aged, or other licenced residential facilities.
REPAIR. To restore to a sound acceptable state of operation, serviceability or appearance.
Repairs shall be expected to last as long as replacement by new items.
REPLACE or REPLACEMENT. To remove an existing or portion of a system and to construct
or install a new item of a quality similar to that of the existing item when it is new. Replacement
ordinarily takes place when repair of the item is impractical.
ROOMING HOUSES. Any group of rooms that form single habitable units used or intended
to be used for living and sleeping but not for cooking or eating purposes, with the exception of other
licenced residential facilities.
TEMPORARY GUEST. An individual other than an occupant, staying and residing with the
occupant for less than 30 consecutive days.
UNSAFE. As applied to a structure, a condition or combination of conditions which are
dangerous or hazardous to persons or property.
UNSANITARY. Conditions which are dangerous or hazardous to the health of persons.
(C) Registration.
(1) Registration required. No owner shall operate a rental dwelling unit in the city without
having first obtained a registration as hereinafter provided from the Building Official. Each owner shall
register annually with the Building Official. If the registration is denied, no occupancy of rental dwelling
units then vacant or which become vacant shall be permitted until a registration has been issued. Rental
dwelling units within an unregistered building for which a registration application has been made and
which rental dwelling units are in compliance with this section may be occupied provided that the
unregistered rental dwelling units within the building do not create a hazard to the health and safety of
persons in occupied rental dwelling units.
2010 S-1
Building Regulations 14A
(2) Registration procedures. Within 60 days after the passage of this section, the owner of any
building and its rental dwelling units within the city shall apply to the Building Official for a rental
registration in the manner hereafter prescribed.
(a) Application shall be made on forms provided by the city and accompanied by the initial
fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council. The owner of a building and its rental dwelling
units constructed after the date of passage of this section shall obtain a registration prior to actual
occupancy of any rental dwelling unit therein.
(b) Applicants shall provide the following information on registration applications:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the building and the
name, address, and telephone number of the operator or agent actively managing said building.
2. The legal description and address of the building.
3. The number of rental dwelling units, the floor area for each such rental dwelling
unit, the total floor area of the building, and the total number of occupants per rental dwelling unit.
4. Name and address of person to whom owner/applicant wishes a notice to be sent.
5. Such other information as the city shall require.
(3) Application and inspection. Upon receipt of a properly executed application for a rental
registration, the Building Official and/or Fire Marshal shall inspect the building and rental dwelling units
to ensure that they are in compliance with this section.
(4) Issuance of rental registration.
(a) If the building and rental dwelling units are in compliance with this section, a
registration shall be issued to the owner which shall state that the building and rental dwelling units have
been inspected and are in compliance with this section. If the city finds that the circumstances of
occupancy following the issuance of the registration involves possible violations, the city may again
inspect the building and rental dwelling units during the registration period.
(b) The city will by Council resolution establish a re-inspection fee. If a building and its
rental dwelling units are not currently registered, no registration may be issued until all outstanding fees
have been paid. If a building and its rental dwelling units are registered, the registration shall expire 20
days after the owner or his agent is notified of the inspection fee that must be paid to maintain such
registration in good standing, unless the fee is paid prior to the expiration of the 20 day period.
2010 S-1
14B East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(5) Registration display. A registration issued under this section shall be conspicuously
displayed on the building wherever feasible. The owner shall promptly produce the registration upon
demand of a prospective occupant or the Building Official and/or Fire Marshal or his/her authorized
representative.
(6) Registration transfer. The registration is transferable upon application to the Building
Official and payment of the registration transfer fee by the prospective owner if the registered premises
are in compliance with all applicable codes. The registration shall terminate if renewal or application for
transfer is not made within 30 days after transfer of ownership of the building.
(7) Registration renewal. Renewal of the registration as required annually by this section may
be made by filling out the required form furnished by the Building Official to the owner of a building
and by mailing the form together with the required registration fee to the Building Official. Such
renewal or registration may be made only when no change in the ownership, operation, agency or type
of occupancy as originally registered has been made and where there has been an inspection within the
last 2 years.
(8) Registration fees. Registration fees, registration transfer fees, inspection fees, and
re-inspection fees shall be established by City Council resolution.
(9) Revocation. A registration issued or renewed under this section may be revoked upon a
finding of noncompliance with the provisions of this section. Reinstatement of a revoked registration
shall be accompanied by an amount equal to 50% of the registration fee. Issuance of a new registration
after revocation shall be made in the manner provided for obtaining an initial registration.
(D) Maximum density and maximum space for rental units.
(1) The occupancy of any rental dwelling unit shall npt exceed the following:
(a) For the first occupant, 150 square feet of habitable room floor space and for every
additional occupant thereof, at least 100 square feet of habitable room floor space.
(b) In no event shall the total number of occupants of any rental dwelling unit exceed 2
times the number of habitable rooms.
(2) No owner shall rent or let to another for occupancy any rental dwelling unit in violation
of division (C)(1)(b) of this section other than for temporary guests.
(3) No occupant shall allow a temporary guest to remain in the rental dwelling unit for more
than 30 consecutive days. After 30 days the temporary guest must be included in the total number of
occupants.
2010 S-1
Building Regulations 14C
(E) Prohibitions.
(1) No owner shall own, maintain, operate, rent, or let to any other individual(s) for occupancy
any rental dwelling unit in violation of this section.
(2) No owner shall operate a building and its rental dwelling units without registration issued
pursuant to this section or accept rental payments from an occupant of any unregistered rental dwelling
unit which payment is for occupancy for a period during which the rental dwelling unit is not registered
pursuant to this section.
(3) No owner or occupant shall refuse or fail to allow the Building Official and/or Fire Marshal
to enter a building and its rental dwelling units for purposes of inspection when authorized by this
section.
(4) No person shall occupy an unregistered rental dwelling unit if such rental dwelling unit is
required to be registered under this section.
(5) No person may occupy a rental dwelling unit in violation of this section.
(6) No person, firm, or corporation, including an owner, or occupant, shall remove or tamper
with a placard used for posting property pursuant to this section.
(F) Trespass over property to which public has some implicit right of access.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow an owner of real property to which the
public has some implicit right of access to exclude a person from that property if the person has
committed a crime on the property or has violated the properly posted or otherwise provided rules of
conduct for the property.
(2) Definitions. For the purpose of this division, the following words and terms shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
COVERED PREMISES. Any improved real property, or portion thereof, within the city
to which the public has an implicit right of access, including, but not limited to, places of worship,
shopping malls, retail sales facilities, hotels, motels, nursing homes, restaurants, multiple dwellings,
hospitals, medical and dental offices, clubs, lodges, office buildings, banks and financial institutions,
transit stations, athletic and recreational facilities, personal service establishments, theaters, and day care
facilities.
2010 S-1
14D East Grand Forks - Land Usage
PRIVATE AREA. Areas within the covered premises not normally accessible to members
of the public without explicit permission of the person in direct control of the area, including, but not
limited to, individual apartment units, employee rest areas and facilities, banquet halls, meeting rooms,
and private offices.
PRIVATE COMMON AREAS. Other common areas within the covered premises normally
within the exclusive control of a tenant but subject to reasonable regulation by the property manager,
including, but not limited to, sales floors, store restroom facilities accessible to customers or clients,
checkout lanes, and customer service areas.
PROPERTY MANAGER. Any owner of a covered premises, or the agent of the owner
or any tenant who is authorized by the owner to exercise control over the covered premises, including
its public common areas.
PUBLIC COMMON AREAS. All areas of the covered premises, other than private
common areas, maintained for the common use of its tenants or of the general public incidental to normal
and legitimate activities upon the covered premises, including, but not limited to: the curtilage; parking
lots and ramps; private roadways, sidewalks, and walkways; recreational facilities; reception areas;
rotundas; waiting areas; hallways; restroom facilities; elevators; escalators; and staircases.
TENANT. Any authorized occupant of a covered premises, or the agent thereof, but
excluding an occupant of a domestic use, such as a renter or lessee of a dwelling or apartment, resident
in a nursing home, or a hotel or motel guest.
TRESPASS NOTICE. A written notice that contains minimally the following information:
1. Verbatim copies of divisions (D)(5) and (6) of this section;
2. The name, date of birth, and address of the person to whom the notice is issued
and the name of the person's custodial parent or guardian if the person is a juvenile;
3. A description of the specific conduct that forms the basis for the issuance of the
notice;
4. A description of the specific covered premises or portion thereof, to which the
notice applies;
5. The period during which the notice is in effect, including the date of its expiration;
6. The name, title, address, and telephone number of a person with authority to
modify, amend, or rescind the notice;
2010 S-1
Building Regulations 14E
7. The method by which the notice was served upon the person to whom it was
issued.
(3) Issuance of trespass notice. A property manager or tenant may issue a trespass notice to
a person only if there is probable cause to believe the person has, no more than 30 days before the
issuance of that notice:
(a) Committed an act prohibited by state statute or city ordinance while on the covered
premises; or
(b) Violated any rule of conduct for the covered premises that has been conspicuously
posted at all public entrances to the covered premises or that the property manager or tenant has provided
to the person in writing.
(4) Coverage of trespass notice.
(a) If issued by a property manager, a trespass notice is effective only as to those public
common areas and private areas within the property manager's exclusive control, except that a trespass
notice may also cover private common areas and other private areas provided the tenant or tenants in
control of such areas have agreed in writing to be precluded from inviting onto the premises any person
to whom a trespass notice has been issued under this section. Such a trespass notice must state that the
tenant or tenants of the covered premises are precluded from inviting onto the covered premises any
person to whom a trespass notice has been issued under this section.
(b) If issued by a tenant, the trespass notice is effective only as to those private common
areas and private areas over which the tenant has control.
(c) A notice broader in coverage than authorized by this section shall not be invalid, but
shall be valid to the extent authorized by this section.
(5) Prohibited conduct.
(a) No person shall trespass in or upon any covered premises of another and, without claim
of right, refuse to depart therefrom on demand of the property manager, or a tenant authorized to
exercise control over the covered premises or portion involved.
(b) No person served with a trespass notice in conformity with this section shall enter in
or upon the premises described therein during its effective period without the written permission of the
notice issuer, agent, or assign.
2010 S-1
14F East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(c) No person shall enter any public facility, utility, or grounds thereto, or any covered
premises or portion thereof in violation of conspicuously posted signs prohibiting or restricting access
thereto, including, but not limited to, the following: "No Trespassing," "Authorized Personnel Only,"
"Private," "Employees Only," "Emergency Exit Only."
(6) Violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section is guilty of an
infraction.
(7) Additional provisions.
(a) No trespass notice shall be effective for more than 1 year.
(b) All trespass notices issued pursuant to this section must be properly served upon the
person named therein as follows:
1. Personal service documented by either a receipt signed by the person to whom it
was issued or an affidavit of the issuer; or
2. If the person is arrested or detained by a potice officer, the officer may personally
serve the notice on behalf of the property manager or tenant and document service in the officer's official
police report detailing the incident.
(8) Severability. If any subsection or portion of this section is deemed invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect
the validity of other subsections or portions of this section.
(G) Conduct.
(1) When the Building Official and/or Fire Marshal receive notice that an incident of disorderly
conduct in a registered rental dwelling unit has occurred, the Building Official and/or Fire Marshal shall
give notice of the violation to the owner and the occupants of the rental dwelling unit affected, and direct
the owner to take steps to prevent further violation.
(2) If another instance of disorderly conduct in a registered rental dwelling unit occurs within
3 months of an incident for which a notice was given, the Building Official and/or Fire Marshal shall
notify the owner and the occupants of the affected rental dwelling unit of the violation and the owner
shall submit a written report of the actions taken, and proposed to be taken by the owner to prevent
further disorderly conduct in the registered rental dwelling unit. This report shall be submitted to the
Building Official and/or Fire Marshal within 5 days of receipt of the notice of disorderly conduct in the
registered rental dwelling unit and shall detail all actions taken by the owner in response to all notices
of disorderly conduct in the registered rental dwelling unit within the preceding 3 months. If an owner
fails to submit a written report as required by this section, the Building Official and/or Fire Marshal shall
revoke the rental registration.
2010 S-1
Building Regulations 14G
(3) If another instance of disorderly conduct in the registered rental dwelling unit occurs within
3 months after the second instance of disorderly conduct in which notices were given to the owner, and
the occupants of the affected unit, the Building Official and/or Fire Marshal shall revoke the owner's
registration.
(H) Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation, occupant, or owner who violates or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor criminal offense. Each day
that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(1981 Code, § 4.21)
§ 150.10 CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE REQUIRED.
No residential building contractor, residential remodeler, or other person who is required to be
licensed by the state under the provisions of M.S. §§ 326.83 to 326.991, as they may be amended from
time to time, and no person employing a residential contractor, who is required to be licensed, shall be
issued a building, zoning or land use permit unless that contractor is licensed. Any person applying for
a permit who is required to have a state license but who does not have a state license shall be reported
to the State Commissioner of Commerce, who may begin an action against the person.
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.11 MANUFACTURED HOMES.
After the date of the adoption of this code, only manufactured homes which comply with the
Manufactured Home Building Code established by M.S. § 327.31 may be located in and used as a
dwelling within the city. A mobile home, manufactured home, house trailer or other mobile dwelling
which does not comply with the Manufactured Home Building Code and which is used as a residence
after the date of the adoption of this code is a nonconforming use, and this nonconforming use may be
continued, including through repair or maintenance, but if the nonconformity or occupancy is
discontinued for a period of more than 1 year, or the nonconforming use is destroyed by fire or other
peril to the extent of greater than 50% of its market value, any subsequent use or occupancy of the land
or premises shall be a conforming use or occupancy.
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
Zoning, see § 152.295
§ 150.12 AMATEUR RADIO SUPPORT TOWERS.
Amateur radio support structures (towers) shall not exceed a height above ground level of 70 feet,
unless a conditional use permit has been granted by the City Council. They shall be mounted on the roof
2010 S-1
14H East Grand Forks - Land Usage
of a dwelling or other building or located in the rear yard unless there is not sufficient space to erect
them in those locations. They shall be installed in accordance with the instructions furnished by the
manufacturer of that tower model. Because of the experimental nature of the amateur radio service,
antennas mounted on a tower may be modified and changed at any time so long as the published
allowable load on the tower is not exceeded and the structure of the tower remains in accordance with
the manufacturer's specifications.
§ 150.13 LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
(A) Findings. The City Council makes the following findings regarding the effect sexually oriented
businesses have on the character of the city's neighborhoods. In making these findings, the City Council
accepts the recommendation of the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation
of Sexually Oriented Businesses dated June 6, 1989. City Council accepts these recommendations
evidenced by Ordinance 303, 3rd Series, adopted November 20, 2007.
(1) Sexually-oriented businesses have an impact on the neighborhoods surrounding them which
is distinct from the impact caused by other uses.
(2) Residential and commercial neighborhoods located within close proximity to sexually
oriented businesses experience the following negative impacts:
(a) Increased crime rates, particularly in sex-related crimes such as rapes, prostitution,
indecent exposure and other lewd and lascivious behavior;
(b) Property values which are either diminished or fail to appreciate at the rate of other
comparable properties not located in proximity to sexually oriented businesses;
(c) Increased transiency and decreased stability of ownership;
(d) Deteriorated neighborhood appearance from litter and graffiti;
(e) Sex-related harassment of residents and customers by motorists and pedestrians;
(f) A perception that the area is unsafe; and
(g) Difficulty in attracting and retaining customers, employees, and desirable tenants.
(3) The adverse impacts which sexually oriented businesses have on surrounding areas diminish
as the distance from the sexually oriented business increases.
2010 S-1
Building Regulations 14I
(4) The adverse impacts of sexually-oriented businesses are exacerbated when the uses are
located near each other.
(5) The presence of liquor establishments in the immediate vicinity of sexually oriented
businesses also compounds the adverse impacts on the neighborhood.
(6) Sexually oriented businesses can exert a dehumanizing influence on persons attending places
of worship, children attending day care centers or schools, and people using public parks and libraries.
(7) Sexually oriented businesses can significantly contribute to the deterioration of residential
neighborhoods and can impair the character and quality of the residential housing in the area where they
are located, thereby exacerbating the shortage of affordable and habitable housing for city residents.
(8) The concentration of sexually oriented businesses in 1 area can have a substantially
detrimental effect on that area and on the overall quality of urban life. A cycle of decay can result from
the influx and concentration of sexually oriented businesses. The presence of such businesses is
perceived by others as an indication that the area is deteriorating and the result can be devastating: other
businesses move out of the vicinity and residents flee from the area. The resulting decline in real estate
values erodes the city's tax base and contributes to overall urban blight.
(9) Land use regulations are appropriate to minimize the detrimental effects that sexually
oriented businesses have on adjacent land uses.
(B) When no zoning regulations adopted. If the city has not adopted zoning regulations for sexually
oriented businesses, as defined this code, then a sexually oriented business may locate only in those areas
of the city which the City Council determines that the predominant use of the land is for commercial or
industrial purposes.
(C) Not to operate in certain areas. No person may operate a sexually oriented business on
property, any part of which is within the area circumscribed by a circle that has a radius of 250 feet from
any of the uses listed below. Distances must be measured by following a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures or objects, between the closest points on the boundary lines of the property
parcels where the 2 uses are located. This distance requirement applies to the following uses:
(1) Property used or zoned for residential uses;
(2) A day care facility, school, library, park, playground, state or federal wildlife area or
preserve, religious institution, or other public recreational facility;
(3) Premises licensed under Chapter 117, Alcoholic Beverages; and
(4) Another sexually-oriented business.
(Am. Ord. 303, 3rd Series, passed 11-20-2007)
2010 S-1
14J East Grand Forks - Land Usage
§ 150.14 COMPLIANCE WITH CODE.
No person shall erect, alter or replace any structure within the city unless the structure complies with
the applicable requirements of this code and the person has obtained a land use permit from the City
Clerk certifying compliance with all of the applicable requirements of this code. No person shall use any
structure or premises for any purpose other than as permitted by this code, except that lawful
nonconforming uses as of the date of the adoption of this code may continue only as provided in M.S.
§ 462.357, Subd. 1e, as it may be amended from time to time.
2010 S-1
CHAPTER 151: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
151.001 Title
151.002 Purpose
151.003 Jurisdiction
151.004 Platting authority
151.005 Enactment
151.006 Interpretation, conflict, and separability
151.007 Amendments
151.008 Variances
151.009 Fees established
151.010 Definitions
151.011 Compliance with comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, and official map
General Subdivision Procedures
151.025 General subdivision procedures
151.026 Concept plan meeting and classification
151.027 Official submission date
151.028 Coordination of zoning applications with subdivision approval
151.029 Coordination of subdivision plat approval with Polk County Zoning Ordinance
Procedure for Simple Subdivision Plats
151.045 Procedure for simple subdivision plats
151.046 Preliminary plat application for simple subdivision plats
151.047 Final plat application for simple subdivision plats
151.048 Recording for simple subdivision plats
Procedure for Minor Subdivision Plats
151.060 Procedure for minor subdivision plats
151.061 Preliminary plat application for minor subdivision plats
151.062 Final plat application for minor subdivision plats
151.063 Recording for minor subdivision plats
15
16 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
Procedure for Major Subdivision Plats
151.075 Procedure for major subdivision plats
151.076 Preliminary plat application for major subdivision plats
151.077 Final plat application for major subdivision plats
151.078 Recording for major subdivision plats
Presentation Requirements
151.090 Concept plan
151.091 Preliminary plat presentation requirements
151.092 Final plat presentation requirements
Design Standards
151.105 Design standards
151.106 Streets
151.107 Easements
151.108 Blocks
151.109 Lots
151.110 Natural features
151.111 Public land
151.112 Flood plain lands
151.113 Water facilities
151.114 Sewer facilities
Required Improvements
151.120 Required improvements
Premature Subdivisions
151.130 Premature subdivisions
151.131 Condition establishing premature subdivisions
151.132 Burden of evidence
Access Spacing Standards
151.145 Access spacing standards
151.999 Penalty
Subdivision Regulations 17
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 TITLE.
Chapter 151 of East Grand Forks City Code shall regulate the subdividing of land within the city
and within an area extending 2 miles beyond the city limits, and will be referred to herein as the
chapter.
(1981 Code, § 11.01, Subd. 1) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.002 PURPOSE.
This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
(A) To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city.
(B) To guide the future growth and development of the city in accordance with the goals and
policies set forth in the City's Land Use Plan.
(C) To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the city and to
encourage the orderly and beneficial development of the community by assuring the timing and
sequencing of development, promotion of infill development in existing neighborhoods and
non-residential areas with adequate public facilities, to assure proper urban form and open space
separation of urban areas, to protect environmentally critical areas and areas premature for urban
development.
(D) To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the city and the value of buildings and
improvements upon the land, and to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.
(E) To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and efficient
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation, and other public
requirements and facilities.
(F) To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the
circulation of traffic throughout the city, having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in
streets and highways and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land and
buildings, and to provide for the proper location and widths of streets and building lines.
(G) To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions in order to
further the orderly layout and use of land, and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumentation
of subdivided land.
18 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(H) To ensure that public facilities and services are available concurrent with development and
will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision and that the community will be
required to bear no more than its fair share of the cost of providing the facilities and services through
requiring the applicant to pay fees, furnish land, or establish mitigation measures to ensure that the
development provides its fair share of capital facility needs generated by the development.
(I) To prevent the pollution of air, streams, and ponds; to assure the adequacy of drainage
facilities; to safeguard the water table, and to encourage the wise use and management of natural
resources throughout the city in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the
community and the value of the land.
(J) To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the city and to ensure appropriate
development with regard to these natural features.
(K) To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land while
preserving the density of development as established in the zoning regulations of the city.
(L) Require new subdivisions to provide financial support for infrastructure improvements that
are necessary to support new growth.
(1981 Code, § 11.01, Subd. 2) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.003 JURISDICTION.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the city and within an area
extending 2 miles beyond the city limits.
(1981 Code, § 11.01, Subd. 3) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.004 PLATTING AUTHORITY.
(A) Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to land
subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated by the city's home rule charter. The
applicant has the duty of compliance with reasonable conditions laid down by the city for design,
dedication, improvement, and restrictive use of the land to conform to the physical and economic
development of the city and to the health, safety, and general welfare of the future lot owners in the
subdivision and of the community at large.
(B) No land within the jurisdiction of this chapter may be subdivided through the use of any
legal description other than with reference to a plat approved by the city in accordance with this
chapter. No land shall be subdivided or sold, leased, transferred or developed until all provisions of
this chapter have been met. No plat or replat shall be filed or accepted for filing by the Office of the
Polk County Recorder or Registrar of Titles unless adopted by the affirmative vote of the majority of
the members of the City Council approving such plat or replat.
Subdivision Regulations 19
(C) No building permit shall be issued for any parcel or plat of land created by subdivision after
the effective date of, and not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, and no excavation of
land or construction of any public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced except
in conformity with this chapter and the approved plat is filed with the Polk County Recorders Office.
(1981 Code, § 11.01, Subd. 4) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.005 ENACTMENT.
In order that land may be subdivided in accordance with these purposes and policies, these
subdivision regulations are hereby adopted and made effective as of December 11, 2003. Upon the
adoption of this chapter according to law, the previous subdivision regulations are hereby repealed,
except as to those sections expressly retained in this chapter. All applications for subdivision
approval, including final plats, pending on the effective date of this chapter shall be reviewed under
this chapter except that this chapter will not apply if preliminary plat approval was obtained, and the
period for submittal of a final plat has not expired, prior to the effective date of this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 11.01, Subd. 5) (Ord. 273, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.006 INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT AND SEPARABILITY.
(A) In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be
the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This
chapter shall be construed broadly to promote the purposes for which they are adopted. This chapter
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule, or regulation, statute,
or other provision of law except as provided in this chapter.
(B) Where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by
any other provision of this chapter or any ordinance, rule, or regulation, or other provision of law,
the provision which is more restrictive or imposes higher standards shall control.
(C) If any part or provision of this chapter of the application of this chapter to any person or
circumstances is adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the judgment shall be
confined in its operation to the part, provision, or application directly involved in the controversy in
which the judgment shall be rendered and it shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of
this chapter or the application of them to other persons or circumstances. The City Council hereby
declares that it would have enacted the remainder of this chapter even without any such part,
provision, or application which is judged to be invalid.
(1981 Code, § 11.01, Subd. 6) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
20 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
§ 151.007 AMENDMENTS.
For the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare, the Planning
Commission, on its own initiative, on referral from the City Council, or from a petition from the
public, may from time to time propose amendments to this chapter which shall then be approved or
disapproved by the City Council. Approval shall require a 2/3-majority vote of the City Council.
The Planning Commission, before forwarding any amendment to the City Council, shall hold a
public hearing with public notice given 10 days in advance.
(1981 Code, § 11.01, Subd. 7) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.008 VARIANCES.
Where the city finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict
compliance with this chapter and/or the purposes of this chapter may be served to a greater extent by
an alternative proposal, it may approve variances this chapter so that substantial justice may be done
and the public interest secured, provided that the variance, exception, or waiver of conditions shall
not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter; and further provided that the
city shall not approve variances unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it
in each specific case that:
(A) The granting of the variances will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare
or injurious to other property;
(B) The conditions upon which the request is based are unique to the property for which the
relief is sought and are not applicable generally to other property;
(C) Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions of the
specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a
mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of this chapter is carried out;
(D) The relief sought will not in any manner vary the provisions of Chapter 152 of the City
Code or the Land Use Plan, except that those documents may be amended in the manner prescribed
by law.
(E) In approving variances, the city may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure
substantially the purposes described herein.
(F) A petition for a variance shall be submitted in writing by the applicant at the time of
submitting an application for subdivision approval. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the
petition and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
(1981 Code, § 11.01, Subd. 8) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
Subdivision Regulations 21
§ 151.009 FEES ESTABLISHED.
The City Council shall, from time to time establish by resolution, fees for review of
subdivisions. No application for subdivision shall be considered filed with Planning staff, unless and
until said application is accompanied by the fee, as established by resolution of the City Council, and
as required by these regulations.
(1981 Code, § 11.01, Subd. 9) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.010 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALLEY. Means any strip of land publicly or privately owned, less than 24 feet in width between
property lines, set aside for public vehicular access to abutting property and public utility uses.
APPLICANT. Means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided or its representative who
shall have express written authority to act on behalf of the owner. Consent shall be required from
the legal owner of the premises.
ARTERIAL STREET or HIGHWAY. Means a street or highway of considerable continuity;
designed primarily to serve as travel corridors between various sectors of the area and beyond (such
as from within a city to the outlying areas.)
BLOCK Means any property abutting on 1 side of a street and laying between the 2 nearest
intersecting or intercepting streets or railroad right-of-way or unsubdivided acreage.
BUILDING. Means any structure having a roof that may provide shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals or property of any kind.
COLLECTOR STREET. Means refers to a street designed to serve the internal traffic of an
area (such as a neighborhood,) and which distributes and collects traffic from local streets and
connects with highways and/or arterial streets. A LOCAL STREET as herein used means a street
whose primary use is to serve abutting property.
CONCEPT PLAN. Means that map submitted in connection with a multi-phased or phased
subdivision application which provides the information and graphics meeting the requirements of this
chapter for the purpose of implementing an integrated development scheme for all phases of the
proposed subdivision.
CUL-DE-SAC. Means a comparatively short street having but 1 end open to traffic and the
other end being permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-around.
22 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
DEVELOPMENT. Means to improve or take overt action to alter real property.
DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE. Means those goals determined from time to time in plan or
policy form as part of the city's comprehensive planning program that indicate how the city wishes to
develop itself in line with orderly and logical direction.
EASEMENT. Means the right to use the land of another owner for a specified use. An
EASEMENT may be granted for the purpose of constructing and maintaining walkways, roadways,
individual sewage treatment systems, utilities, drainage, driveway, and other uses.
FLOOD FRINGE. Means that portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway. Flood fringe
is synonymous with the term FLOOD FRINGE used in the Flood Insurance Study for the City of
East Grand Forks. Unnumbered A Zones shall be the same as FLOOD FRINGE except in floodway
areas which are determined as per Minn. Reg. 6128.5000.6120.6200 Floodplain Management for
Determining Floodways and Flood Fringe.
FLOOD PLAIN. Means the areas adjoining a watercourse which have been or hereafter may be
covered by the regional flood.
FLOODWAY Means the channel of the watercourse and those portions adjoining flood plains
which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the regional flood.
IMPROVEMENTS. Means changes to the land necessary to prepare it for development.
IMPROVEMENTS - PUBLIC. Means changes to the land necessary to prepare it for
development including but not limited to grading, filling, street paving, curb paving, sidewalks, walk
ways, watermains, sewers, drainageways, and other public works and appurtenances.
LOCAL STREET. Means a street designed for access to abutting property and not intended to
facilitate through traffic.
LOT. Means land occupied by, or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings; or
by a dwelling group and its accessory buildings; together with such open spaces as are required
under the provisions of this chapter, having not less than the minimum area required by this chapter
for a building site in the district in which such lot is situated, and having its principal frontage on a
street.
MONEY IN LIEU OF LAND. Means payment of money into a municipally earmarked fund to
provide for facilities off-site in place of dedicating land or providing such facility on site.
PERMANENT STRUCTURES AND BUILDINGS. Mean structures and building existing prior
to the proposed plat will remain in place after the plat has been approved.
PLAT. Means the map, drawing or chart on which the applicant's plan of subdivision is
presented to the City Council for approval.
Subdivision Regulations 23
PLAT - FINAL. Means the map of a subdivision, and any accompanying material as required,
to be recorded after approval by the City Council.
PLAT - PRELIMINARY. Means the drawing or drawings, described in this chapter, indicating
the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted for approval.
REGIONAL FLOOD. Means a flood which is representative of large floods known to have
occurred in the vicinity of East Grand Forks and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to
occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval.
REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. Means that point not less than the
water surface profile associated with the regional flood, plus any increase in flood heights
attributable to encroachments on the flood plain.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. Means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street,
crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil, or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or
storm sewer main, or for any other special use. The usage of the term RIGHT-OF-WAY for land
platting purposes shall mean that every right of way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is
to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right of way and not included
within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. RIGHT OF WAY intended for streets,
crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, or any other use involving maintenance by a
public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the applicant of the plat on which such right of way
is established.
RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH. Means the distance between property lines measured at right angles
to the center line of the street.
STREET. Means public property, not an alley, intended for traffic circulation. In appropriate
context the term STREET may refer to the right of way bounded by the property lines of such public
property, or may refer to the paving installed within such right of way.
STRUCTURE. Means anything constructed of erected.
SUBDIVISION. Means the division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land regardless of
how it is to be used, into 2 or more lots either by plat or by metes and bounds description; or the
division or redivision of land involving dedication of a new park, playground, street, or other public
right of way facility, or the vacation, realignment, or any other changes in existing streets, alleys,
easements, recreation areas, water, or other public improvements or facilities; provided, however,
that the following classes shall be exempt:
(1) The division of land for agricultural purposes into parcels greater than 40 acres, where
no new streets, roads, or other right of way is involved.
(2) The division of land is a court ordered action as a direct result of an inheritance from a
deceased family member.
24 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
SUBDIVISION - MAJOR. Means any division of land not meeting the definition for a simple
nor minor subdivision.
SUBDIVISION - MINOR. Means the division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
regardless of how it is to be used, into 2 but not more than 7 lots or parcels either by plat or by
metes and bounds description, or the division or redivision of land involving dedication of a new
park, playground, street, nor other public right of way facility, nor the vacation, realignment, nor
any other changes in existing streets, alleys, easements, recreation areas, water, nor other public
improvements nor facilities.
SUBDIVISION - SIMPLE. Means the division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
regardless of how it is to be used, into 2 lots either by plat or by metes and bounds description but
not including the division or redivision of land involving dedication of a new park, playground,
street, nor other public right of way facility, nor the vacation, realignment, nor any other changes in
existing streets, alleys, easements, recreation areas, water, nor other public improvements nor
facilities.
(1981 Code, § 11.01, Subd. 10) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.011 COMPLIANCE WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, ZONING ORDINANCE AND
OFFICIAL MAP.
No subdivision of land shall conflict with the provisions of the East Grand Forks Land Use Plan,
Chapter 152 of the City Code, or Official Maps.
(1981 Code, § 11.01, Subd. 11) (Ord. 273, adopted 12-11-2003)
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES
§ 151.025 GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES.
The following procedures shall be followed in the administration of this chapter and no real property
within the jurisdiction area as identified in this chapter shall be subdivided and offered for sale until the
final plat has been approved by the City Council as set forth in the procedures provided herein.
(1981 Code, § 11.02) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
Subdivision Regulations 25
§ 151.026 CONCEPT PLAN MEETING AND CLASSIFICATION.
Prior to the submission of any application for subdivision plat approval under the provisions of this
chapter, the applicant shall submit a concept plan and meet with the planning staff to discuss the platting
application and process. Through the concept plan meeting, the planning staff will summarize the
informational requirements and issues related to the specific platting request. The intention is to provide
the developer with an advisory review of the subdivision without incurring major costs.
(1981 Code, § 11.02, Subd. 1) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.027 OFFICIAL SUBMISSION DATE.
(A) For the purposes of this chapter, the date a completed application for preliminary or final plat
approval are submitted to planning staff, shall constitute the official submission sate of the application
on which the period required for formal approval, conditional approval or disapproval shall commence
to run. The planning staff, upon receipt of the application, shall notify the applicant in writing within
10 city business days if the application is found to be incomplete, per M.S. § 15.99, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(B) The City Council must take action on a completed application following referral by the Planning
Commission within the time permitted by M.S. § 15.99, as it may be amended from time to time. The
person making the application shall be notified of the action taken.
(1981 Code, § 11.02, Subd. 2) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.028 COORDINATION OF ZONING APPLICATIONS WITH SUBDIVISION
APPROVAL.
It is the intent of this chapter that subdivision review be carried out simultaneously with the review
of the zoning applications under the Chapter 152, Zoning Code. The plans required for the zoning
applications shall be submitted in a form to satisfy the requirements of this chapter. Whenever zoning
applications include the division or resubdivision of land as regulated by this chapter, subdivision plat
approval shall be required prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(1981 Code, § 11.02, Subd. 3) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.029 COORDINATION OF SUBDIVISION PLAT APPROVAL WITH POLK COUNTY
ZONING ORDINANCE.
It is the intent of this chapter that subdivision plat review be carried out simultaneously with the
review of zoning applications under the Polk County Zoning Ordinance. Whenever a zoning application
includes the division or resubdivision of land under the jurisdiction of this chapter, subdivision plat
approval shall be required prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(1981 Code, § 11.02, Subd. 4) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
26 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
PROCEDURE FOR SIMPLE SUBDIVISION PLATS
§ 151.045 PROCEDURE FOR SIMPLE SUBDIVISION PLATS.
If, at the concept plan meeting, the proposed subdivision plat has been classified as a simple
subdivision plat, the following procedures shall be followed.
(1981 Code, § 11.03) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.046 PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION FOR SIMPLE SUBDIVISION PLATS.
(A) The applicant shall submit to the planning staff 5 copies of a preliminary plat and completed
administrative application form for the proposed subdivision plat. The preliminary plat and application
must be completed and provide all of the information as set forth in this hapter.
(B) The planning staff shall forward copies of the application form and preliminary plat to the
appropriate review agencies for their recommendations on the proposal. Planning staff shall request the
reviewing agencies to submit their recommendations.
(C) The applicant will be given staff comments and recommendations as to what if any changes that
must be made. The applicant shall then revise the proposed subdivision plat as required.
(D) The applicant may appeal the recommendations made by the planning staff to the Planning
Commission. All information regarding the proposed subdivision plat shall be forwarded to the Planning
Commission for consideration at its next meeting. Following its review, the Planning Commission shall
determine what recommendations shall be forwarded regarding the proposed subdivision plat.
(E) Approval of the preliminary plat is not an acceptance of the subdivision plat for record but is
rather an expression of approval of a general plat as a guide to preparation to the subdivision plat for
final approval and recording upon fulfillment of all requirements of this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 11.03, Subd. 1) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.047 FINAL PLAT APPLICATION FOR SIMPLE SUBDIVISION PLATS.
(A) A complete application for final plat shall be submitted no later than 90 days after the date
which the applicant receives the notice of recommendations of final plat. Otherwise, the preliminary plat
approval shall be considered void, unless an extension is requested in writing by the developer, and for
good cause, is granted by the City Council.
(B) A complete final plat application consists of, a completed administrative application form, 5
paper copies and 1 electronic version of the final plat which shall conform to the preliminary plat as
reviewed. The Final Plat shall show the features designated in §§ 151.090 et seq.
Subdivision Regulations 27
(C) The planning staff shall forward copies of the application form and final plat to the appropriate
review agencies for their recommendations on the proposal. Planning staff shall request the reviewing
agencies to submit their recommendations.
(D) Once planning staff has received all of the recommendations, they shall notify the applicant of
the changes, if any, that must be made. The applicant shall then revise the proposed subdivision plat as
required.
(E) When a final plat meets all the conditions of this chapter, planning staff shall forward the
application and proposed final plat and any recommendations to the City Council for their action upon
the proposal. Prior to the City Council giving consideration to said final plat, the Clerk-Treasurer shall
cause notice to be published in the official newspaper of the city. The City Council shall consider said
final plat, said notice of the time and place of said meeting to be published at least 10 days prior to the
meeting of the City Council at which said final plat shall be considered by the City Council.
(1981 Code, § 11.03, Subd. 2) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.048 RECORDING FOR SIMPLE SUBDIVISION PLATS.
(A) Once the owner or applicant has received notice of the final action taken by the City Council,
he or she shall have 90 days thereafter to submit the approved final plat that meets the conditions, if any,
as set by the Council to the Planning staff. The planning staff shall review the final plat for conformance
with the action taken by the City Council.
(B) Once planning staff has determined the final plat meets all requirements of this chapter, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall sign the final plat.
(C) The owner or applicant shall then file the final plat together with a certified copy of the
resolution with the Polk County Recorders Office. Any approval of the final plat by the City Council
shall be null and void if the plat and resolution of the Council approving same are not recorded with the
Recorders Office within 60 days after the date the Clerk-Treasurer signs the final plat, unless application
for an extension of time is made in writing during said 60-day period to the City Council, and an
extension is granted by the City Council.
(1981 Code, § 11.03, Subd. 3) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
28 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
PROCEDURE FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION PLATS
§ 151.060 PROCEDURE FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION PLATS.
If, at the concept plan meeting, the proposed subdivision plat has been classified as a minor
subdivision plat, the following procedures shall be followed.
(1981 Code, § 11.04) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.061 PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION PLATS.
(A) The applicant shall submit to the planning staff 5 copies of a preliminary plat and completed
administrative application form for the proposed subdivision plat. The preliminary plat and application
must be completed and provide all of the information as set forth in this chapter.
(B) The planning staff shall forward copies of the application form and preliminary plat to the
appropriate review agencies for their recommendations on the proposal. Planning staff shall request the
reviewing agencies to submit their recommendations.
(C) The applicant will be given staff comments and recommendations as to what if any changes must
be made. The applicant shall then revise the proposed subdivision plat as required.
(D) The applicant may appeal the recommendations made by the planning staff to the Planning
Commission. All information regarding the proposed subdivision plat shall be forwarded to the Planning
Commission for consideration at its next meeting. Following its review, the Planning Commission shall
determine what recommendations shall be forwarded regarding the proposed subdivision plat.
(E) Approval of the preliminary plat is not an acceptance of the subdivision plat for record but is
rather an expression of approval of a general plat as a guide to preparation to the subdivision plat for
final approval and recording upon fulfillment of all requirements of this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 11.04, Subd. 1) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.062 FINAL PLAT APPLICATION FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION PLATS.
(A) A complete application for final plat shall be submitted no later than 90 days after the date
which the applicant receives the notice of recommendations of final plat. Otherwise, the preliminary plat
approval shall be considered void, unless an extension is requested in writing by the developer, and for
good cause, is granted by the City Council.
(B) A complete final plat application consists of, a completed administrative application form, 5
paper copies and 1 electronic version of the final plat which shall conform to the preliminary plat as
reviewed. The final plat shall show the features designated in §§ 151.090 et seq.
Subdivision Regulations 29
(C) The planning staff shall forward copies of the application form and final plat to the appropriate
review agencies for their recommendations on the proposal. Planning staff shall request the reviewing
agencies to submit their recommendations.
(D) When a final plat meets all the conditions of this chapter, planning staff shall forward the
application, proposed final plat, staff recommendations, and any review agency recommendations to the
Planning Commission for their action upon the proposal. Prior to the Commission giving consideration
to said final plat, the Clerk-Treasurer shall cause notice to be published in the official newspaper of the
city. The City Council shall consider said final plat, said notice of the time and place of said meeting to
be published at least 10 days prior to the meeting of the Commission at which said final plat shall be
considered by the Commission.
(E) After receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission together with all applicable
information gathered upon the proposed subdivision, the City Council may take action upon said plat.
The City Council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the said plat. Following final action
by the City Council, the planning staff shall notify the owner or applicant, and the appropriate review
agencies, of the City Council's action.
(1981 Code, § 11.04, Subd. 2) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.063 RECORDING FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION PLATS.
(A) Once the owner or applicant has received notice of the final action taken by the City Council,
he or she shall have 90 days thereafter to submit the approved final plat that meets the conditions, if any,
as set by the City Council to the planning staff. The planning staff shall review the final plat for
conformance with the action taken by the City Council.
(B) Once planning staff has determined the final plat meets all requirements of this chapter, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall sign the final plat.
(C) The owner or applicant shall then file the final plat together with a certified copy of the
resolution with the Polk County Recorders Office. Any approval of the final plat by the Council shall
be null and void if the plat and resolution of the Council approving same are not recorded with the
Recorders Office within 60 days after the date the Clerk-Treasurer signs the final plat, unless application
for an extension of time is made in writing during said 60-day period to the Council, and an extension
is granted by the Council.
(1981 Code, § 11.04, Subd. 3) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
30 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
PROCEDURE FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLATS
§ 151.075 PROCEDURE FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLATS.
If, at the concept plan meeting, the proposed subdivision plat has been classified as a major
subdivision plat, the following procedures shall be followed.
(1981 Code, § 11.05) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.076 PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLATS.
(A) The applicant shall submit to the planning staff 5 copies of a preliminary plat and completed
administrative application form for the proposed subdivision plat. The preliminary plat and application
must be completed and provide all of the information as set forth in this chapter.
(B) Planning staff shall forward copies of the application form and preliminary plat to the
appropriate review agencies for their recommendations on the proposal. Planning staff shall request the
reviewing agencies to submit their recommendations prior to the next scheduled Planning Commission
meeting, which shall be noted in the request.
(C) When a preliminary plat meets all the conditions of this chapter, planning staff shall forward
the application, proposed preliminary plat, staff recommendations, and any review agency
recommendations to the Planning Commission for their action upon the proposal. Prior to the
Commission giving consideration to said preliminary plat, the Clerk-Treasurer shall cause notice to be
published in the official newspaper of the city. The Council shall consider said preliminary plat, said
notice of the time and place of said meeting to be published at least 10 days prior to the meeting of the
Commission at which said preliminary plat shall be considered by the Commission.
(D) The Commission may recommend approve, approve with conditions, or deny the said plat.
Following final action by the Commission, the planning staff shall notify the Council, owner or
applicant, and the appropriate review agencies of the Commission's action. The applicant shall then
revise the proposed subdivision plat as required.
(E) All information regarding the proposed subdivision plat shall be forwarded to the Council for
consideration at its next meeting. Following its review, the Council shall determine what
recommendations shall be forwarded regarding the preliminary plat.
(F) Approval of the preliminary plat is not an acceptance of the subdivision plat for record but is
rather an expression of approval of a general plat as a guide to preparation to the subdivision plat for
final approval and recording upon fulfillment of all requirements of this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 11.05, Subd. 1) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
Subdivision Regulations 31
§ 151.077 FINAL PLAT APPLICATION FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLATS.
(A) A complete application for final plat shall be submitted no later than 90 days after the date
which the applicant receives the notice of recommendations of final plat. Otherwise, the preliminary plat
approval shall be considered void, unless an extension is requested in writing by the developer, and for
good cause, is granted by the City Council.
(B) A complete final plat application consists of, a completed administrative application form, 5
paper copies and 1 electronic version of the final plat which shall conform to the preliminary plat as
reviewed. The Final Plat shall show the features designated in §§ 151.090 et seq.
(C) The planning staff shall forward copies of the application form and final plat to the appropriate
review agencies for their recommendations on the proposal. Planning staff shall request the reviewing
agencies to submit their recommendations.
(D) When a final plat meets all the conditions of this chapter, planning staff shall forward the
application, proposed final plat, staff recommendations, and any review agency recommendations to the
Planning Commission for their action upon the proposal.
(E) After receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission together with all applicable
information gather upon the proposed subdivision, the Council may take action upon said plat. The
Council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the said plat. Following final action by the
Council, the Planning staff shall notify the owner or applicant, and the appropriate review agencies, of
the Council's action.
(1981 Code, § 11.05, Subd. 2) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.078 RECORDING FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLATS.
(A) Once the owner or applicant has received notice of the final action taken by the Council, he or
she shall have 90 days thereafter to submit the approved final plat that meets the conditions, if any, as
set by the Council to the planning staff. The planning staff shall review the final plat for conformance
with the action taken by the Council.
(B) Once planning staff has determined the final plat meets all requirements of this chapter, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall sign the final plat.
(C) The owner or applicant shall then file the final plat together with a certified copy of the
resolution with the Polk County Recorders Office. Any approval of the final plat by the Council shall
be null and void if the plat and resolution of the Council approving same are not recorded with the
Recorders Office within 60 days after the date the Clerk-Treasurer signs the final plat, unless application
for an extension of time is made in writing during said 60-day period to the Council, and an extension
is granted by the Council.
(1981 Code, § 11.05, Subd. 3) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
32 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
PRESENTATION REQUIREMENTS
§ 151.090 CONCEPT PLAN.
(A) Concept plan information. Prior to the formulation of a preliminary plat, applicants shall
present a sketch plan to the Planning Department at the concept plan meeting.
(B) Information to be included. The sketch plan shall include the following information unless
waived by planning staff:
(1) Name and address of developer/owner.
(2) Date of plan preparation.
(3) Scale of plan (engineering scale only).
(4) North arrow indication.
(5) Legal description.
(6) Property location map illustrating the site location relative to adjoining properties and
streets.
(7) Scaled drawing (engineering scale only) illustrating property boundaries using the City's
GIS database.
(8) Scaled drawing of the proposed subdivision sketch plan including street patterns and lot
layout related to the natural features of the site, and adjoining properties.
(9) Natural Features. A generalized drawing of natural features showing wetlands, lakes,
drainage ways, and woodland areas.
(10) Any required zoning changes.
(11) Proposed timing and staging of development.
(12) Additional information as required by the Planning staff.
(1981 Code, § 11.06, Subd. 1) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
Subdivision Regulations 33
§ 151.091 PRELIMINARY PLAT PRESENTATION REQUIREMENTS.
The preliminary plat shall include the following information unless waived by planning staff.
Additional information or modifications may be required by city staff, the Planning Commission or City
Council and additional information may be requested during the review process. In certain cases some
information required by these standards may not be appropriate or may need to be modified in order to
provide an adequate basis for making a decision.
(A) General information.
(1) The proposed name of the plat.
(2) Date of application, name, address, phone number and applicable license number of the
owner, developer, agent, applicant, engineer, surveyor or other principle involved in the development
of the plat.
(3) Proof of ownership or legal interest in the property in order to make application.
(4) Existing zoning or any zoning changes needed, or reference to any zoning or similar land
use actions that have already occurred that are pertinent to the proposed development.
(5) Total acreage of the land to be subdivided.
(6) Boundary line survey and legal description. Identify any property within the subdivision
that is registered (torrens).
(7) Five paper copies of the preliminary plat and supporting documents, plus any additional
copies deemed necessary by the planning staff, plus 1 reproducible copy reduced to 11 inches by 17
inches along with 1 copy of preliminary plat and all related engineering plans in a digital format (DWG
file in North Dakota (North) State Plane coordinates) compatible with city requirements.
(8) North arrow and scale of 1 to 200 (1/200) to 1 to 50 (1/50) depending upon the size of the
plat and the detail of the information to be shown.
(9) Existing covenants, liens, or encumbrances.
(10) Proposed street names.
(11) Any additional information as requested by the planning staff.
34 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(B) Existing features to be shown.
(1) Existing property lines and property lines extending 200 feet from the exterior boundaries
of the parcel to be subdivided, including the names of the adjacent property owners shall be indicated.
(2) Existing roads, both public and private, showing width of road, type of construction, and
any associated easements.
(3) Any and all existing public and private easements with purpose of easement and types and
location of any facility or installation that is located in the easement.
(4) Location, size, and capacity of all existing and abandoned drainage, storm water, individual
sewage treatment systems, wells, and utilities, including poles located on the property and to a distance
of 200 feet beyond the property lines.
(5) Permanent buildings or other substantial land uses located on the property and to a distance
of 200 feet beyond the property.
(6) Waterways, watercourses, lakes, and wetlands with ordinary high water level and 100-year
flood elevations shown on the map and delineated in the field.
(C) Proposed features to be shown.
(1) Proposed lot lines and dimensions of all lots. When lots are located on a curve in a road
or cul-de-sac, the lot width at the building setback line shall be shown.
(2) Proposed spot elevations.
(3) Proposed uses, including parks, storm water retention areas, and areas of common
ownership.
(4) Location, grade, and width of proposed streets, pedestrian ways, bicycle paths, trails,
walking paths and provision for extending streets to serve adjacent areas. Access and street
classifications shall be consistent with the Grand Forks/East Grand Forks Transportation Plan, as
amended.
(5) Location of proposed structures, driveways, percolation tests and soil borings, if applicable,
and 2 sites suitable for individual sewer treatment systems with the method outlined for protecting the
alternate individual sewage treatment system site for future use.
(6) Grading plans showing how the site will be graded and showing the final contours into the
existing contours. Preliminary street grades and drainage plan shall be shown on a copy of the contour
map.
Subdivision Regulations 35
(7) Proposed easements for drainage, slope protection, flood protection, and protection of
wetlands and waterbodies, including stormwater retention areas and easements for the installation of
utilities.
(8) A report, prepared by a Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) licensed designer,
on the feasibility of individual sewage treatment systems (ISTS) and water systems on each lot or a
communal or shared sewage and water system serving the subdivision. The report shall follow the
Minn. Rules Ch. 7080, as may be amended, and include soil boring analysis and percolation tests to
verify report conclusions.
(9) The minimum setback requirements with resulting building envelope.
(D) Additional information required.
(1) A build out plan (ghost plat), when applicable, depicting how the land within the
subdivision may be further subdivided in the future.
(2) Proposed title declarations for residential lots adjoining potential future development open
spaces notifying the perspective homeowner of the intent to have the open space develop in the future.
(3) Any additional information as requested by the planning staff.
(1981 Code, § 11.06, Subd. 2) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.092 FINAL PLAT PRESENTATION REQUIREMENTS.
The final plat shall include the following information unless waived by planning staff. Additional
information or modifications may be required by city staff, the Planning Commission or City Council
and additional information may be requested during the review process. In certain cases some
information required by these standards may not be appropriate or may need to be modified in order to
provide an adequate basis for making a decision.
(A) Two mylar copies of the final plat.
(B) One reproducible copy reduced to 11 inches by 17 inches of the final plat.
(C) Five blueline copies of the final plat and supporting documents, plus any additional copies
deemed necessary by the planning staff plus 1 reproducible copy reduced to 11 inches by 17 inches
along with 1 copy of the final plat in a digital format (DWG file in North Dakota (North) State Plane
coordinates) compatible with city requirements.
(D) One up-to-date (within 3 months) title insurance or opinion, as the City Attorney or planning
staff may require.
36 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(E) One copy of any title declaration, deed restriction, restrictive covenant, or homeowner's
association documents in recordable form.
(F) When an approved plat is located outside of the corporate boundaries of the city, the above
certificates will be changed to more accurately reflect the name of the proposed subdivision plat and its
location within Polk County.
(G) Other information as may be required by the City Council.
(1981 Code, § 11.06, Subd. 3) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 151.105 DESIGN STANDARDS.
Generally, design standards assure that the layout of the subdivision harmonizes with existing plans
affecting the development and its surroundings, and shall be in conformity with the development
objectives of the city. The following design standards shall apply.
(1981 Code, § 11.07) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.106 STREETS.
In order to provide for streets of suitable location, width, improvements to accommodate prospective
traffic, satisfactory access to police, firefighting, snow removal, sanitation, road-maintenance equipment,
to coordinate streets so as to compose a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining
properties, the following design standards for streets are hereby required.
(A) General street design.
(1) The design of all streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets,
to reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographical conditions, to run-off of storm waters, and to the
proposed uses of the areas to be served.
(2) Where new streets extend existing streets, their projections shall be at the same or greater
width, but in no case less than the minimum required width.
(3) Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in new subdivisions
shall make provision for the proper projection of streets. When a new subdivision adjoins unsubdivided
land susceptible to being subdivided, then the new streets shall be carried to the boundaries of such
unsubdivided land. The street arrangement shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners of adjoining
property in platting their own land and providing convenient access to it.
Subdivision Regulations 37
(4) The right-of-way locations shall be as shown in the transportation element of the city's
comprehensive plan and where not shown thereon locations for street rights-of-way shall be as follows:
(a) Arterial shall be located along all section lines.
(b) Collector shall be along all quarter section lines.
(c) All other rights-of-way may be located as per the applicant's plan provided they are
not in conflict with other sections of this chapter or the Land Use Plan.
(B) Street width and grade.
(1) The following standards of right-of-way width and grade shall be observed by the
subdivider:
Types of Street Minimum Width Maximum Grade Minimum Grade
Trunk highways and
Arterials
100 to 150 feet 5% 0.3%
Collector 80 feet 6% 0.3%
Local 80 feet 8% 0.3%
(2) Reverse curves shall have tangents of at least 100 feet in length shall be introduced between
reverse curves on collector streets and 50 feet on local streets.
(3) Local streets shall be so aligned that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
(4) Street jogs with centerline off-sets of less than 150 feet shall be avoided.
(5) Street intersections as practical, shall intersect at right angles and no intersection shall be
at any angle less than 75 degrees. It must be evidenced that safe and efficient traffic flow is encouraged.
(6) Cul-de-sacs shall have a maximum length of 500 feet measured along the centerline from
the intersection of origin end of right-of-way. Each cul-de-sac shall be provided at the closed end with
a turn-around having a right-of-way diameter of 100 feet.
(7) Half-streets shall be prohibited except where the Council finds it to be practical to require
the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided.
(8) The name of streets obviously in alignment with existing and named streets shall bear the
name of such existing streets. In no case shall the name for the proposed street duplicate existing street
names, including phonetically.
38 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(9) Private streets shall not be approved, unless approved as part of an approved Planned Unit
Development (PUD), nor shall public improvements be approved for any previously existing private
streets, unless authorized by Council.
(10) Street surfacing done by the applicant shall be approved by the Council.
(11) Local service drives maybe required by the Council when the proposed plat is adjacent to
a principle arterial street or may require that the lots back onto the arterial street thus prohibiting a
vehicle access between the 2.
(12) Sidewalks. Reserved. These will be developed when the City adopts installation guidelines
for sidewalks. If you recall, the Pedestrian Plan was adopted by the City Council with the provision that
these guidelines would be studied.
(1981 Code, § 11.07, Subd. 1) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.107 EASEMENTS.
(A) Easements shall be provided, where necessary and shall generally be 20 feet wide or 10 feet
wide on each side of the lot line. They shall be centered on rear and other lot lines. They shall have
continuity of alignment from block to block. At deflection points, easements for pole line anchors shall
be provided.
(B) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, or street, there shall be
provided a storm-water easements or drainage rights-of-way substantially in line with such watercourse,
together with additional width for construction and normal storm water run-off storage.
(C) The easement shall include not only the stream channel, but also adjoining areas that have been
subject to flooding in years of heavy run-off.
(1981 Code, § 11.07, Subd. 2) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.108 BLOCKS.
(A) Block lengths shall not exceed 1,200 feet, and, if possible, shall not be less than 400 feet in
length. In blocks longer than 800 feet, a pedestrian crossway easement with a minimum right-of-way
of 10 feet shall be provided near the center of the block. The use of additional access easements to
schools, parks and other destinations may also be required.
(B) Block arrangement shall be so designed as to provide 2 tiers of lots of appropriate depth unless
it adjoins a railroad; a limited access highway; the rear lot line abuts a different land use; or topographic
conditions necessitate a single tier of lots. In these cases the lot depth shall be at least 15 feet greater
than minimum requirements.
(1981 Code, § 11.07, Subd. 3) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
Subdivision Regulations 39
§ 151.109 LOTS.
(A) Where possible, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved
street lines. Lots with frontage on 2 parallel streets shall be permitted only under unusual circumstances
such as being adjacent to controlled access highways.
(B) Minimum lot sizes within the City shall conform to the zoning ordinance in force. Corner lots
shall be platted at least 15 feet wider than the normal minimum lot width required if no provision is so
made in the zoning ordinance in force.
(C) There shall be no direct vehicular access from residential lots to trunk highways or arterial
streets, All lots shall have access to a public street, or upon an approved private street in Planned Unit
Developments (PUD), with a minimum frontage as required by the zoning ordinance in force as the
minimum lot width.
(D) Lot remnants which are below the minimum lot size must be added to adjacent or surrounding
lots rather than be allowed to remain as an unusable outlot or parcel unless the owner can show plans
for the future use of such remnant.
(E) Residential lots shall be separated from trunk highways and arterial streets and railroad
rights-of-way by a 25-foot buffer strip, which may be in the form of added depth or width of lots backing
on or siding along the arterial or railroad right-of-way.
(1981 Code, § 11.07, Subd. 4) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.110 NATURAL FEATURES.
In subdividing of land, due regard shall be shown for all the natural features which, if preserved,
will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development.
(1981 Code, § 11.07, Subd. 5) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.111 PUBLIC LAND.
Because subdivision activity creates a need for a full range of public facilities, the Council may
require the dedication of a part of the subdivision for public use, or in lieu of such dedication the
payment of a monetary fee, such fee to be deposited in a fund separate and distinct from the general
fund, such funds to be used for the purpose of acquiring land for public use and for the development of
such lands. The City Council may from time to time by resolution set the amount of land to be dedicated
and/or the amount of the monetary fee.
(1981 Code, § 11.07, Subd. 6) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
40 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
§ 151.112 FLOOD PLAIN LANDS.
No plat shall be approved for any subdivision which covers an area within the flood plain unless the
applicant makes improvements which will assure that each lot contains a flood free site for location of
structure; design roads so that the finished surface is not more than 2 feet below the regulatory flood
protection elevation; and locates or designs public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems to provide protection to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
(1981 Code, § 11.07, Subd. 7) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.113 WATER FACILITIES.
(A) The applicant shall design the proposed subdivision so that connection to the city's water system
is optimized and provides the most effective and efficient connection to the nearest water capable of
carrying the needed water supply.
(B) In proposed subdivisions outside of the corporate limits and where connection to a public water
system is not practicable, the applicant shall have an individual on-site water system for each parcel
approved by the State of Minnesota and Polk County.
(1981 Code, § 11.07, Subd. 8) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.114 SEWER FACILITIES.
(A) The applicant shall design the proposed subdivision so that connection to the city's sanitary
sewer system is optimized and provides the most effective and efficient connection to the nearest sewer
line capable of carrying the sewage.
(B) In proposed subdivisions outside of the corporate limits and where connection to a public
sanitary sewer system is not practicable, the applicant shall have a sewage treatment system for each
parcel approved by Polk County.
(1981 Code, § 11.07, Subd. 9) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
Subdivision Regulations 41
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
§ 151.120 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
Before the Council approves a final plat, the applicant shall give satisfactory assurance of the
provision of the following requirements.
(A) Monuments. Steel monuments shall be placed at all lot and block corners, angle points of curves
in streets and a intermediate points as shown on the final plat. All U. S., state, county, or other official
monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in precise position.
(B) Streets. All the streets shall be provided in accordance with engineering specifications
established by the Council.
(C) Water mains. Public water shall be used and in accordance with Council specifications.
(D) Sanitary sewer. The applicant shall be required to install sanitary sewers and connect the same
to trunk line sewers in a manner as prescribed by the Council.
(E) Drainage facilities. Such facilities and easements shall be installed as will adequately provide
for the drainage of surface waters.
(F) Street name signs. These shall be placed at all street intersections within or abutting the
subdivision and shall conform to the standard of design accepted for all street name signs by the Planning
Commission.
(G) Specifications. All of the required improvements shall conform to engineering standards and
specifications as required by the city.
(1981 Code, § 11.08, Subds. 1–7) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
PREMATURE SUBDIVISIONS
§ 151.130 PREMATURE SUBDIVISIONS.
Any preliminary plat/final plat and/or development deemed premature pursuant to the criteria listed
below shall be denied by the City Council.
(1981 Code, § 11.09) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
42 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
§ 151.131 CONDITION ESTABLISHING PREMATURE SUBDIVISIONS.
(A) A subdivision may be deemed premature should any of the provisions which follow exist:
(1) Lack of adequate drainage. A condition of inadequate drainage shall be deemed to exist
if:
(a) Surface or subsurface water retention and runoff is such that it constitutes a hazard
resulting in flooding, loss of life, property damage, or other losses.
(b) The proposed subdivision will cause pollution of water bodies or damage to other
natural resources.
(c) The proposed site grading and development will cause damage from erosion,
sedimentation, or slope instability.
(d) Factors to be considered in making these determinations may include: average rainfall
for the area; area drainage patterns; the relationship of the land to floodplains; the nature of soils and
sub-soils and their ability to adequately support surface water runoff and waste disposal systems; the
slope and stability of the land; and the presence of woodlands, wetlands, water bodies, and/or other
natural resources.
(2) Lack of adequate potable water supply. A proposed subdivision shall be deemed to lack
an adequate potable water supply if the proposed subdivision does not have adequate sources of water
to serve the proposed subdivision if developed to its maximum permissible density without causing an
unreasonable depreciation of existing water supplies for surrounding areas.
(3) Lack of adequate roads or highways to serve the subdivision. A proposed subdivision shall
be deemed to lack adequate roads or highways to serve the subdivision when:
(a) Public roads which serve the proposed subdivision are of such a width, grade, stability,
vertical and horizontal alignment, site distance and paved surface condition that an increase in traffic
volume generated by the proposed subdivision would create a hazard to public safety and general
welfare, or seriously aggravate an already hazardous condition, and when, said roads are inadequate for
the intended use.
(b) The traffic generated by the proposed subdivision would create or contribute to unsafe
conditions on highways existing at the time of the application or proposed for completion within the next
2 years.
(4) Lack of adequate waste disposal systems. A proposed subdivision shall be deemed to lack
adequate waste disposal systems if in subdivisions for which sewer lines are proposed, there is
inadequate public or private sewer capacity in the present system to support the subdivision if developed
Subdivision Regulations 43
to its maximum permissible density, or if in subdivisions where sewer lines are neither available nor
proposed, there is inadequate on-site sewer capacity potential to support the subdivision if developed to
the maximum permissible density.
(5) Inconsistency with land use plan. A proposed subdivision shall be deemed inconsistent with
the East Grand Forks Land Use Plan when the subdivision is inconsistent with the purposes, objectives
and/or recommendations of the adopted Land Use Plan of East Grand Forks, as may be amended.
(6) Public service capacity. The city, county, township or school district lacks necessary
public service capacity when services such as recreational facilities, schools, police and fire protection
and other public facilities, which must be provided at public expense, cannot reasonably be provided for
within the next 2 years.
(7) Inconsistency with capital improvement plans. A proposed subdivision shall be deemed
inconsistent with capital improvement plans when improvements and/or services necessary to
accommodate the proposed subdivision have not been programmed in the East Grand Forks or other
regional capital improvement plans. The City Council may waive this criteria when it can be
demonstrated that a revision to capital improvement plans can be accommodated.
(1981 Code, § 11.09, Subd. 1) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.132 BURDEN OF EVIDENCE.
The burden shall be upon the applicant to show evidence that the proposed subdivision or
development is not premature.
(1981 Code, § 11.09, Subd. 2) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
ACCESS SPACING STANDARDS
§ 151.145 ACCESS SPACING STANDARDS.
Priority access control streets are to be determined by the official East Grand Forks Access Control
Map, as amended. The East Grand Forks Access Control Map is established by resolution of the City
Council.
(A) Local streets. All uses may take direct access to local streets.
(B) Low priority streets. No single individual residential dwelling (established pursuant to this
chapter) shall be permitted direct access to low priority streets. All uses with 150 feet or more of
frontage may take direct access to low priority streets. Uses with less than 150 feet of frontage shall not
44 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
be permitted to take access directly to low priority streets and shall be required to share common drives.
No use shall be permitted to take direct access to a low priority street at any point within 120 feet of any
intersection.
(C) High and medium priority streets (non-trunk highway). Access shall be permitted to medium
priority streets provided that the point of access is more than 660 feet from any intersection or other
point of access to that medium priority street. Access to high priority streets shall be permitted provided
that the point of access is more than 880 feet from any intersection or other point of access to that high
priority street.
(D) Minnesota Department of Highways Access Spacing Guidelines. High and medium priority
streets that are Minnesota trunk highways shall follow the Minnesota Department of Transportation
Access Spacing Guidelines, as amended.
(1981 Code, § 11.10) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he or she
performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby
prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
(1981 Code, § 11.99) (Ord. 274, 3rd Series, adopted 12-11-2003)
CHAPTER 152: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
152.001 Title
152.002 Purposes and intent
152.003 Application
152.004 Statute reference
152.005 Comprehensive revision
152.006 Definitions
Administration
152.020 Administration
152.021 Appeals
152.022 Special use permits
152.023 Variances
152.024 Zoning amendments
152.025 Application information
152.026 Fees
152.027 Financial guarantee
Non-Conforming Lots, Buildings, Structures and Uses
152.040 Purpose
152.041 Legal non-conforming lots (lot of record)
152.042 Legal non-conforming structures
152.043 Legal non-conforming uses
General Zoning District Provisions
152.055 Establishing zoning districts
152.056 Zoning district boundaries
152.057 Road vacation
152.058 Rights-of-way
152.059 Water areas
45
46 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
152.060 Zoning map
152.061 Flooding
152.062 Annexation
(R-1) Single-Family Residential District
152.075 Purpose
152.076 Permitted uses
152.077 Permitted accessory uses
152.078 Special uses
152.079 District performance standards
(R-2) Two-Family Residential District
152.090 Purpose
152.091 Permitted uses
152.092 Permitted accessory uses
152.093 Special uses
152.094 District performance standards
(R-3) High Density Residential District
152.105 Purpose
152.106 Permitted uses
152.107 Permitted accessory uses
152.108 Special uses
152.109 District performance standards
Planned Unit Development (PUD) District
152.120 Purpose
152.121 Administrative Procedures
152.122 Permitted uses
152.123 Permitted accessory uses
152.124 Special uses
152.125 District performance standards
(UER) Urban Expansion Reserve District
152.135 Purpose
152.136 Permitted uses
152.137 Permitted accessory uses
152.138 Special uses
152.139 District performance standards
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 47
(UER-C) Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster District
152.155 Purpose
152.156 Permitted uses
152.157 Permitted accessory uses
152.158 Special uses
152.159 District performance standards
(UBR) Urban Business Reserve District
152.175 Purpose
152.176 Permitted uses
152.177 Permitted accessory uses
152.178 Special uses
152.179 District performance standards
(C-1) Downtown Commercial District
152.195 Purpose
152.196 Permitted uses
152.197 Special uses
152.198 Design guidelines
152.199 District performance standards
(C-2) Highway Commercial District
152.215 Purpose
152.216 Permitted uses
152.217 Special uses
152.218 District performance standards
(I-1) Light Industrial District
152.230 Purpose
152.231 Permitted uses
152.232 Special uses
152.233 District performance standards
(I-2) General Industrial District
152.245 Purpose
152.246 Permitted uses
48 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
152.247 Special uses
152.248 District performance standards
(FW) Floodway Overlay District
152.260 Uses permitted
152.261 Uses by special use permit
152.262 Structural approval
152.263 General requirements
(FF) Flood Fringe Overlay District
152.275 Uses permitted
152.276 Uses by special permit
General Performance Standards
152.290 Purpose
152.291 Application
152.292 Architectural requirements
152.293 Building performance standards
152.294 Landscaping standards
152.295 Manufactured home courts and mobile homes
152.296 Refuse
152.297 Residential yard storage
152.298 Screening
152.299 Travel trailers and travel vehicles
152.300 Flood control easements
Wireless Communication Towers
152.315 Purpose
152.316 Procedure; satellite dishes
152.317 Procedure; wireless communication antennas and towers
Limited Livestock Raising
152.330 Purpose
152.331 Private stables
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 49
Parking/Off-Street Loading Areas and Access
152.345 Purpose
152.346 Application
152.347 Change of use
152.348 Existing facilities
152.349 Use of parking facilities
152.350 Design of parking and loading facilities
152.351 Accessibility Requirements
152.352 Computing requirements
152.353 Location of parking facilities
152.354 Combined parking facilities
152.355 Exemptions from parking regulations
152.356 Construction and maintenance
152.357 Lighting
152.358 Off-street parking
152.359 Access
152.360 Driveway width standards
Wind Energy Conservation
152.370 Wind energy conversion system
Home Occupations
152.380 Home occupations
Signs
152.390 General provisions
152.391 Safety, visibility, and nuisance provisions
152.392 Sign performance standards; business and industrial districts
152.393 Sign performance standards; residential area
152.394 Prohibited signs
152.395 Exempt signs
152.999 Penalty
50 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 TITLE.
Per the November 2003 revision, this chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as the East
Grand Forks Zoning Regulations; and shall be referred to herein as Chapter 152.
(1981 Code § 10.01, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.002 PURPOSES AND INTENT.
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
(A) To promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, and general welfare of the inhabitants of
the city by lessening congestion in the public rights-of-way; securing safety from fire, panic, and other
dangers;
(B) Providing adequate light and air;
(C) Preventing the overcrowding of land;
(D) Avoiding undue concentration of population;
(E) Facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other
public requirements;
(F) Conserving the value of property; and
(G) Encouraging the most appropriate use of land, minimizing losses due to flooding.
(1981 Code § 10.01, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.003 APPLICATION.
(A) Jurisdiction. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the incorporated areas
of East Grand Forks.
(B) Relation to the city land use plan. Pursuant to M. S. § 394.24, as it may be amended, and city
policy, the city's adopted Land Use Plan, as amended, shall serve as the basis upon which land use and
development shall be regulated. This chapter shall not conflict with, and shall be based upon and
implemented as the city's Land Use Plan.
Zoning Code 51
(C) Standard requirement. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are either
more or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by other ordinance, rule or regulation of
the city, the ordinance, rule or regulation which imposes the more restrictive condition, standard, or
requirement shall prevail.
(D) Conformity with this chapter.
(1) No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, constructed, moved or
altered; and no building, structure or land shall be used for any purpose nor in any manner which is not
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and without a building permit being issued.
(2) No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be reduced in dimension
or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date
of this chapter shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this chapter.
(E) Building compliance. Except as herein provided, no building, structure or premises shall
hereafter be used or occupied, and no building permit shall be issued that does not conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
(F) Uses not provided for within zoning districts. Whenever, in any zoning district a use is not
specifically permitted, the use shall be considered prohibited.
(G) Separabilty. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city that the several provisions of
this chapter are separable in accordance with the following:
(1) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this chapter to be
invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this chapter not specifically included in
said judgment.
(2) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision
of this chapter to a particular property, building, or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the
application of said provision to any other property, building, or structure not specifically included in said
judgment.
(1981 Code § 10.01, Subd. 3) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.004 STATUTE REFERENCE.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by M.S. §§ 394.21 to 394.37.
(1981 Code § 10.01, Subd. 4) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
52 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
§ 152.005 COMPREHENSIVE REVISION.
The City Council intends this chapter to be a comprehensive revision to the East Grand Forks
Zoning Regulations. Any act done, offense committed, rights accruing or accrued, liability, or penalty
incurred or imposed prior to the effective date of this chapter is not affected by its enactment.
(1981 Code § 10.01, Subd. 5) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.006 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABANDONED SIGN. A sign which no longer correctly directs or exhorts any person, advertises
a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product, activity conducted, or product available on the premises
where such sign is displayed.
ACCESSORY USE or STRUCTURE. Means a use or structure on the same lot with, and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
ADULT USES. Uses which include a sexually oriented arcade; sexually oriented bookstore;
sexually oriented video store; sexually oriented store; sexually oriented cabaret; sexually oriented
conversation/rap parlor; sexually oriented massage parlor; sexually oriented motel; sexually oriented
theater; sexually oriented steam room, bath house or sauna; or a nude model studio. Activities classified
as obscene as defined by M.S., § 617.241, as it may be amended from time to time, are not included.
ADVERTISING MESSAGE. That symbol and/or wording on a sign describing products or
services being offered to the public.
AGRICULTURAL USE. The use of land for the growing and/or production and wholesale
distribution of field crops, livestock, and livestock products for the purpose of income or own use,
including but not limited to the following:
(1) Field crops, including but not limited to, barley, beans, corn, hay, oats, potatoes, rye,
sorghum, and sunflowers.
(2) Livestock, including but not limited to, dairy and beef cattle, goats, sheep, hogs, poultry,
game birds and other animals including deer, rabbits and mink.
(3) Livestock products, including but not limited to, milk, butter, cheese, eggs, meat, fur and
honey.
(4) Trees, shrubs, bushes, and plants for wholesale distribution.
Zoning Code 53
(5) Sod farming.
(6) Orchards.
ANIMAL UNIT. A unit of measure used to compare differences in the production of animal wastes
which has a standard amount of waste produced on a regular basis by a slaughter steer or heifer. For
the purpose of this chapter, the following equivalents apply:
(1) To determine the animal unit measure for any animal not specified below, divide the
average adult weight by 1,000.
(2) The property shall have a minimum of 2 productive acres for the first animal unit and 1
productive acre for each additional animal unit.
Equivalent Animal
Units
Animal Unit Animal Unit
Per Acre
250 500
(1) Slaughter Steer or Cow Heifer 1.0 1.0 250 500
(1) Cow and Calf Pair 1.2 .8 208 417
Mature Dairy Cow
(1) Over 1,000 lbs 1.4 .7 179 357
(1) Under 1,000 lbs 1.0 1.0 250 500
Swine
(1) Over 300 lbs .4 2.5 625 1,250
(1) Between 55-300 lbs .3 3.3 833 1,667
(1) Under 55 lbs .05 20.0 5,000 10,000
(1) Sheep .4 2.5 625 1,250
(1) Duck .01 100.0 25,000 50,000
Turkey
(1) Over 5 lbs .018 55.6 13,889 27,779
(1) Under 5 lbs .005 200.0 50,000 100,000
54 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
Equivalent Animal
Units
Animal Unit Animal Unit
Per Acre
250 500
Chickens (Dry Manure)
(1) Over 5 lbs .005 200.0 50,000 100,000
(1) Under 5 lbs .003 333.3 83,333 166,667
(1) Chicken (Liquid Manure) .003 30.3 7,576 15,152
(1) Horse 1.0 1.0 250 500
ANIMATED SIGN. Any sign which includes action or motion. For purposes of this section, this
term does not refer to flashing, indexing or rotating which are separately defined.
APPLICANT. The owner, their agent or person having legal control, ownership and/or interest
in land for which the provisions of this chapter are being considered or reviewed.
AREA IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A free-standing sign which identifies the name of a
neighborhood, a residential subdivision, a multiple residential complex consisting of 3 or more
structures, a shopping center consisting of 5 or more separate businesses, an industrial area, an office
complex consisting of 3 or more structures, or any combination of the above located on contiguous
property.
ARTERIAL STREET. A street or highway of considerable continuity designed as a radial or
cross-town traffic artery between various sectors of the city (such as from within the city to outlying
parts thereof and beyond).
AWNING. A temporary hood or cover which projects from, and is entirely supported by the
exterior wall of a building; is composed of non-rigid materials, except for the supporting framework;
and is of a type which can be retracted, folded, or collapsed against the face of the supporting building.
AWNING SIGN. A non-illuminated identification sign affixed flat to the surface of an awning and
which does not extend vertically or horizontally beyond the limits of such awning.
BANNER or PENNANT. A temporary sign composed of lightweight material, such as paper, cloth,
or plastic; either enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame; secured or mounted so as to allow movement
of the sign by movement of the atmosphere; and erected for the purpose of announcing open houses,
grand openings, or special events.
Zoning Code 55
BASEMENT (for FLOOD REGULATIONS ONLY). Means any area of a structure, including
crawl space, having its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all 4 sides, regardless of the depth
of excavation below ground level.
BILLBOARD. A sign erected and used for the purpose of advertising a product, event, person or
subject not related to the premises on which said sign is located.
BLOCK. The property abutting on 1 side of a street and laying between the 2 nearest intersecting
or intercepting streets or railroad right-of-way or unsubdivided acreage.
BUFFER. The use of land, topography, difference in elevation, space, fences, or landscape
plantings to screen or partially screen a use or property from another use or property, or to shield or
mitigate noise, lights, or other impacts.
BUFFER YARD. A strip of land utilized to screen, or partially screen a use or property from
another use or property, or to shield or mitigate noise, lights, or other impacts.
BUILDING. Any structure having a roof that may provide shelter or enclosure of persons, animals
or property of any kind.
BUILDING FACADE, FACE, or WALL. That portion of any exterior elevation of a building
extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the building
elevation.
BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the average finished grade of the building, to the
top of the cornice of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, or the mean distance of the highest
gable on a pitched or hipped roof.
BULLETIN or BULLETIN BOARD. A sign which accommodates changeable symbols and/or
wording, and which displays information on activities and events on the premises or in the community.
BUSINESS. Any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise or associated
equipment is exhibited, stored, sold, or where services are offered for compensation.
CANOPY or MARQUEE. A permanent roof-like structure attached to and supported by a building,
projecting from part or all of a building face over the entrance to a building and constructed of a durable
material such as metal, glass or plastic, but is not the same as a projecting roof.
CANOPY or MARQUEE SIGN. Any sign attached to, or constructed in or on a canopy or
marquee, and which does not extend horizontally beyond the limits of such canopy or marquee.
56 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
COLLECTOR STREET. A street designed to serve the internal traffic of an area (such as a
neighborhood), and which distributes and collects traffic from local streets and connects with highways
and/or arterial streets. A local street as herein used means a street whose primary use is to serve
abutting property.
COMMERCIAL. Means activity involving the retail sale of goods or services carried out for profit.
COMMON OPEN SPACE. Any open space including parks, nature areas, playgrounds, trails, and
recreational buildings and structures, which are intended for use by, and are an integral part of a
development, and are not owned on an individual basis by each owner of a dwelling unit.
CONDOMINIUM. A form of individual ownership within a building that entails joint ownership
and responsibility for maintenance and repairs of the land and other common property of the building.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A non-illuminated sign placed at a construction site identifying the
project and/or names of architects, engineers, developers, contractors, or other individuals or firms
involved with the project.
CO-LOCATION OF WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES. Means when 2 or more
providers place their wireless communication facilities together on the same wireless communication
tower.
DAY CARE FACILITY. Any state licensed facility, public or private, which for gain or otherwise,
regularly provides 1 or more persons with care, training, supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation, or
developmental guidance on a regular basis, for periods of less than 24 hours per day, in a place other
than the person's own home. DAY CARE FACILITIES include, but are not limited to, family day care
homes, group family day care homes, day care centers, day nurseries, nursery schools, daytime activity
center, day treatment programs, and other non-residential programs as defined by M.S. § 245A.02,
Subd. 10, as it may be amended from time to time.
DAY CARE, IN HOME. A day care service that takes place in, and is an accessory use in a
principal dwelling that is occupied by the owner or operator of the service, which for gain, or otherwise,
regularly provides 1 or more persons with care, training, supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation, or
development guidance on a regular basis for periods of less than 24 hours per day.
DECK. A horizontal, unenclosed platform, with or without attached railings, seats or other features,
attached or functionally related to a principal use.
DEED RESTRICTION/TITLE RESTRICTION. A stipulation recorded on the property deed/title
stating that the property may be used, or may not be used for a particular purpose or purposes.
DWELLING UNIT. Means a building or portion thereof arranged or designed for occupancy by
not more than 1 family for living purposes, and which has cooking facilities.
Zoning Code 57
ELECTRICAL SIGN. Any sign containing electrical wiring, which is attached, or intended to be
attached, to an electrical energy source.
EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. Means a method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of conveying a
proportionate share of flood flows.
EASEMENT. The right to use the land of another owner for a specified use. An easement may be
granted for the purpose of constructing and maintaining walkways, roadways, individual sewage
treatment systems, utilities, drainage, driveway, and other uses.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES - GOVERNMENTAL USES, BUILDINGS AND STORAGE.
Governmental services such as office buildings; garages; temporary open space; open storage, when not
a principal use; fire and police stations; solid waste facilities; household hazardous waste facilities;
recreational areas; training centers; correctional facilities; or other essential uses proposed by federal,
state, city, local, special districts; and school districts, except that schools shall not be permitted under
this provision.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES - PUBLIC UTILITY USES, TRANSMISSION SERVICES, BUILDINGS
AND STORAGE. Transmission service such as electrical power lines of a voltage of 35 KV or greater,
or bulk gas or fuel being transferred from station to station and not intended for enroute consumption
or other similar equipment and accessories.
EXTERIOR STORAGE (INCLUDES OPEN STORAGE). The storage of goods, materials,
equipment, manufactured products and similar items not fully enclosed by a building.
EYE LEVEL VIEW. For the purposes of this Chapter, EYE LEVEL VIEW will be measured 6 feet
above the grade of the site to be screened.
FEEDLOT. A lot or building, or combination of lots and buildings, intended for the confined
feeding, breeding, raising or holding of animals and specifically designed as a confinement area in which
manure may accumulate, or where the concentration of animals is such that a vegetative cover cannot
be maintained within the enclosure.
FENCE. Any partition, structure, wall or gate erected as a divider, marker, barrier or enclosure
and located along the boundary, or within the required yard setback.
FINISHED FLOOR AREA. Any portion of a structure that is actively used for living space.
FLOOD. Means a temporary rise in stream flow, or stage, which results in inundation of the areas
adjacent to the channel.
FLOOD FREQUENCY. Means a temporary increase in the flow, or stage of a stream or in the
stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
58 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
FLOOD FRINGE. Means that portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway. FLOOD
FRINGE is synonymous with the term FLOOD FRINGE used in the Flood Insurance Study for the City
of East Grand Forks. Unnumbered A Zones shall be the same as FLOOD FRINGE except in floodway
areas which are determined as per Minn. Reg. 6128.5000.6120.6200 Floodplain Management for
Determining Floodways and Flood Fringe.
FLOOD PLAIN. Means the areas adjoining a watercourse, which have been, or hereafter may be
covered by the regional flood.
FLOOD PROOFING. Means a combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to
properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. Means an elevation not less than 2 feet above the water
surface profile associated with the regional flood. It is the elevation to which uses regulated by this
chapter are required to be elevated or flood proofed. Structures built prior to Dec. 31, 1998 may
continue as allowable non-conforming uses subject to §§ 152.040 et seq.
FLOODWAY. Means the channel of the watercourse, and those portions of the adjoining flood
plains, which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the regional flood.
FLOOR AREA, FINISHED. The sum of the finished areas of all floors of the building measured
from the exterior walls.
FREESTANDING SIGN. Any self-supporting sign not attached to any other structure.
FREIGHT TRANSPORTATION TERMINAL. A building or area in which freight brought by
motor truck is transferred and/or stored for movement by motor truck.
FRONTAGE. That boundary of a lot which abuts a publicly maintained road.
GROUND SIGN. A freestanding sign not exceeding 9-feet in height resting on the ground in or on
a structure such as a frame, posts, or poles.
GROUP CARE FACILITY. A facility licensed by the State of Minnesota to provide 24-hour-a-day
care, supervision, food, lodging, rehabilitation, training, education, habilitation or treatment outside a
patient's own home.
HOME OCCUPATION. Any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on
by the inhabitants therein, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for
dwelling purposes and does not change the character thereof. Clinics, hospitals, barber shops, beauty
shops and animal hospitals shall not be deemed to be home occupations.
Zoning Code 59
IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign that is limited to the name, address, and number of a building,
institute or person and to the activity carried on in the building or institution, or the occupancy of the
person.
ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign illuminated by artificial light, either directly from a source of
light incorporated in or connected with such a sign, or indirectly from a light source separate from the
sign but intentionally directed upon it.
IMPERVIOUS. An artificial or natural surface that is highly resistant to infiltration by water. It
includes surfaces such as standing water, compacted sand or clay, as well as most conventionally
surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and other similar structures.
INDUSTRIAL USE. The use of land or buildings for the production, manufacture, warehousing,
storage, or transfer of goods, products, commodities or other wholesale items.
INFORMATIONAL SIGN. Any sign intended to display information of interest to the public, such
as directions, time, temperature, date, atmospheric conditions, news, traffic control, instructions, etc.
INTEGRAL BUILDING SIGN. A sign bearing the name of a building, dates of construction,
commemorative tablets and the like, which are an integral part of the building or structure.
JUNK YARD. The use of any land for the storage or keeping of junk, including scrap metal; or for
the dismantling or wrecking of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery; provided, however, that this
definition shall not be deemed to include any storage of materials which are incidental or accessory to
any business or industrial use on the same lot.
LANDSCAPING. Planting of trees, grass, ground cover, shrubs, and screening, including the use
of rock and timbers.
LATTICE. Means a framework or structure of crossed metal strips typically resting on 3 members
constructed vertically to which antennas are affixed, and may include accessory transmission and
receiving equipment stored in an equipment building.
LIMITED LIVESTOCK RAISING. The confining, breeding, or raising of animals provided the
animal density is not greater than 1.0 animal unit per productive or pasturing acre. The activity shall
have a minimum of 2 productive acres for the first animal unit. This activity is subject to regulation on
parcels in the UER Zoning District.
LOT. Land occupied by, or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings; or by a
dwelling group and its accessory buildings; together with such open spaces as are required under the
provisions of this chapter, having not less than the minimum area required by this chapter for a building
site in the district in which such lot is situated, and having its principal frontage on a street.
60 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
LOT DEPTH. Means the distance between front and rear lot lines. The rear lot line shall be that
line which abuts any alley. Where no lines of this lot abut an alley, the average of the longest sides of
the lot shall be the depth. If a lot is square and no side thereof abuts on any alley, then the depth shall
be the sides of the lot which run perpendicular to the front of any building existing or hereafter
constructed on the lot.
LOT, ILLEGAL NON-CONFORMING. A non-conforming lot that did not legally exist prior to
the adoption date of this chapter, and is a violation of this chapter.
LOT, LEGAL NON-CONFORMING. Any lot that legally existed prior to the adoption date of this
chapter, which fails to meet the current required lot size, width, or does not have the required frontage
on a publicly maintained road.
LOT LINE. The property line bounding a lot, except that where any portion of a lot extends into
the public rights-of-way, the lot line shall be deemed to be the boundary of said public right-of-way.
LOT LINE, FRONT. That boundary of a lot which abuts a publicly maintained street, and in the
case of a corner lot both lot lines abutting streets shall be considered front lot lines. The remaining lot
lines shall be considered side lot lines.
LOT LINE, REAR. That boundary of a lot that is opposite the front lot line. If the rear line is less
than 10 feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line 10 feet in
length within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT, THROUGH. A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting 2 substantially parallel
streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both streets shall be deemed front lines for the
application of this chapter.
LOT OF RECORD. See Lot, Legal Nonconforming.
LOT WIDTH. Means the distance between straight side lot lines measured at a point equidistant
from the rear and front lot lines.
MANUFACTURED HOME. Means a structure, transportable in 1 or more sections, which in the
traveling mode is 8 feet or more in body width, or forty feet or more in body length, or, when erected
on site is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as
a dwelling with or without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes
the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that the term
includes any structure which meets all the requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer
voluntarily files a certificate required by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 61
Urban Development and complies with the standards established under M.S. Ch. 327 including the
Manufactured Home Building Code adopted therein. The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not
include the term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
MONOPOLE. Means a single, slender and typically cylindrical, vertical structure to which
antennas or antenna support structures are affixed, and may include accessory transmission and receiving
equipment stored in equipment building.
NON-CONFORMITY. Any legal use, structure or parcel of land already in existence, recorded or
authorized before the adoption of official controls or amendments thereto that would not have been
permitted to become established under the terms of the official controls as now written, if the official
controls had been in effect prior to the date it was established, recorded or authorized.
OBSTRUCTION. Means any dam, well, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel, modification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill,
structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood
plain which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
PARKING SPACE. A surfaced and permanently maintained area on privately or publicly owned
property either within or outside of a building of sufficient size to store 1 standard vehicle.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD. The minimum criteria applicable to all land uses and procedures
of the zoning regulations.
POLITICAL SIGN or CAMPAIGN SIGN. A sign announcing candidate(s) seeking political office
and/or political issues and data pertinent thereto.
PORTABLE SIGN. A sign designated to be movable from 1 location to another and which is not
permanently attached to the ground or to any structure.
PREMISES. A contiguous area of land, with its appurtenances and buildings, and which is under
common ownership.
PRINCIPAL USE/BUILDING. The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from
subordinate or accessory uses. A PRINCIPAL USE may be either permitted, or a special use.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street,
cartway, bicycle lane and public sidewalk in which the municipality has an interest, including other
dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility easements of the city. A public right-of-way does
not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other non-wire
2010 S-1
62 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
telecommunications or broadcast service. The lands described by an easement, deed, dedication, title,
law or occupation of a road, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, or sidewalk are included as
right-of-way.
PUBLIC UTILITY. A person, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to
furnish and who is furnishing, under federal, state, or municipal regulations, gas, steam, electricity,
sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or water to the public.
PYLON SIGN. A freestanding sign erected upon a pylon or post structure that is for the purpose
of advertising the place of business.
REACH. A hydraulic engineering term used to describe a longitudinal segment of a stream or river
influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river
between 2 consecutive bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
REAL ESTATE SIGN. A sign pertaining to the sale, lease, or rental of the property upon which
it is located.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400 square feet or less
when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light truck and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping or seasonal use. For the purpose of this chapter,
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE shall be synonymous with the term TRAVEL TRAILER/TRAVEL
VEHICLE.
REGIONAL FLOOD. Means a flood , representative of large floods known to have occurred
generally in Minnesota, and which is reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an
average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is
synonymous with the term BASE FLOOD used in the Flood Insurance Study.
SENSITIVE RECEPTORS. Means those areas which require increased distances from potentially
harmful structures or uses, and which include, but are not limited to: residential and open-space districts,
schools, parks, play areas, churches, cemeteries, on/off sale liquor establishments, and adult uses.
SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure, individual sewage treatment
system, or other facility, and a road, road right-of-way, property line, stream, river, or other protected
water.
SIGN. Any letters, words, figures, designs, symbols, trademarks, or numbers, illuminated or
non-illuminated, which are intended to attract attention to any place, business, subject, person, firm,
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 63
corporation, public performance, article, machine or merchandise whatsoever, and which is painted,
printed, or constructed and displayed in any manner visible to the general public out of doors for
recognized advertising purposes.
SIGN HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from ground to the highest point of said sign.
SIGN SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any structure that supports, or is capable of supporting a sign,
including decorative cover.
SHOPPING CENTER. An integrated grouping of commercial stores under single ownership or
control.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change, other than incidental repairs, which would prolong
or modify the life of the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams,
girders or foundations.
STRUCTURE. Means anything constructed or erected on the ground, attached to the ground, or
on-side utilities; including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins,
fences, manufactured homes, travel trailers/vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria.
STRUCTURE, ILLEGAL NONCONFORMING. A structure which did not legally exist prior to
the adoption of this chapter, and which does not conform with the current chapter requirements for the
district in which it is located.
STRUCTURE, LEGAL NONCONFORMING. A structure which legally existed prior to the
adoption date of this chapter, which is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter for the
district in which the structure is located.
SUSPENDED SIGN. A sign attached to and located below any permanent eave, roof, or canopy.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Within any 365-day period any reconstruction, rehabilitation
(including normal maintenance and repair), repair after damage, addition or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
2010 S-1
64 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
(2) Any alteration of an historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure. For the purposes of this chapter, HISTORIC
STRUCTURE shall be as defined in Code of Federal Regulations, part 59.1.
TEMPORARY ROADSIDE STAND. A freestanding structure of operation setup to sell agricultural
products for a period of 30 days or less, that does not adversely affect traffic circulation, and does not
occupy space required for parking.
TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign erected for a specified period of time that is not permanently affixed
to any building or structure.
TOWNHOUSES. Dwelling units horizontally attached to 1 or more similar dwelling units in a
linear or cluster arrangement. Characteristic features of townhouses are their private entrances and small
private yards (patios) for outdoor living. A townhouse development normally includes at least 1 large
common area of open space for aesthetic and recreational purposes.
TWINHOME. Means 2 dwelling units each located upon separate, abutting lots; each attached side
to side, but not having a side yard setback from 1 lot line; each sharing only 1 common, unpierced from
ground to roof wall; and separated from any other building or structure by space on all sides.
USE. Means the purpose for which land or premises or a building thereon is designed, arranged
or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
USE, CONDITIONAL AND USE, SPECIAL. A use that may be allowed as appropriate or
desirable in a specified district, but that requires special approval because, if not carefully located or
designed, may create special problems such as excessive height, bulk, or abnormal traffic congestion;
and to which requirements may be attached that must be complied with as a condition to continued use.
USE, ILLEGAL NONCONFORMING. Any use of a property or structure that did not legally exist
prior to the adoption date of this chapter as a permitted, or special use in the zoning district in which the
use is located; and that is not allowed as a permitted, or special use under this chapter in the district in
which the use is located.
USE, LEGAL NONCONFORMING. Any use of a property or structure which legally existed in
the district in which the use is located prior to the adoption date of this chapter, but which is not allowed
as a permitted, or special use under this chapter in the district in which the use is located.
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 65
VARIANCE. A modification or variation of the provisions of this chapter. A variance shall not
be granted allowing a use prohibited in the district in which the structure, use and lot are located.
WALL GRAPHIC, OUTDOOR. Any mosaic, mural, painting, or graphic art or combination of
these professionally applied to a building and which does not contain any brand-name product symbol
or name, lettering, logo, or any advertising message.
WATERWAY. A natural or constructed channel that carries a flow of water.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS). Means any mechanism designed for the
purpose of converting wind energy into electrical or mechanical power.
WINDOW SIGN. A sign installed inside a window for purposes of viewing from outside the
premises. This does not include merchandise located in a window.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION ANTENNA. Means an antenna system designed to transmit
communication signals, which is typically mounted upon an existing structure (i.e. buildings, towers).
This definition shall encompass radio and television broadcasting antennas, and shall not encompass any
satellite dishes.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY. Means a facility consisting of the equipment and
structures involved in sending or receiving communications signals.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWER. Means a tower including, but not limited to
self-supporting lattice and monopole, typically used to elevate a wireless communication antenna and/or
satellite dish antenna, and which may include accessory transmission and receiving equipment stored in
an equipment building.
YARD. Means an open space, other than a court, on the same lot with a building, and which is
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as herein provided. In measuring a yard
the line of a building shall be deemed to mean a line parallel to the nearest lot line drawn through the
point of a building, or the point of a dwelling group nearest to such lot line; exclusive of canopies, caves,
fire escapes, entries, uncovered porches that are no more than 6 feet wide, covered porches that are no
more than 6 feet wide with 3 sides remaining open, landing places, and provided that the measurement
shall be taken from the line of the building to the nearest lot line.
YARD FRONT. Means a yard extending across the front of the lot between the inner side yard line,
and lying between the front line of the lot and the nearest line of the building.
YARD REAR. Means a yard extending across the full width of the lot and laying between the rear
line of the lot and the nearest line of the building.
2010 S-1
66 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
YARD SIDE. Means a yard between the side line of the lot and the nearest line of the building and
extending from the front line of the lot to the rear yard.
(1981 Code § 10.01, Subd. 6) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 303, 3rd Series, passed
11-20-2007)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 152.020 ADMINISTRATION.
The planning staff is hereby charged with the administration of the terms of this chapter.
(1981 Code § 10.02) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.021 APPEALS.
(A) Appeals of decisions by planning staff. All findings and decisions of the planning staff or other
official involved in the administration of this chapter shall be final subject to appeal to the Planning
Commission, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. Any affected person may initiate such a
request by filing an appeal with planning staff on an approved form. All appeals shall be filed within 30
days of the date of the decision. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each complete
application for appeal and, after the close of the hearing, shall make findings and submit its
recommendations to the City Council.
(B) Action by the City Council on appeals. The City Council shall make the final decision regarding
all appeals requests. Approval shall require a 2/3-majority vote of the City Council.
(C) Expiration of Appeal. If substantial development or construction has not taken place within 6
months of the date of approval of an appeal, such appeal shall be considered void unless a petition for
a time extension has been granted by the City Council by the deadline.
(1981 Code § 10.02, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.022 SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
(A) Criteria for granting special use permits. Special uses may be approved, by the City Council,
upon a showing by the applicant that standards and criteria stated in Chapter 152 will be satisfied. Such
standards and criteria shall include both general requirements for all special uses and, insofar as
practicable, requirements specific to each designated special use. In granting a special use permit, the
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 67
City Council shall consider the effect of the proposed use upon the health, safety, and general welfare
of occupants of surrounding lands. Among other things, the planning commission and City Council shall
make the following findings where applicable:
(1) The use will not create an excessive burden on public facilities and utilities, which serve
or are proposed to serve the area.
(2) The use will be sufficiently compatible with, or separated by sufficient distance from, or
screened from adjacent land uses so that there will be no deterrence to the use or development of adjacent
land and uses.
(3) Each structure or improvement is so designed and constructed that it is not unsightly in
appearance to the extent that it will hinder the orderly and harmonious development of the district
wherein proposed.
(4) The use is consistent with the purposes of Chapter 152, and the purposes of the zoning
district in which the applicant intends to locate the proposed use.
(5) The use is not in conflict with the East Grand Forks Land Use Plan.
(6) Adequate measures have been taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to
minimize traffic congestion, provide adequate access to public roads, and provide sufficient on-site
parking.
(B) Additional conditions. In permitting a new special use permit or alteration upon review of an
existing special use permit, the planning commission may recommend, and the City Council may impose,
in addition to these standards and requirements expressly specified by this chapter, additional conditions
which the Planning Commission or City Council considers necessary to protect the interests of the
surrounding area or the city as a whole.
(C) Procedure.
(1) Pre-application meeting. Prior to submission of a special use permit application, the
applicant may submit a concept plan and meet with the planning staff to discuss the special use permit
application. Through the pre-application, the planning staff will summarize the informational
requirements and issues related to the specific special use permit request.
(2) Submit application.
(a) The applicant shall submit to the planning office or designee, a completed special use
permit application, and provide all other information required by the planning staff.
2010 S-1
68 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(b) The application shall be completed when the applicant has complied with the following
requirements: A written and/or graphic description of the special use permit request including an
explanation of compliance with § 152.022(A). The application shall include a site plan consistent with
§ 152.025.
(3) Fee. Applications must be accompanied by the fee established by the City Council.
(4) Notify if application incomplete. The planning staff, upon receipt of the application, shall
notify the applicant in writing within 10 city business days if the application is found to be incomplete,
per M.S. § 15.99, as amended.
(5) Report. Upon receipt of a complete application, the planning staff shall prepare a report
and refer the application to the Planning Commission.
(6) Public hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposal.
Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper designated by the City Council
at least 10 days prior to the hearing. The city shall mail written notification of the proposed special use
permit to property owners located within 350 feet of the subject site. Timing of the mailed notice shall
be the same as that for the published notice. The failure to give mailed notice to individual property
owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to
comply has been made.
(7) Copy to Department of Natural Resources Regional Hydrologist. In the case of an
application for a special use permit within the FW or FF District, Department of Natural Resources
Regional Hydrologist shall receive from the Floodplain Administrator a copy of the application not less
than 10 days prior to the hearing of the application. A copy of all decisions granting a special use permit
within the FW or FF District shall be forwarded to the Department of Natural Resources Regional
Hydrologist within 10 days of such action.
(8) Applicant to appear. The applicant or a representative shall appear before the Planning
Commission in order to answer questions concerning the proposed special use permit.
(9) Authority to request additional information. The Planning Commission and planning staff
shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning a special use
permit. Said information is to be declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to
all pertinent sections of this chapter. Failure of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive
information may be grounds for denial of the request.
(10) Recommendation to City Council. The recommendations of the Planning Commission shall
be forwarded to the City Council for consideration. The City Council shall take action on the application
within the time permitted by M.S. § 15.99, as may be amended. If it grants the special use permit, the
City Council may impose conditions it considers necessary to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 69
(11) Amended special use permit application. An amended special use permit application shall
be administered in the manner required for a new special use permit. Amended special use permits
include requests for changes in conditions. Any change involving structural alteration, enlargements,
intensification of use, or similar change not specifically permitted by the special use permit issued shall
require an amended special use permit and all procedures may apply as if a new permit were being
issued.
(12) Revocation. In the event that any of the conditions set forth in a permit are violated, the
City Council shall have the authority to revoke the special use permit.
(1981 Code § 10.02, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.023 VARIANCES.
(A) Generally. A variance from the provisions of Chapter 152 may be issued to provide relief to
the landowner in those zones where the chapter imposes undue hardship or practical difficulties to the
property owner in the reasonable use of this land. No use variances may be issued. A variance may be
granted only if the following circumstances exist.
(B) Criteria for granting variances.
(1) Granting of the variance will not be in conflict with the Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances apply to the property which do not generally
apply to other properties in the same zoning district or vicinity, and which result from lot size or shape,
topography, or other circumstances over which the owners of property since the enactment of this
chapter have had no control.
(3) The literal interpretation of the provisions of Chapter 152 would deprive the applicant of
rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this chapter.
(4) That the special conditions or circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant.
(5) That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege
that is denied by this chapter to owners of other lands, structures or buildings in the same zoning district.
(6) The variance requested is the minimum variance, which would alleviate the hardship.
(7) Economic considerations alone shall not constitute a hardship if a reasonable use of the
property otherwise exists under the provisions of this chapter.
2010 S-1
70 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(8) Variance shall not be issued within any designated regulatory floodway if increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(9) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with the existing local laws or ordinances.
(10) A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard
to afford relief.
(C) Procedure.
(1) Pre-application meeting. Prior to submission of a variance application, the applicant may
submit a concept plan and meet with the planning staff to discuss the variance application. Through the
pre-application, the planning staff will summarize the informational requirements and issues related to
the specific variance request. A second pre-application meeting may be conducted if deemed warranted
to assist the applicant in preparing their application.
(2) Submit application. The property owner applying for a variance shall submit to the
planning office a completed variance application stating the hardship present, and provide all other
information required by the planning staff. The application shall be completed when the applicant has
complied with the following requirements:
(a) A written and/or graphic description of the variance request including an explanation
of compliance with § 152.023(B). The application shall include a site plan consistent with § 152.025.
(b) Supporting information described by the planning staff during the pre-application
meeting and required in other sections of this chapter.
(c) Applications must be accompanied by the fee established by the City Council.
(3) Notify if application incomplete. The planning staff, upon receipt of the application, shall
notify the applicant in writing within 10 city business days if the application is found to be incomplete,
per M.S. § 15.99, as amended.
(4) Report. Upon receipt of a complete application, the planning staff shall prepare a report
and refer the application to the Planning Commission for consideration.
(5) Public hearing. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the request.
Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper designated by the city council
at least 10 days prior to the hearing. The city shall mail written notification of the proposed variance
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 70A
to property owners located within 350 feet of the subject site. Timing of the mailed notice shall be the
same as that for the published notice. The failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners
or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to comply has
been made.
(6) Applicant to appear. The applicant or a representative shall appear before the Planning
Commission in order to answer questions concerning the proposed variance.
(7) Authority to request additional information. The Planning Commission and planning staff
shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning a variance. Said
information is M.S. § 15.99, as amended.
(8) Recommendation to City Council. The recommendations of the Planning Commission shall
be forwarded to the City Council for consideration. The City Council shall take action on the application
within the time permitted by M.S. § 15.99, as may be amended.
(9) Decisions final. All decisions by the City Council in granting variances or hearing appeals
from any administrative order, requirement, decision, or determination shall be final, except that any
aggrieved person or persons, or any department, board or commission of the jurisdiction or of the state
shall have the right to appeal within 30 days, after receipt of notice of the decision, to the District Court
in Polk County on questions of law and fact.
(10) Expiration of variance. A variance shall expire 6 months from the date of issuance if the
variance is not utilized. A request for extension may be filed, and shall state facts showing a good faith
attempt to utilize the variance in the allowed 6 months. Upon receipt of a request for variance extension,
planning staff shall review the request and make a decision to grant or deny the extension based on the
information submitted. At staff's discretion, the request may be referred to the Planning Commission.
The applicant shall be informed of the decision within the time permitted by state law. No extension
shall be for more than 3 months, after which if the variance is not utilized the variance would become
void. In no case shall more than 1 variance extension be approved for an individual variance request.
(1981 Code § 10.02, Subd. 3) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 303, 3rd Series, passed
11-20-2007)
§ 152.024 ZONING AMENDMENTS.
The East Grand Forks City Council may adopt amendments to the zoning regulations and zoning
map in relation both to land uses within a particular district or to the location of the district lines. Such
amendments shall not be issued indiscriminately, but shall only be used as a means to reflect changes
in the goals and policies of the city as reflected in the East Grand Forks Land Use Plan.
2010 S-1
70B East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(A) Criteria for granting zoning amendments. Any amendment to the Zoning Regulations or zoning
map shall be evaluated based on, but not limited to, the following criteria:
(1) The proposed action has been considered in relation to the specific policies and provisions
of, and has been found to be consistent with the official City Land Use Plan.
(2) The proposed use is or will be compatible with present and future land uses of the area.
(3) The proposed use conforms with all performance standards contained in Chapter 152.
(4) The proposed use can be accommodated with existing and planned public services and will
not overburden the city's service capacity.
(5) Traffic generation by the proposed use is within capabilities of street system serving the
property.
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 71
(B) Procedures.
(1) Initiation of amendment. An amendment to the text of Chapter 152 or the zoning map may
be initiated by the City Council, the planning advisory commission, or by the property owner. Any
amendment not initiated by the planning advisory commission shall be referred to the planning advisory
commission for review and may not be acted upon by the City Council until it has received the planning
advisory commission's recommendation.
(2) Pre-application meeting. Prior to submission of a zoning amendment application, the
property owner may submit a concept plan and meet with the planning staff to discuss the zoning
amendment application. Through the pre-application, the planning staff will summarize the
informational requirements and issues related to the specific zoning amendment request.
(3) Submission requirements. The property owner applying for a zoning amendment shall
submit to the clerk/treasurer's office or designee, a completed zoning amendment application, and
provide all other information required by the planning staff. The application shall be completed when
the applicant has complied with the following requirements:
(a) Submit a written and/or graphic description of the zoning amendment request,
including an explanation of compliance with § 152.024(A). The application shall include a site plan
consistent with § 152.025.
(b) Supporting information described by the planning staff during the pre-application
meeting and required in other sections of this chapter.
(c) Applications must be accompanied by the fee established by the City Council.
(4) Notify if incomplete. The planning staff, upon receipt of the application, shall notify the
applicant in writing within 10 City business days if the application is found to be incomplete, per M.S.
§ 15.99, as amended.
(5) Report. Upon receipt of a complete application, the planning staff shall prepare a report
and refer the application to the Planning Commission for consideration.
(6) Public hearing. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the request.
Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper designated by the city council
at least 10 days prior to the hearing. When an amendment involves changes in district boundaries
affecting an area of 5 acres or less, the city shall mail written notification of the proposed zoning
amendment to property owners located within 350 feet of the subject site. Timing of the mailed notice
shall be the same as that for the published notice. The failure to give mailed notice to individual
property owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings, provided a bona fide
attempt to comply has been made.
72 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(7) Applicant to appear. The applicant or a representative shall appear before the Planning
Commission in order to answer questions concerning the proposed amendment request.
(8) Authority to request additional information. The Planning Commission and planning staff
shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant concerning a zoning
amendment. Said information is to be declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation
to all pertinent sections of this chapter. Failure of the applicant to supply all necessary supportive
information may be grounds for denial of the request.
(9) Report to City Council. Following the hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a
report to the City Council recommending approval, modified approval or disapproval of the proposed
amendment.
(10) Action on application. The City Council must take action on a completed application
following referral by the planning commission within the time permitted by M.S. § 15.99, as amended.
The person making the application shall be notified of the action taken.
(11) Two-thirds’ affirmative vote. No zoning amendment shall be adopted except by a 2/3
affirmative vote of the City Council.
(12) One-year period. No application of a property owner for an amendment to the text of this
chapter or the zoning maps shall be considered by the Planning Commission within a 1-year period
following denial of such request, except that the planning advisory commission may permit a new
application, if in the opinion of the planning commission, new evidence or a change of circumstances
warrant it.
(13) Records of amendment. The Planning Staff shall maintain records of amendments to the
text of Chapter 152, and the zoning map and of the zoning amendment request.
(14) Annexation. No annexation petition shall be considered unless and until a hearing has also
been petitioned for placing the annexed territory in a zoning district or districts. No building permits
shall be issued in annexed territory until such hearing has been held and the territory assigned a zoning
district or districts.
(1981 Code § 10.02, Subd. 4) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
Zoning Code 73
§ 152.025 APPLICATION INFORMATION.
(A) The following information shall be required with the submission of the zoning applications of
§§ 152.020 et seq. This information represents minimum submission requirements unless items are
waived by the planning staff.
(B) The information required for zoning applications generally consists of the following items, and
shall be submitted unless waived by the planning staff following a pre-application meeting.
(1) Concept plan information. Prior to the formulation of a site plan, applicants may present
a concept plan to the planning staff prior to the filing of a formal application. The concept plan will
include the following information.
(a) Property location map illustrating the site location relative to adjoining properties and
streets.
(b) Scaled drawing illustrating property boundaries using the City's GIS data base.
(c) General location of existing and proposed structures including signs.
(d) Tentative access, circulation, and street arrangements, both public and private.
(e) Amenities to be provided such as recreational areas, open space, walkways,
landscaping, etc.
(f) General location of parking areas.
(g) Proposed on-site storm water drainage.
(h) Natural features, drainageways, wetland, and trees.
(i) Size and locations of all building pads.
(2) Site plan information.
(a) Site boundaries, buildings, structures and other improvements shall be identified on-site
with a current certificate of survey, prepared and signed by a Minnesota licensed land surveyor,
depicting the following:
1. Scale of plan (engineering scale only).
2. North point indication.
3. Existing boundaries with lot dimension and area.
74 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
4. All encroachments.
5. Easements of record.
6. Legal description of the property.
7. Ponds, lakes, springs, rivers, wetlands, 100-year flood elevations or other
waterways affecting the subject property.
(b) A site plan utilizing a copy of the current certificate of survey as a base for the site in
question, depicting the following:
1. Name and address of developer/owner.
2. Name and address of architect/designer.
3. Date of plan preparation.
4. Name of project or development.
5. All proposed improvements, including:
a. Required and proposed setbacks.
b. Location, setback and dimensions of all proposed buildings and structures.
c. Location of all adjacent buildings located within 10 feet of the exterior
boundaries of the property in question.
d. Location, number, dimensions, and setbacks of proposed parking spaces and
drive aisles.
e. Location, number, and dimensions of proposed loading spaces.
f. Location, width, and setbacks of all curb cuts and driveways.
g. Vehicular circulation.
h. Provisions for storage and disposal of waste, garbage, and recyclables,
including details for screening exterior trash/recycling enclosures.
i. On-site well location.
Zoning Code 75
j. On-site individual sewer treatment system. Primary and alternative sites must
be identified.
(c) Grading, drainage and erosion control plan, utilizing a copy of the current certificate
of survey as a base for the site in question, prepared and signed by a Minnesota licensed engineer,
depicting the following:
1. Existing contours at 2-foot intervals.
2. Proposed grade elevations at 2-foot maximum intervals.
3. Drainage plan, including the configuration of drainage areas and calculations when
impervious surfaces exceed 1 acre in area.
4. Storm sewer, catch basins, invert elevations, type of castings, and type of
materials.
5. Spot elevations (may be prepared by a Minnesota licensed surveyor).
6. Proposed driveway grades.
7. Surface water ponding and treatment areas.
8. Erosion control measures.
9. Location, type, and square footage of impervious surface.
(d) Landscape, screening and buffering plan, utilizing a copy of the as a base for the site
in question, depicting the following:
1. Planting schedule (table) containing:
a. Symbols.
b. Quantities.
c. Common names.
d. Botanical names.
e. Sizes of plant material.
f. Root specification (bare root, balled and burlapped, potted, etc.).
76 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
g. Special planting instructions.
2. Planting detail (show all species to scale at normal mature crown diameter or
spread for local hardiness zone).
3. Note indicating how disturbed soil areas will be restored through the use of
sodding, seeding, or other techniques.
(e) Other plans and information as required by the planning staff include, but are not
limited to:
1. Architectural elevations of all principal and accessory buildings.
2. Typical floor plan and typical room plan drawn to scale with a summary of square
footage for each use or activity.
3. Fire protection plan.
4. Nuisance mitigation plan (related to noise, odors, glare, dust, or similar nuisance
issues).
5. The type, color, and materials used in all external surfaces.
(1981 Code § 10.02, Subd. 5) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.026 FEES.
The application fees for all permits shall be established by the City Council by resolution. The City
Council may periodically review and revise all or portions of the fee schedule. The acceptance of all
zoning applications and issuance of permits shall not occur until a complete application has been filed
and the appropriate fee has been paid.
(1981 Code § 10.02, Subd. 6) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.027 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE.
(A) Upon approval of a planning action described in §§ 152.020 et seq., the city shall be provided
with a financial guarantee in the form of a letter of credit or cash escrow approved for said conditions
prior to the issuance of building permits or the initiation of work on the proposed improvements or
development. Said security shall guarantee conformance and compliance with the conditions of the
application approval and city code provisions.
(B) The security shall be in the amount equal to 125% of the city's estimated cost of labor and
materials for the proposed improvements or development.
Zoning Code 77
(C) The city shall hold the security until completion of the proposed improvements or development,
and until such improvements or development are deemed in compliance with Chapter 152 by the planning
staff.
(D) Failure to comply with the conditions of the application approval and city ordinances and
provisions shall result in forfeiture of the security in whole or in part depending upon the degree of
non-compliance, and at the discretion of the planning staff.
(E) Whenever a performance guarantee is imposed by the city, the applicant shall be required to
enter into a performance agreement with the city. This agreement is to provide authorization to the city
to utilize the posted security for the enforcement of city code and conditions of approval to mandate the
completion of stipulated work should the applicant fail to meet the terms and conditions of the
performance agreement. Said agreement shall hold harmless the city for completion of the work and
address other matters as may be determined by the City Attorney.
(1981 Code § 10.02, Subd. 7) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
NON-CONFORMING LOTS, BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND USES
§ 152.040 PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide for the regulation of non-conforming lots, buildings,
structures and uses, and to specify those requirements, circumstances, and conditions under which
non-conforming buildings, structures and uses will be operated and maintained. Chapter 152 establishes
separate zoning districts, each of which is an appropriate area for the location of uses which are
permitted in that zoning district. It is necessary and consistent with the establishment of these districts
that non-conforming lots, buildings, structures and uses not be permitted to continue without restriction.
Furthermore, it is the intent of this chapter that all non-conforming uses shall be eventually brought into
conformity.
(1981 Code § 10.03, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.041 LEGAL NON-CONFORMING LOTS (LOT OF RECORD).
(A) Any parcel or lot which legally existed prior to the adoption date of this chapter, but which fails
to meet the current required lot size, width of the zoning district, or does not have the required frontage
on a publicly maintained road, may be utilized in compliance with all other chapter requirements subject
to the following provisions:
(1) The dimensions or area of a legal nonconforming lot may be altered provided that no
alteration shall be permitted that would render the lot further in non-compliance with the chapter
requirements.
78 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(2) Legal non-conforming lots of record intended for residential, commercial, industrial or
institutional development or expansion shall have sufficient lot area and configuration to meet all
applicable codes.
(B) A parcel of land which contains a single family home in all zoning districts on the effective date
of this chapter, and does not meet the minimum lot size, lot dimensions or have sufficient road frontage,
shall be considered a legal nonconforming lot, subject to the above provisions of this subchapter.
(1981 Code § 10.03, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.042 LEGAL NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.
Any structure which legally existed prior to the adoption date of this chapter, but which is not in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter for the zoning district in which the structure exists, may
be utilized subject to the following provisions:
(A) A legal non-conforming principal structure which is only nonconforming due to an
encroachment into a required setback may be enlarged in compliance with all other ordinance
requirements provided that:
(1) The expansion will not decrease the distance between the structure and the applicable lot
line.
(2) A legal nonconforming structure may be expanded or enlarged up to 50% of the total square
footage of the structure existing on the effective date of this chapter, subject to compliance with all
applicable setbacks and building dimension regulations in the zoning district. All expansions shall be
calculated on an accumulative basis to determine maximum expansion size of a non-conforming
structure.
(3) Aside from the existing non-conforming setback, the site and building shall comply with
the performance standards of this chapter.
(B) A legal non-conforming structure which is damaged by any cause to the extent of less than 50%
of its current market value as determined by the city assessor, may be reconstructed within 12 months
of the original damage to the structure, in compliance with all other chapter requirements.
(C) If the damage to a legal non-conforming structure is 50% or more of the current market value
as determined by the city assessor, it shall be removed, and any construction thereafter shall be in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(D) Normal maintenance of a non-conforming structure is permitted. Maintenance may include
necessary non-structural repairs and incidental alterations, which do not enlarge or intensify the use of
the structure.
Zoning Code 79
(E) No parcel of land or portion thereof shall be subdivided if such action results in buildings and/or
uses becoming non-conforming.
(1981 Code § 10.03, Subd. 3) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.043 LEGAL NON-CONFORMING USES.
Any use which legally existed prior to the adoption date of this chapter, but which is not a permitted
use under the current code, may be allowed to continue subject to the following provisions:
(A) When a lawful, non-conforming use of any structure or parcel of land in any zoning district has
been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to any non-conforming use.
(B) A lawful, non-conforming use of a structure or parcel of land may be changed to lessen the
non-conformity of use. Once a non-conforming structure or parcel of land has been changed, it shall not
thereafter be so altered to increase the non-conformity.
(C) A non-conforming use which has been discontinued for a period of 12 or more months shall not
be reestablished, and any further use shall be in compliance with the regulations of this chapter.
(D) A structure that is a legal non-conforming use, or which contains a legal non-conforming use,
and is damaged by any cause to the extent of which is less than 50% of its current market value, as
determined by the assessor's records, may be re-established within 12 months of the original damage,
subject to meeting all other requirements of this chapter.
(E) If a structure that is a legal non-conforming use or which contains a legal non-conforming use
is damaged by 50% or more of its current market value as determined by the assessor's records, any
further use if the structure is rebuilt, shall be in compliance with the regulations of this chapter.
(F) Maintenance of a building or other structure containing or used by a nonconforming use will
be allowed when it includes necessary non-structural repair and incidental alterations which do not
extend or intensify the nonconforming building or use.
(G) In the event a change in the zoning classification for a district renders a use non-conforming as
a result of such change, the use shall be permitted to continue subject to divisions (A) through (F) above.
(1981 Code § 10.03, Subd. 4) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
80 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
GENERAL ZONING DISTRICT PROVISIONS
§ 152.055 ESTABLISHING ZONING DISTRICTS.
(A) In order to classify, regulate and restrict the location of trade and industry, and the location of
buildings designated for specific uses, to protect residential uses, to regulate and limit the height and bulk
of buildings hereafter erected or altered, to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas, and
to regulate and determine the areas of yards and open space within and surrounding such buildings, East
Grand Forks is hereby divided into zoning districts.
(B) The use, height and area regulations shall be uniform in each district, and said zoning districts
shall be known as:
Reserved
Reserved
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Multi-Family Residential District
R-3 High Density Residential District
PUD Planned Unit Development
UER Urban Expansion Reserve District
UER-C Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster District
C-1 Downtown District
C-2 Highway Commercial District
I-1 Light Industrial District
I-2 General Industrial District
Reserved
FW Floodway District
FF Flood Fringe District
(1981 Code § 10.04, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
Zoning Code 81
§ 152.056 ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
Zoning district boundary lines established by this chapter generally follow lot lines, the centerlines
of railroad rights-of-way, street rights-of-way, water courses or the corporate limit lines, all as they exist
upon the effective date of this chapter.
(1981 Code § 10.04, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.057 ROAD VACATION.
Whenever any road, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the city, the zoning
district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the
center of such vacation, and all areas included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all
appropriate regulations of the extended districts.
(1981 Code § 10.04, Subd. 3) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.058 RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
All roads, alleys, public ways and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated,
shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property in the most restrictive classification immediately
abutting upon such alleys, roads, public ways or railroad rights-of-way. Where the centerline of a road,
alley, public way or railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such area, unless
otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to
such centerline.
(1981 Code § 10.04, Subd. 4) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.059 WATER AREAS.
All areas within the city that are under water and which are not shown as included within any zone
shall be subject to all regulations of the zone, which immediately adjoins such water area. If such water
area adjoins 2 or more zones, the boundaries of each zone shall be construed to be extended into the
water area in a straight line until they meet the other district at the half way point and/or to the corporate
limits.
(1981 Code § 10.04, Subd. 5) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
82 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
§ 152.060 ZONING MAP.
The location and boundaries of the districts established by this text and hereby set forth on the
zoning map entitled East Grand Forks Zoning Map. Said map shall be on file with the planning staff
and hereinafter referred to as the zoning map. Said map and all the notations, references and other
information shown thereon shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein and thereby
made a part of this chapter by reference. It is the responsibility of the planning staff to maintain the East
Grand Forks Zoning Map, and amendments thereto shall be recorded on said map. The official East
Grand Forks Zoning Map shall be kept on file in City Hall.
(1981 Code § 10.04, Subd. 6) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.061 FLOODING.
No vacant flood plain land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected, altered or
moved shall be occupied until the applicant submits to the building official a certification by a registered
professional engineer, or land surveyor that the finished fill and building flood elevations or other flood
protection measures are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. This section does not imply
that areas outside the flood plain districts or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer
or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder. Within the Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts, all uses not listed
as permitted uses or special uses shall be prohibited. The Official Flood Plain Zoning Map, as prepared
by the Federal Insurance Administration showing the extent and boundaries of the Regional Flood is
hereby declared and established as part of this chapter and a part of the Zoning Map. The Official Flood
Plain Zoning Map shall include current editions of the following: Flood Insurance Study for the City of
East Grand Forks (September 1977), Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (September 15, 1977), and
the Flood Insurance Rate Map (dated July 20, 1979) including all approved amendments and revisions.
The Official Flood Plain Zoning Map shall be on file in the office of the building official.
(1981 Code § 10.04, Subd. 7) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.062 ANNEXATION.
The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by reference in § 152.061 above, may include
floodplain areas that lie outside the corporate boundaries of the city at the time of adoption of Ordinance
303, 3rd Series on November 20, 2007. If any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the city
after November 20, 2007, the newly annexed floodplain lands shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter immediately upon the date of the annexation into the city limits.
(Ord. 303, 3rd Series, passed 11-20-2007)
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 83
(R-1) SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 152.075 PURPOSE.
The R-1, Single-Family Residence District, is established for the purpose of providing single-family
residential development in areas where adequate public facilities and services exist and where such
development is appropriate given the surrounding land uses.
(1981 Code § 10.07, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.076 PERMITTED USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this subchapter, the following are
permitted uses within the R-1, Single-Family Residence District, subject to all development and
performance standards:
(A) Drainage system, flood control and watershed structure, and erosion control device meeting all
city and state standards.
(B) Essential Services - governmental uses, buildings and storage not industrial in nature.
(C) Public and private educational institutions, limited to elementary, middle or junior high and
senior high schools.
(D) Public parks, and public recreation areas.
(E) Religious institutions such as chapels, churches, temples and synagogues.
(F) Single-family detached dwellings.
(G) State licensed residential care facility in a single-family detached dwelling, of 6 or fewer
persons.
(1981 Code § 10.07, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.077 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this subchapter, the following are
permitted accessory uses within the R-1, Single-Family Residence District, subject to all applicable
provisions of this subchapter:
2010 S-1
84 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(A) Administrative offices, meeting rooms, classrooms and service areas in private and public
recreational facilities, the uses of which are incidental and directly related to the primary use.
(B) Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons in a single-family detached dwelling.
(C) Home occupations in a single-family dwelling, as regulated in § 152.380.
(D) Private garages and off-street parking and loading areas, as regulated in §§ 152.345 et seq.
(1981 Code § 10.07, Subd. 3) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.078 SPECIAL USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this Title, the following are special uses
within the R-1, Single-Family Residence District and require a special use permit in accordance with the
procedures identified in § 152.022.
(A) Bed and breakfast.
(B) Cemeteries.
(C) Campgrounds.
(D) Essential services - public utility uses, transmission services, buildings and storage.
(E) Hospitals, sanatoriums, or philanthropic institutions except correctional institutions and animal
hospitals. Any such buildings permitted to be used shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any lot
or street line and that the appearance of the building shall be in appropriate harmony with the residential
character of the area and provided that they meet the parking and loading and unloading facilities
requirements as set forth for such uses in §§ 152.345 et seq.
(F) Outdoor commercial recreation, including golf courses, tennis clubs, public swimming pools.
(G) Railroad right-of-way.
(H) Two-family dwellings and twinhomes, provided they meet the requirements set forth for such
uses in the R-2 District.
(I) Wireless communication antennas, as regulated by §§ 152.315 et seq.
(1981 Code § 10.07, Subd. 4) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
(J) Daycare centers.
(Am. Ord. 284, 3rd Series, passed 5-17-2005)
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 85
§ 152.079 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
The following performance standards shall be observed in the R-1, Single-Family Residence District
subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this chapter.
(A) Lot size (minimum): Eight thousand four hundred square feet.
(B) Lot width (minimum): Sixty-five feet.
(C) Lot depth (minimum): One hundred twenty feet.
(D) Minimum building setbacks:
(1) Thirty feet from front property line. On corner lots, the second front yard shall have a
minimum setback of 15 feet from the front property line.
(2) Twenty-five feet from rear property line, private garages exempt, see division (E)(3).
(E) Side yard setback:
(1) Ten feet. On lots containing 100 feet of width or more.
(2) Six feet. On lots containing less than 100 feet of width.
(3) Detached private garages. Detached private garages shall be setback from the alley and
side or rear property lines no less than 3 feet.
(F) Impervious lot coverage: No more than 40% of the lot.
(G) Maximum building height: Thirty-five feet from average grade.
(H) Minimum dwelling size: Nine hundred square feet of finished floor area.
(1981 Code § 10.07, Subd. 5) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 294, 3rd Series, passed
8-15-2006)
2010 S-1
86 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(R-2) TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 152.090 PURPOSE.
The R-2, Two-family Residential District, is established for the purpose of providing a greater
diversity of housing choices within the city in areas where adequate public facilities and services exist
and where such development is appropriate given the surrounding land uses.
(1981 Code § 10.08, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.091 PERMITTED USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this subchapter, the following are
permitted uses within the R-2, Two-family Residential District, subject to all development and
performance standards:
(A) Drainage system, flood control and watershed structure, and erosion control device meeting all
city and state standards.
(B) Essential services - governmental uses, buildings and storage not industrial in nature.
(C) Public and private educational institutions, limited to elementary, middle or junior high and
senior high schools.
(D) Public parks, and public recreation areas.
(E) Religious institutions such as chapels, churches, temples and synagogues.
(F) Single-family detached dwellings.
(G) State licensed residential care facility, serving 16 or fewer persons.
(H) Twinhomes.
(I) Two-family dwellings.
(J) Townhouses.
(1981 Code § 10.08, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 87
§ 152.092 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this subchapter, the following are
permitted accessory uses within the R-2, Two-family Residential District, subject to all applicable
provisions of this subchapter:
(A) Administrative offices, meeting rooms, classrooms and service areas in private and public
recreational facilities, the uses of which are incidental and directly related to the primary use.
(B) Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons in a single-family detached dwelling.
(C) Home occupations in a single-family dwelling, as regulated in § 152.380.
(D) Private garages and off-street parking and loading areas, as regulated in §§ 152.345 et seq.
(1981 Code § 10.08, Subd. 3) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.093 SPECIAL USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this Title, the following are special uses
within the R-2, Multi-Family Residential District and require a special use permit in accordance with
the procedures identified in § 152.022.
(A) Bed and breakfast.
(B) Campgrounds.
(C) Cemeteries.
(D) Essential services, public utility uses, transmission services, buildings and storage.
(E) Hospitals or sanatoriums, philanthropic, or eleemosynary institutions except correctional
institutions and animal hospitals. Any such buildings permitted to be used shall be set back not less than
100 feet from any lot or street line and that the appearance of the building shall be in appropriate
harmony with the residential character of the area and provided that they meet the parking and loading
and unloading facilities requirements as set forth for such uses in §§ 152.345 et seq.
(F) Outdoor commercial recreation, including golf courses, tennis clubs, public swimming pools.
(G) Railroad right-of-way.
2010 S-1
88 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(H) Wireless communication antennas, as regulated by §§ 152.315 et seq.
(1981 Code § 10.08, Subd. 4) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
(I) Daycare centers.
(Am. Ord. 284, 3rd Series, passed 5-17-2005)
§ 152.094 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
The following performance standards shall be observed in the R-2, Two-family Residential District
subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this chapter.
(A) Lot size (minimum): Seven thousand four hundred square feet.
(B) Lot width (minimum): Fifty feet.
(C) Lot depth (minimum): One hundred twenty feet.
(D) Minimum building setbacks:
(1) Thirty feet from front property line. On corner lots, the second front yard shall have a
minimum setback of 15 feet from the front property line.
(2) Twenty-five feet from rear property line, private garages exempt, see division (E)(3) below.
(E) Side yard setback:
(1) Ten feet. On lots containing 100 feet of width or more.
(2) Six feet. The side yard setback is 6 feet. On lots containing less than 100 feet of width.
(3) Detached private garages. Detached private garages shall be setback from the alley and
side or rear property lines no less than 3 feet.
(4) Exception. Except on lots containing an attached twinhome or an attached townhome, 1
side will be set at 0 feet and the remaining side yard setback shall be as otherwise required in this
subchapter.
(F) Impervious lot coverage: No more than 40% of the lot for single-family uses. No more than
45% of the lot for multi-family uses.
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 89
(G) Maximum building height: Thirty-five feet from average grade.
(H) Minimum building size: Nine hundred square feet of finished floor area.
(1981 Code § 10.08, Subd. 5) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 294, 3rd Series, passed
8-15-2006)
(R-3) HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 152.105 PURPOSE.
The R-3, High Density Residential District, is established in the recognition of the need for high
density housing arrangements that result in increased housing choices and affordability within the city
in areas where adequate public facilities and services exist and where such development is appropriate
given the surrounding land uses.
(1981 Code § 10.09, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.106 PERMITTED USES
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this subchapter, the following are
permitted uses within the R-3, High Density Residential District, subject to all development and
performance standards:
(A) Condominiums or apartments.
(B) Dormitory.
(C) Drainage system, flood control and watershed structure, and erosion control device meeting all
city and state standards.
(D) Essential services - governmental uses, buildings and storage not industrial in nature.
(E) Nursing homes, convalescent homes, retirement homes, and other housing options for senior
citizens.
(F) Public and private educational institutions, limited to elementary, middle or junior high and
senior high schools.
2010 S-1
90 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(G) Public parks, and public recreation areas.
(H) Religious institutions such as chapels, churches, temples and synagogues.
(I) Single-family detached dwellings.
(J) State licensed residential care facility, serving 16 or fewer persons.
(K) Townhouses.
(L) Twinhomes.
(M) Two-family dwellings.
(1981 Code § 10.09, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.107 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this subchapter, the following are
permitted accessory uses within the R-3, High Density Residential District, subject to all applicable
provisions of this subchapter:
(A) Administrative offices, meeting rooms, classrooms and service areas in private and public
recreational facilities, the uses of which are incidental and directly related to the primary use.
(B) Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons in a single-family detached dwelling.
(C) Home occupations in a single-family dwelling, as regulated in § 152.380.
(D) Private garages and off-street parking and loading areas, as regulated in §§ 152.345 et seq.
(1981 Code § 10.09, Subd. 3) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.108 SPECIAL USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are special
uses within the R-3, High Density Residential District and require a special use permit in accordance
with the procedures identified in § 152.022.
(A) Bed and breakfast.
(B) Cemeteries.
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 91
(C) Essential services - public utility uses, transmission services, buildings and storage.
(D) Hospitals or sanatoriums, philanthropic, or eleemosynary institutions except correctional
institutions and animal hospitals. Any such buildings permitted to be used shall be set back not less than
100 feet from any lot or street line and that the appearance of the building shall be in appropriate
harmony with the residential character of the area and provided that they meet the parking and loading
and unloading facilities requirements as set forth in §§ 152.345 et seq.
(E) Outdoor commercial recreation, including golf courses, tennis clubs, public swimming pools.
(F) Railroad right-of-way.
(G) Wireless communication antennas, as regulated by §§ 152.315 et seq.
(1981 Code § 10.09, Subd. 4) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
(H) Daycare centers.
(Am. Ord. 284, 3rd Series, passed 5-17-2005)
§ 152.109 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
The following performance standards shall be observed in the R-3, High Density Residential
District subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this chapter.
(A) Lot size (minimum): Seven thousand square feet.
(B) Lot width (minimum): Fifty feet.
(C) Lot depth (minimum): One hundred twenty feet.
(D) Minimum building setbacks:
(1) Thirty feet from front property line. On corner lots, the second front yard shall have a
minimum setback of 15 feet from the front property line.
(2) Twenty-five feet from rear property line, private garages exempt, see division (E)(3).
(E) Side yard setback:
(1) Ten feet. On lots containing 100 feet of width or more.
(2) Six feet. The side yard setback is 6 feet. On lots containing less than 100 feet of width.
2010 S-1
92 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(3) Detached private garages. Detached private garages shall be setback from the alley and
side or rear property lines no less than 3 feet.
(4) Exception. Except on lots containing a twinhome, townhome, or adjoining condominium
apartments, 1 side yard will be set at 0 feet and the remaining side yard setback shall be otherwise
required in this subchapter.
(F) Impervious lot coverage:
(1) No more than 45% of the lot for single-family uses.
(2) No more than 50% of the lot for 2-family uses.
(3) No more than 60% of the lot for apartment uses.
(4) Required off-street parking and loading area shall meet the following impervious surface
minimum setback requirements:
(a) Twenty feet from the front property line.
(b) Five feet from the rear property line.
(G) Maximum building height: Seventy feet from average grade for apartments. Thirty-five feet
from average grade for all other uses allowed in this subchapter
(1981 Code § 10.09, Subd. 5) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 294, 3rd Series, passed
8-15-2006)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) DISTRICT
§ 152.120 PURPOSE.
(A) This subchapter is to make provisions for a harmonious variety of housing choices within the
Planned Unit Development District. The PUD District allows for larger tracts of land under single or
unified ownership to be developed with greater flexibility and imaginative design than is generally
possible under the conventional zoning regulations. The PUD District is exclusively for the development
of residential housing. Such planned unit developments shall be developed in accordance with an overall
design and an integrated general development plan, be consistent with the intent and purposes of this
subchapter and Land Use Plan, and not adversely affect the property adjacent to the land included in the
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 93
project. It is not the intent of this chapter to allow for reductions or waivers to standard zoning
requirements solely for the purpose of increasing overall density or allowing development that otherwise
could not be approved.
(B) The PUD process shall encourage the following:
(1) A greater variety in the types of residential environment available to the residents of the
city.
(2) To respond to changes in housing demand and in new housing concepts.
(3) The provision of privately controlled common open space ancillary to new housing
developments.
(4) A more efficient allocation and maintenance of public facilities such as streets and utility
lines serving new housing developments.
(5) The use of traffic management and design techniques to reduce the potential for traffic
conflicts. Improvements to area roads and intersections may be required as appropriate.
(1981 Code § 10.10, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.121 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
(A) Pre-application meeting. Prior to submittal of a general development plan, the applicant shall
submit a concept plan and meet with the planning staff to discuss the application. Through the
pre-application meeting, the planning staff shall summarize the information requirements and issues
related to the request.
(B) Planning Commission. The proponents of a planned unit development shall submit a general
development plan to the Planning Commission for its review and secure the approval of the Council after
receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing on the proposed general development plan in conformance with the provisions as provided
in § 152.022.
(C) City Council.
(1) If the plan is approved, any substantial change to the plan will require a resubmission to,
and approval of the Council after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission will hold a public hearing on the proposed substantial change to the plan in
conformance with the provisions as provided in § 152.022.
2010 S-1
94 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(2) Substantial change may include, but is not necessarily limited to: a rearrangement of
structures, increase in any building size, change in location of open space or parking lots, an increase
in the number of dwelling units, reduction in setback from adjoining properties, delay in planting
schedule of more than 1 year, reduction in landscaping area or number of plants.
(D) Sunset clause. If the plan is approved, the subsequent plat shall be recorded within a period of
1 year from the date of approval of the general development plan. The general development plan will
become null and void if the subsequent plat has not been recorded within the 1 year. Resubmittal and
approval of the general development plan is required if the plat has not been recorded within 1 year.
(1981 Code § 10.10, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.122 PERMITTED USES.
The following uses are permitted generally in PUD districts; however, individual PUD districts may
and usually will be more restrictive by limiting the type of dwellings permitted.
(A) Condominiums and apartments.
(B) Dormitory.
(C) Drainage system, flood control and watershed structure, and erosion control device meeting all
city and state standards.
(D) Essential services - governmental uses, buildings and storage not industrial in nature.
(E) Nursing homes, convalescent homes, retirement homes, and other housing options for senior
citizens.
(F) Public and private educational institutions, limited to accredited elementary, middle or junior
high and senior high schools.
(G) Public parks, and public recreation areas.
(H) Religious institutions such as chapels, churches, temples and synagogues.
(I) Single-family detached dwellings.
(J) State licensed residential care facility, serving 16 or fewer persons.
(K) Townhouses.
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 95
(L) Twinhomes.
(M) Two-family dwellings.
(1981 Code § 10.10, Subd. 3) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.123 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this subchapter, the following are
permitted accessory uses within the PUD, Planned Unit Development District, subject to all applicable
provisions of this subchapter:
(A) Administrative offices, meeting rooms, classrooms and service areas in private and public
recreational facilities, the uses of which are incidental and directly related to the primary use.
(B) Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons in a single-family detached dwelling.
(C) Home occupations in a single-family dwelling, as regulated in § 152.380.
(D) Private garages and off-street parking and loading areas, as regulated in §§ 152.345 et seq.
(1981 Code § 10.10, Subd. 4) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.124 SPECIAL USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this Title, the following are special uses
within the PUD, Planned Unit Development District and require a special use permit in accordance with
the procedures identified in § 152.022.
(A) Bed and breakfast.
(B) Essential services - public utility uses, transmission services, buildings and storage.
(C) Hospitals or sanatoriums, philanthropic, or eleemosynary institutions except correctional
institutions and animal hospitals. Any such buildings permitted to be used shall be set back not less than
100 feet from any lot or street line and that the appearance of the building shall be in appropriate
harmony with the residential character of the area and provided that they meet the parking and loading
and unloading facilities requirements as set forth for such uses in §§ 152.345 et seq.
(D) Wireless communication antennas, as regulated by §§ 152.315 et seq.
(1981 Code § 10.10, Subd. 5) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
2010 S-1
96 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(E) Daycare centers.
(Am. Ord. 284, 3rd Series, passed 5-17-2005)
§ 152.125 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
The following performance standards shall be observed in the PUD, Planned Unit Development
District subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this chapter.
(A) Requirements. The project shall propose reasonable yard, building setback, lot size, lot depth,
lot width, height, frontage requirements, landscaping, density, and open space provisions for the
protection and aesthetic enhancement of both the immediate property and the adjacent property for
approval by the city council after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission.
(B) Private infrastructure. No private infrastructure shall be permitted, with the exception of
private roadways and street lighting shall be permitted within the project provided they are approved by
the City Council and installed to city specifications for similar public streets.
(C) Front yard setback (minimum). Twenty feet from the front property line.
(D) Impervious lot coverage.
(1) No more than 45% of the lot for single-family uses.
(2) No more than 50% of the lot for 2-family uses.
(3) No more than 60% of the lot for apartment uses.
(Am. Ord. 283, 3rd Series, passed 12-21-2004; Am. Ord. 294, 3rd Series, passed 8-15-2006)
(E) Required off-street parking. Required off-street parking and loading area shall meet the
following impervious surface minimum setback requirements:
(1) Twenty feet from the front property line.
(2) Five feet from the rear property line.
(F) Minimum dwelling size. One thousand square feet of finished floor area for single-family uses.
Eight hundred square feet of finished floor area per dwelling unit for all multi-family uses.
(1981 Code § 10.10, Subd. 6) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 96A
(UER) URBAN EXPANSION RESERVE DISTRICT
§ 152.135 PURPOSE
This district is to preserve land in those rural areas of East Grand Forks, identified in its Land Use
Plan for logical future extension of urban land uses served by public utilities. This zoning district is
intended to preserve these areas of the city in very low rural development densities or clustered
residential developments that may be compatibly integrated with future urban development. This district
is also meant to perform the following functions:
(A) To conserve land in a viable economic status until such time as public utilities may be extended
and urban development densities may be supported.
(B) To reduce the possibility of urban/rural land use conflicts in both the use of the land and future
extension of public utilities and other infrastructure items.
(1981 Code § 10.11, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.136 PERMITTED USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are permitted
uses in an UER, Urban Expansion Reserve District:
(A) Agricultural uses as defined by this chapter.
(B) Drainage system, flood control and watershed structure, and erosion control device meeting all
city and state standards.
2010 S-1
96B East Grand Forks - Land Usage
Zoning Code 97
(C) Essential services - governmental uses, buildings and storage - public utility uses.
(D) Limited livestock raising, as regulated in §§ 152.330 and 152.331.
(E) Public parks, and public recreation areas.
(F) Railroad right-of-way.
(G) Single-family detached dwellings.
(H) State licensed residential care facility in a single-family detached dwelling, that serves 6 or
fewer persons.
(1981 Code § 10.11, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.137 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are permitted
accessory uses in an UER, Urban Expansion Reserve District:
(A) Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons in a single-family detached dwelling.
(B) Home occupations in a single-family dwelling, as regulated in § 152.380.
(C) Private garages and off-street parking and loading areas, as regulated in §§ 152.345 et seq.
(D) Sale of agricultural seed accessory to an ongoing farming operation.
(E) Temporary roadside stand for sale of in season agricultural products planted and completely
grown on the premises.
(1981 Code § 10.11, Subd. 3) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.138 SPECIAL USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are special
uses in an UER, Urban Expansion Reserve District, and require a special use permit based upon
procedures and criteria set forth in and regulated by § 152.022.
(A) Campgrounds.
(B) Cemetery.
(C) Commercial nursery or greenhouse operation.
98 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(D) Essential services – public utility uses, transmission services, buildings and storage.
(E) Golf courses, driving ranges.
(F) Religious institutions such as chapels, churches, temples, and synagogues.
(G) Wireless communication antennas, as regulated by §§ 152.315 et seq.
(1981 Code § 10.11, Subd. 4) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.139 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
The following performance standards shall be observed in an UER, Urban Expansion Reserve
District, subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this chapter.
(A) Density. One dwelling unit per 40 acres of land or quarter-quarter section.
(B) Lot size. Forty acres or quarter-quarter section.
(C) Lot width. Six hundred feet.
(D) Public road frontage (minimum). Sixty-sixty feet.
(E) Front yard setback. Sixty-six feet from the public street right-of-way. On lots less than 2 acres,
33 feet from the road right-of-way on a public street.
(F) Side yard setback. Thirty feet. On lots of record less than 2 acres, 15 feet. On corner lots,
the side yard setback abutting the road shall be the same as the front yard setback.
(G) Rear yard setback. Sixty feet. On lots of record less than 2 acres, 30 feet.
(H) Accessory building setbacks.
(1) On lots 2 acres or greater in area, accessory buildings shall meet the principal building
setbacks.
(2) For lots less than 2 acres in area, accessory buildings shall maintain the following setbacks:
(a) Interior side yard: Five feet.
(b) Rear yard: Eight feet.
(I) Impervious surface lot coverage. No more than 25% of the lot.
Zoning Code 99
(J) Accessory building area and height.
(1) (a) Maximums. Detached garages, buildings, and additional accessory structures,
individual and combined, shall be subject to the maximums listed in the following table.
(b) Exceptions.
1. Existing or proposed agricultural buildings currently used for agricultural
purposes, as verified by the planning staff.
2. Existing agricultural buildings previously used for agricultural purposes shall not
be included in area calculation requirements of this table, unless they are suitable for use as garages or
residential accessory structures (such as a machine shed), as determined by the planning staff.
Lot Size Maximum Building Area Maximum Building
Height
Less than 1 acre 1,000 sq. ft. 15 ft.
1–1.99 acres 1,600 sq. ft. 18 ft.
2–4.99 acres 2,000 sq. ft. 18 ft.
5–7.99 acres 2,600 sq. ft. 20 ft.
8–9.99 acres 3,200 sq. ft. 20 ft.
10–19.99 acres 4,000 sq. ft. 24 ft.
(2) Outside wall dimensions. Outside wall dimensions will be used to determine maximum
building area, except where a roof projects out greater than 2 feet from the side wall, roof area will be
used to determine maximum building area.
(K) Principal building height maximum. Thirty-five feet.
(L) Minimum building size. Nine hundred square feet of finished floor area.
(1981 Code § 10.11, Subd. 5) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
100 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(UER-C) URBAN EXPANSION RESERVE CLUSTER DISTRICT
§ 152.155 PURPOSE.
This district is to preserve land in those rural areas of East Grand Forks identified in its Land Use
Plan for logical future extension of urban land uses served by public utilities. This zoning district is
intended to preserve these areas of the city in very low rural development densities or clustered
residential developments that may be compatibly integrated with future urban development. This district
is also meant to perform the following functions:
(A) To conserve land in a viable economic status until such time as public utilities may be extended
and urban development densities may be supported.
(B) To reduce the possibility of urban/rural land use conflicts in both the use of the land and future
extension of public utilities and other infrastructure items.
(C) To regulate residential development in a cluster subdivision design that preserves open space
for future development when public utilities become available.
(1981 Code § 10.12, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.156 PERMITTED USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are permitted
uses in an UER-C, Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster District:
(A) Agricultural uses as defined by this chapter.
(B) Drainage system, flood control and watershed structure, and erosion control device meeting all
city and state standards.
(C) Essential services - governmental uses, buildings and storage not industrial in nature.
(D) Limited livestock raising, as regulated in §§ 152.330 and 152.331.
(E) Public parks and public recreation areas.
(F) Railroad right-of-way.
(G) State licensed residential care facility in a single-family detached dwelling, that serves 6 or
fewer persons.
Zoning Code 101
(H) Single-family detached dwellings.
(1981 Code § 10.12, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.157 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are permitted
accessory uses in an UER-C, Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster District:
(A) Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons in a single-family detached dwelling.
(B) Home occupations in a single-family dwelling, as regulated in § 152.380.
(C) Private garages and off-street parking and loading areas, as regulated in §§ 152.345 et seq.
(D) Sale of agricultural seed accessory to an ongoing farming operation.
(E) Temporary roadside stand for sale of in season agricultural products planted and completely
grown on the premises.
(1981 Code § 10.12, Subd. 3) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.158 SPECIAL USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are special
uses in an UER-C, Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster District, and require a special use permit based
upon procedures and criteria set forth in and regulated by § 152.022.
(A) Cemetery.
(B) Religious institutions such as chapels, churches, temples and synagogues.
(C) Commercial nursery or greenhouse operation.
(D) Essential services - public utility uses, transmission services, buildings and storage.
(E) Fairs and fairgrounds, provided all traffic, noise, screening, and development/use compatibility
issues are addressed.
(F) Golf courses, driving ranges.
(G) Religious institutions such as chapels, churches, temples, and synagogues.
102 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(H) Wireless communication antennas, as regulated by §§ 152.315 et seq.
(1981 Code § 10.12, Subd. 4) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.159 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
The following performance standards shall be observed in an UER-C, Urban Expansion Reserve
Cluster District for cluster subdivisions subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, and
modifications set forth in this chapter.
(A) Density. If 80% or more land in the subdivision can be preserved as open space for future
development, the density shall be 1 unit per 10 acres based on the gross acreage of the subdivision.
(B) Open Space. The cluster shall establish open space to be reserved for future development. The
open space may be platted into a single oversized lot or shall be platted into 1 large lot that would count
against the properties building eligibilities. Deed restrictions shall be placed over the open space, which
will prohibit further subdivision of the open space until the land can be served by public utilities. Ghost
platting concept plans shall be required to illustrate how the current plat may be integrated with future
urban development. Deed restrictions shall also be placed on all newly created lots informing the
potential buyer that the adjoining open space is intended for future urban development when utilities
become available.
(C) Street access. Temporary lot access to collector roads may only be permitted provided all lots
in residential clusters are designed to receive permanent access from a future local public streets.
(D) Lot size. One acre and demonstrates sufficient land area to accommodate 2 independent sewage
treatment systems.
(E) Lot width. One hundred feet.
(F) Public road frontage (minimum). Sixty-six feet.
(G) Front yard setback. Sixty-six feet from the public street right-of-way on lots less than 2 acres,
33 feet from the road right-of-way on a public street.
(H) Side yard setback. Fifteen feet.
(I) Rear yard setback. Thirty feet.
Zoning Code 103
(J) Accessory building setbacks.
(1) On lots 2 acres or greater in area, accessory buildings shall meet the principal building
setbacks.
(2) For lots less than 2 acres in area, accessory buildings shall maintain the following setbacks:
(a) Interior side yard: Five feet.
(b) Rear yard: Eight feet.
(K) Accessory building area and height.
(1) (a) Maximums. Detached garages, buildings, and additional accessory structures,
individual and combined, shall be subject to the maximums listed in the following table.
(b) Exceptions.
1. Existing or proposed agricultural buildings currently used for agricultural
purposes, as verified by the planning staff.
2. Existing agricultural buildings previously used for agricultural purposes shall not
be included in area calculation requirements of this table, unless they are suitable for use as garages or
residential accessory structures (such as a machine shed), as determined by the planning staff.
Lot Size Maximum Building Area Maximum Building
Height
Less than 1 acre 1,000 sq. ft. 15 ft.
1–1.99 acres 1,600 sq. ft. 18 ft.
2–4.99 acres 2,000 sq. ft. 18 ft.
5–7.99 acres 2,600 sq. ft. 20 ft.
8–9.99 acres 3,200 sq. ft. 20 ft.
10–19.99 acres 4,000 sq. ft. 24 ft.
20–39.99 acres 5,000 sq. ft. 24 ft.
(2) Outside wall dimensions. Outside wall dimensions will be used to determine maximum
building area, except where a roof projects out greater than 2 feet from the side wall, roof area will be
used to determine maximum building area.
104 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(L) Principal building height maximum. Thirty-five feet.
(M) Minimum building size. Nine hundred square feet of finished floor area.
(N) Impervious lot coverage. No more than 25% of the lot.
(1981 Code § 10.12, Subd. 5) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
(UBR) URBAN BUSINESS RESERVE DISTRICT
§ 152.175 PURPOSE.
This district is intended to preserve land in those areas of the City of East Grand Forks identified
in its Land Use Plan for the logical extension of urban commercial and industrial land uses served by
public utilities. This district is intended to preserve a low density rural environment until such time as
the land is needed for future urban commercial or industrial use and public utilities are available. This
district is also meant to perform the following functions:
(A) To conserve land in a viable economic status until such time as public utilities are available and
the site may accommodate intense urban commercial or industrial land uses.
(B) To reduce the possibility of urban/rural land use conflicts in both the use of the land and future
extension of public utilities and other infrastructure items.
(1981 Code § 10.13, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.176 PERMITTED USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are permitted
uses in an UBR, Urban Business Reserve District:
(A) Agricultural uses and buildings as defined by this chapter.
(B) Drainage system, flood control and watershed structure, and erosion control device meeting all
city and state standards.
(C) Essential services – governmental uses, buildings and storage – public utility uses.
(D) Limited livestock raising, as regulated by §§ 152.330 and 152.331.
(E) Public parks, and public recreation areas.
Zoning Code 105
(F) Railroad right-of-way.
(G) Residential care facility serving 6 or fewer persons in a single-family detached dwelling.
(H) Single-family detached dwellings.
(1981 Code § 10.13, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.177 PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are permitted
accessory uses in an UBR, Urban Business Reserve District:
(A) Day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons in a single-family detached dwelling.
(B) Home occupations in a single-family dwelling, as regulated in § 152.380.
(C) Private garages and off-street parking and loading areas, as regulated in §§ 152.345 et seq.
(D) Sale of agricultural seed accessory to an ongoing farming operation.
(E) Temporary roadside stand for sale of in-season agricultural products planted and completely
grown on the premises.
(1981 Code § 10.13, Subd. 3) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.178 SPECIAL USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this chapter, the following are special
uses in an UBR, Urban Business Reserve District, and require a special use permit based upon
procedures and criteria set forth in and regulated by § 152.022.
(A) Commercial nursery or greenhouse operation.
(B) Essential services - public utility uses, transmission services, buildings and storage.
(C) Religious institutions such as chapels, churches, temples and synagogues.
(D) Wireless communication antennas, as regulated §§ 152.315 et seq.
(1981 Code § 10.13, Subd. 4) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
106 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
§ 152.179 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
The following performance standards shall be observed in an UBR, Urban Business Reserve District
subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this chapter.
(A) Density. One dwelling unit per 40 acres of land or quarter-quarter section.
(B) Lot size. Forty acres or quarter-quarter section.
(C) Lot width. Six hundred feet.
(D) Public road frontage (minimum). Sixty-sixty feet.
(E) Front yard setback. Sixty-six feet from the public street right-of-way. On lots less than 2 acres,
33 feet from the road right-of-way on a public street.
(F) Side yard setback. Thirty feet. On lots of record less than 2 acres, 15 feet. On corner lots,
the side yard setback abutting the road shall be the same as the front yard setback.
(G) Rear yard setback. Sixty feet. On lots of record less than 2 acres, 30 feet.
(H) Accessory building setbacks.
(1) On lots 2 acres or greater in area, accessory buildings shall meet the principal building
setbacks.
(2) For lots less than 2 acres in area, accessory buildings shall maintain the following setbacks:
(a) Interior side yard: Five feet.
(b) Rear yard: Eight feet.
(I) Impervious surface lot coverage. No more than 25% of the lot.
(J) Accessory building area and height.
(1) (a) Maximums. Detached garages, buildings, and additional accessory structures,
individual and combined, shall be subject to the maximums listed in the following table.
(b) Exceptions.
1. Existing or proposed agricultural buildings currently used for agricultural
purposes, as verified by the planning staff.
Zoning Code 107
2. Existing agricultural buildings previously used for agricultural purposes shall not
be included in area calculation requirements of this table, unless they are suitable for use as garages or
residential accessory structures (such as a machine shed), as determined by the planning staff.
Lot Size Maximum Building Area Maximum Building
Height
Less than 1 acre 1,000 sq. ft. 15 ft.
1–1.99 acres 1,600 sq. ft. 18 ft.
2–4.99 acres 2,000 sq. ft. 18 ft.
5–7.99 acres 2,600 sq. ft. 20 ft.
8–9.99 acres 3,200 sq. ft. 20 ft.
10–19.99 acres 4,000 sq. ft. 24 ft.
(2) Outside wall dimension. Outside wall dimensions will be used to determine maximum
building area, except where a roof projects out greater than 2 feet from the side wall, roof area will be
used to determine maximum building area.
(K) Principal building height maximum. Thirty-five feet.
(L) Minimum building size. Nine hundred square feet of finished floor area.
(1981 Code § 10.13, Subd. 5) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
(C-1) DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
§ 152.195 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this district is to provide guidance and development to be applied to all renovations
and new construction within the downtown area of East Grand Forks, with the objective of managing
and guiding growth toward the realization of specific urban design objectives. This district provides for
the enhancement of the downtown as the functional and symbolic center of East Grand Forks.
(1981 Code § 10.14, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
108 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
§ 152.196 PERMITTED USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this subchapter, the following are
permitted uses in the C-1, Downtown Commercial District:
(A) Art galleries and museums.
(B) Bars or nightclubs, except bowling alleys.
(C) Bookstore, except adult bookstores.
(D) Business and professional services, except self-service laundries and food locker plants.
(E) Business, technical or professional schools.
(F) Drainage system, flood control and watershed structure, and erosion control device meeting all
city and state standards.
(G) Essential services - governmental uses, buildings and storage.
(H) Library.
(I) Liquor store, package, and meeting the local liquor dispensing laws, not including drive-up
and/or drive-in services.
(J) Lodges, clubs, social or fraternal organizations, except adult entertainment oriented (i.e. adult
cabaret, adult mini motion theater or full theaters).
(K) Medical offices.
(L) Municipal administrative buildings, fire stations and other municipal service buildings, except
those customarily considered industrial in use.
(M) Offices, including banks and financial institutions with or without drive-up and/or drive-in
services.
(N) Parking garage.
(O) Police Station.
(P) Post office.
(Q) Public parks, and public recreation areas.
(R) Public utility and service uses.
Zoning Code 109
(S) Radio and television broadcasting uses.
(T) Railroad right of way.
(U) Residential and senior citizens housing in upper levels only.
(V) Restaurants, not including drive-up and/or drive-in services.
(W) Retail, not including drive-up and/or drive-in services.
(X) Theaters, except adult entertainment uses (i.e., adult cabaret, adult mini motion theater or full
theaters).
(Y) Wholesaling.
(1981 Code § 10.14, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
(Z) Daycare centers
(Am. Ord. 284, 3rd Series, passed 5-17-2005)
§ 152.197 SPECIAL USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this subchapter, the following are special
uses in a C-1, Downtown Commercial District, and require a special use permit based upon procedures
and criteria set forth in and regulated by § 152.022.
(A) Essential services - public utility uses, transmission services, buildings and storage.
(B) Gasoline filling stations.
(C) Hotel, motel, bed and breakfast hotel.
(D) Satellite dish and antennas, as regulated by §§ 152.315 et seq.
(1981 Code § 10.14, Subd. 3) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.198 DESIGN GUIDELINES.
(A) General. Because the city is committed to the highest quality in this district, design guidelines
may be developed to provide guidance and development objectives to be applied to all renovations and
new construction within this district, with the objective of managing and guiding growth toward the
realization of specific urban design objectives. These guidelines are provided for the enhancement of
110 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
the downtown area as the functional and symbolic center of the city. Buildings should contribute to a
strong overall downtown character; building facades should add richness and detail of this vision that
these guidelines are intended to serve. The City Council may from time to time by resolution amend
such design guidelines.
(B) Design review.
(1) The Planning Commission shall review and recommend to the City Council to approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove any or all elements of any external building alteration within this
district for compliance with the above design.
(2) A request for any development in this district shall furnish the Planning Commission with
detailed plan views, elevations, and/or any other documents as requested by the Planning Commission
that may assist them in their determination of whether the finished development will be compatible with
the design guidelines.
(3) The Planning Commission shall use the following guidance in their design review in order
to recreate the small scale and diversity of traditional downtowns: Require that new development
maintain the continuity of the streetscape with appropriate window patterns, entrances, paving and zero
lot line development; require that developments include architectural features such as awnings, canopies
and recessed entries that can protect pedestrians from inclement weather; utilize the State Historic
Building Code; prohibit demolition of any historically significant structures and require review of
buildings greater than 40 years old.
(4) Applicants are encouraged to meet with staff prior to the preparation of the development
drawings.
(5) After the City Council receives the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the
Council shall act to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the application for design review;
or the Council may, before it acts upon the application, submit such application to any employee of the
city it may designate for further review and study. If the Council disapproves the application, the
grounds for such disapproval shall be set forth in the proceedings of the Council, and report to the design
review applicant.
(1981 Code § 10.14, Subd. 4) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
Zoning Code 111
§ 152.199 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
The following performance standards shall be observed in a C-1, Downtown Commercial District
subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this chapter.
(A) Platting required. Platting required for all uses within the C-1, General Commercial District.
No building permits will be issued on unplatted properties, except for the addition of accessory structures
or additions to existing buildings.
(B) Impervious lot coverage. No more than 85% percent of the lot.
(C) Outdoor storage. No outdoor storage
(1981 Code § 10.14, Subd. 5) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
(C-2) HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
§ 152.215 PURPOSE.
The C-2, Highway Commercial District is established to provide appropriate areas, preferably in
clusters in proximity to major thoroughfares for commercial retail establishments that are orientated to
the motoring public, or that require a large display of merchandise.
(1981 Code § 10.15, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.216 PERMITTED USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this subchapter, the following are
permitted uses in the C-2, Highway Commercial District:
(A) All of the uses permitted in the C-1 district, except apartments or any other residential use not
accessory to the principal use of the property.
(B) Accessory store.
(C) Altering, pressing and repair of wearing apparel.
(D) Appliance store.
(E) Automobile garage, accessory store, sales
(F) Building materials sales.
112 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(G) Bowling alley.
(H) Café, cafeteria, including drive-in eating establishments.
(I) Dairy products store.
(J) Drainage system, flood control and watershed structure, and erosion control device meeting all
city and state standards.
(K) Essential services - governmental uses, buildings and storage - public utility uses.
(L) Food locker plant.
(M) Furniture store.
(N) Grocery store.
(O) Hardware store.
(P) Hotel and motel.
(Q) Laundries.
(R) Liquor store, package, and meeting local dispensing laws.
(S) Machinery, equipment, sales, storage, and service.
(T) Office.
(U) Public and private secondary educational institutions.
(V) Public parks and public recreation areas.
(W) Railroad right-of-way.
(X) Supermarket.
(Y) Temporary roadside stand for sale of in-season agricultural products, subject to site plan review
by planning staff.
(X) Small animal veterinary clinic.
(1981 Code § 10.15, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
Zoning Code 113
§ 152.217 SPECIAL USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this subchapter, the following are special
uses in a C-2, Highway Commercial District, and require a special use permit based upon procedures
and criteria set forth in and regulated by § 152.022.
(A) Essential services - public utility uses, transmission services, buildings and storage.
(B) Gasoline filling stations.
(C) Satellite dish and antennas, as regulated by §§ 152.315 et seq.
(1981 Code § 10.15, Subd. 3) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
(D) Tattoo parlors that meet the following criteria:
(1) Provide at least 1 separate wash facility for every 3 work stations.
(2) Provide at least 1 separate was facility for customer use.
(Am. Ord. 285, 3rd Series, passed 5-17-2005)
§ 152.218 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
The following performance standards shall be observed in a C-2, Highway Commercial District
subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this chapter.
(A) Minimum structure setbacks.
(1) Twenty feet from front property line.
(2) Ten feet from rear property line.
(3) Ten feet from side property line.
(B) Principal building height maximum. Forty feet.
(C) Impervious lot coverage. No more than 85% of the lot.
114 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(D) Required off street parking and loading areas. Shall meet the following impervious surface
minimum setback requirements:
(1) Twenty feet from the front property line.
(2) Five feet from the rear property line.
(E) Outside storage. All business' shall meet 1 of the following criteria for business related storage
in the C-2, Highway Commercial District:
(1) Storage must be completely within enclosed building(s).
(2) Appropriately landscaped to 80% opaque, and according to the standards set forth in
§ 152.299.
(3) Effectively screened with a fence that is least 80% opaque, not less than 6 feet no more than
8 feet in height.
(F) Landscaping. All business' located along any of the Greenway Corridors, as designated by the
Land Use Plan, shall be appropriately landscaped according to the standards set forth in § 152.295.
(G) Sales, rental, or display (indoor and outdoor). As an accessory use in association with an
allowed principal use provided that:
(1) The area so occupied shall not exceed 30% of the principal building.
(2) No storage or display of merchandise shall be permitted in required rear, side, or front
yards.
(3) The outdoor sales, rental, or display area shall be included in the calculations for parking
spaces required for the use and shall not occupy space required for parking as stipulated by §§ 152.345
et seq.
(1981 Code § 10.15, Subd. 4) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
Zoning Code 115
(I-1) LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 152.230 PURPOSE.
The purpose of the I-1, Light Industrial District is to provide land for development of traditional
industrial activities, sufficient in size to meet employment and tax base requirements of the city. The
overall character of the district is intended to allow industrial development but to assure that the uses are
less intensive than that allowed in the General Industrial District and compatible with adjacent land uses.
(1981 Code § 10.16, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.231 PERMITTED USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this subchapter, the following are
permitted uses in the I-1, Light Industrial District:
(A) Automobile, truck repair, body shop.
(B) Building materials sales.
(C) Cartage and express facilities.
(D) Contractors offices, shops and yards, such as building, cement, electrical, heating, ventilating
and air conditioning, masonry, painting, plumbing, refrigeration and roofing.
(E) Drainage system, flood control and watershed structure, and erosion control device meeting all
city and state standards.
(F) Essential services - governmental uses, buildings and storage.
(G) Fuel and ice sales.
(H) Greenhouses, wholesale.
(I) Highway maintenance shops and yards.
(J) Laundries.
(K) Machining.
(L) Office or office building.
(M) Packing and crating.
116 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(N) Printing and publishing.
(O) Public parks and public recreation areas.
(P) Radio and television broadcasting uses, excluding towers.
(Q) Restaurants.
(R) Railroad right-of-way.
(S) Tool and dye cast.
(T) Warehousing.
(U) Wholesaling, all commodities except live animals, commercial explosives and junk.
(V) Veterinary clinic.
(1981 Code § 10.16, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.232 SPECIAL USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this subchapter, the following are special
uses in an I-1, Light Industrial District, and require a special use permit based upon procedures and
criteria set forth in and regulated by § 152.022.
(A) Essential services - public utility uses, transmission services, buildings and storage.
(B) Hotel and motel.
(C) Limited manufacturing, of products and materials when in conjunction with retail sales that
meets the requirements set forth in this subchapter.
(D) Wireless communications tower and antennas, as regulated by §§ 152.315 et seq.
(1981 Code § 10.16, Subd. 3) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
Zoning Code 117
§ 152.233 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
The following performance standards shall be observed in an I-1, Light Industrial District, subject
to the additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this chapter.
(A) Minimum structure setbacks.
(1) Twenty feet from front property line.
(2) Ten feet from rear property line except a 0 foot from rear property line setback is allowed
for Lots 2 - 15, Block 2 of the Industrial Park 1st Addition.
(3) Ten feet from side property line.
(B) Principal building height maximum. Forty feet.
(C) Impervious lot coverage. No more than 85% of the lot.
(D) Required off street parking and loading areas. Shall meet the following impervious surface
minimum setback requirements:
(1) Twenty feet from the front property line.
(2) Five feet from the rear property line.
(E) Outside storage. All business' shall meet 1 of the following criteria for business related storage
in the I-1, Light Industrial District:
(1) Storage must be completely within enclosed building(s).
(2) Appropriately landscaped to 80% opaque, and according to the standards set forth in
§ 152.298.
(3) Effectively screened with a fence that is least 80% opaque, not less than 6 feet no more than
8 feet in height.
(F) Landscaping. All business' located along any of the Greenway Corridors, as designated by the
Land Use Plan, shall be appropriately landscaped according to the standards set forth in § 152.294.
(G) Sales, rental, or display (indoor and outdoor). As an accessory use in association with an
allowed principal use provided that:
(1) The area so occupied shall not exceed 30% of the principal building.
2010 S-1
118 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(2) No storage or display of merchandise shall be permitted in required rear, side, or front
yards.
(3) The outdoor sales, rental, or display area shall be included in the calculations for parking
spaces required for the use and shall not occupy space required for parking as stipulated by §§ 152.345
et seq.
(1981 Code § 10.16, Subd. 4) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 294, 3rd Series, passed
8-15-2006; Am. Ord. 303, 3rd Series, passed 11-20-2007)
(I-2) GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 152.245 PURPOSE.
To provide an area where heavy and intensive land uses may locate. The Industrial uses within this
district are considered to be too heavy to be normally included within the Light Industrial District and
should therefore be located in such an area as to present the least negative impact to adjacent, less
intensive land uses.
(1981 Code § 10.17, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.246 PERMITTED USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this subchapter, the following are
permitted uses in the I-2, General Industrial District:
(A) All permitted uses allowed in the Light Industrial (I-1) district.
(B) Drainage system, flood control and watershed structure, and erosion control device meeting all
city and state standards.
(C) Indoor storage or garage rental.
(D) Manufacturing, processing, packaging or assembly of products and materials.
(E) Railroad right-of-way.
(F) Wholesaling.
(1981 Code § 10.17, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 119
§ 152.247 SPECIAL USES
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this subchapter, the following are special
uses in an I-2, General Industrial District, and require a special use permit based upon procedures and
criteria set forth in and regulated by § 152.022.
(A) Adult uses provided that:
(1) The adult use is located 1,000 feet from any other sensitive receptor.
(2) The adult use has frontage on an arterial roadway.
(B) Billboards as regulated by §§ 152.390 et seq.
(C) Bulk fuel storage.
(D) Concrete mixing plant.
(E) Essential services - public utility uses, transmission services, buildings and storage.
(F) Fairs and fairgrounds.
(G) Freight transportation terminal.
(H) Grain terminal.
(I) Railroad yard.
(J) Recycling center.
(K) Salvage yard.
(L) Sanitary or demolition landfill.
(M) Solid and hazardous waste transfer station.
(N) Solid waste processing facility.
(O) Wireless communications tower and antennas, as regulated by §§ 152.315 et seq.
(P) Yard and tree waste composting site.
(1981 Code § 10.17, Subd. 3) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
120 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
§ 152.248 DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
The following performance standards shall be observed in an I-2, General Industrial District subject
to the additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this chapter:
(A) Minimum building setbacks.
(1) Fifty feet from front property line.
(2) Twenty feet from rear property line.
(3) Four feet from side property line.
(B) Impervious lot coverage. No more than 85% of the lot.
(C) Required off-street parking and loading area. Shall meet the following impervious surface
minimum setback requirements:
(1) Twenty feet from the front property line.
(2) Five feet from the rear property line.
(D) Outside storage. All business' shall meet 1 of the following criteria for business related storage
in the I-2, General Industrial District:
(1) Storage must be completely within enclosed building(s).
(2) Appropriately landscaped to 80% opaque, and according to the standards set forth in
§ 152.298.
(3) Effectively screened with a fence that is at least 80% opaque; and not less than 6 feet, or
more than 8 feet in height.
(E) Landscaping. All business' located along any of the Greenway Corridors, as designated by the
Land Use Plan, shall be appropriately landscaped according to the standards set forth in § 152.294.
(F) Sales, rental, or display (indoor and outdoor). As an accessory use in association with an
allowed principal use provided that:
(1) The area so occupied shall not exceed 30% of the principal building.
(2) No storage of display of merchandise shall be permitted in required rear, side or front
yards.
Zoning Code 121
(3) The outdoor sales, rental or display area shall be included in the calculations for parking
spaces required for the use and shall not occupy space required for parking as stipulated by §§ 152.345
et seq.
(1981 Code § 10.17, Subd. 4) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
(FW) FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 152.260 USES PERMITTED.
The following uses shall be permitted uses within the FW District to the extent that they are not
prohibited by any other zoning district:
(A) All uses commonly classed as agricultural.
(B) Drainage system, flood control and watershed structure, and erosion control device meeting all
city and state standards.
(C) Public parks and playgrounds.
(D) Golf courses.
(E) Parking lots and loading areas.
(F) Other open space uses.
(G) Utilities, railroad tracks, streets and bridges. Public utility facilities, roads, railroad tracks and
bridges within the floodplain shall be designed to minimize increases in flood elevations and shall be
compatible with local comprehensive floodplain development plans. Protection to the flood protection
elevation shall be provided where failure or interruption of these public facilities would result in danger
to the public health or safety and such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area.
Where failure or interruption of service would not endanger life or health, a lesser degree of protection
may be provided for minor or auxiliary roads, railroads or utilities.
(1981 Code § 10.19, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 303, 3rd Series, passed
11-20-2007)
§ 152.261 USES BY SPECIAL PERMIT.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this subchapter, the following are special
uses in an FW, Floodway Overlay District, and require a special use permit based upon procedures and
criteria set forth in and regulated by § 152.022.
2010 S-1
122 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(A) Uses or structures accessory to open space or special permit uses.
(B) Extraction of sand, gravel and other materials.
(C) Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water control structures.
(D) Essential services - governmental uses, buildings and storage, and transmission services,
provided the construction will not cause a stage increase.
(1981 Code § 10.19, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.262 STRUCTURAL APPROVAL.
All structures permitted in the FW District shall be approved by the Council and shall meet
locational and structural requirements as they may set. All structures shall be elevated, flood proofed
as per code requirements or designed to be removed prior to flooding.
(1981 Code § 10.19, Subd. 3) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.263 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
(A) General. All uses, except as allowed in division (B) no structure (temporary or permanent)
obstruction, storage of materials or equipment, or other uses may be allowed as special permit uses,
which acting along or in combination with existing or anticipated future uses.
(B) Structures (temporary or permanent).
(1) Structures shall not be designed for human habitation and shall be a necessary appurtenance
of an open space use.
(2) Structures shall have a low flood damage potential.
(3) The structure, or structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of flood water.
(4) Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the
direction of flood flow, and,
(5) So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on the same flood flow lines
as those of adjoining structures.
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 123
(6) Structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, which may result in damage to
other structures and/or restriction of bridge openings and other narrow sections of the stream or river.
(7) Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be installed at or above the
flood protection elevation for the particular area or adequately flood proofed.
(8) Recreational vehicles shall not be allowed except in the existing approved park.
(9) A necessary appurtenant accessory structure shall be placed on a parcel of at least 10 acres
in size and if fill or other form of obstruction to flood flow is necessary for said construction, the
applicant must provide a hydraulic study that demonstrates that there will be no increases to the 100-year
flood level. Pedestrian bridges shall be subjected to the same requirements.
(10) To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be a minimum of 2
"automatic" openings in the outside walls of the structure having a total net area of not less than 1 square
inch for every foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There must be openings on at least 2 sides of
the structure and the bottom of all openings must be no higher than 1 foot above the lowest adjacent
grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy
this requirement for automatic openings.
(11) Storage of materials and equipment:
(a) The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable,
explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited.
(b) Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable from the
area within the time available after a flood warning and in accordance with approved plan by the city.
(1981 Code § 10.19, Subd. 4) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 303, 3rd Series, passed
11-20-2007)
(FF) FLOOD FRINGE OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 152.275 USES PERMITTED.
The following uses shall be permitted uses within the FF District to the extent that they are not
prohibited by any other zoning district.
(A) Any use permitted in §§ 152.260 et seq.
2010 S-1
124 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(B) Residence and other structures constructed on fill so that the basement floor, or first floor if
there is no basement, is 2 feet above the 100-year elevation. The finished fill elevation shall be no lower
than 1 foot above the 100-year flood elevation for the particular area and shall extend at such elevation
for at least 15 feet beyond the limits of any structure or building erected thereon.
(1) Above grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages must be
designed to internally flood and the design plans must stipulate:
(a) A minimum area of automatic openings in walls where internal flooding is to be used
as a flood proofing technique, there shall be a minimum of 2 openings on at least 2 sides of the structure
and the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade. The automatic openings may
be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters without any form of human intervention; and
(b) That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant materials in accordance with
the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the State Building Code and shall be used solely for building access,
parking of vehicles or storage.
(C) Residences constructed so that the basement or lowest floor is below the flood protection
elevation may be permitted subject to the following conditions.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures with basements
within Zone Al-30 on the City's FIRM shall be designed so that any basement area, together with
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities below the flood proofed design level, is watertight with walls
that are impermeable to the passage of water without human intervention. Basement walls (including
sealed structural glass black windows) shall be built with the capacity to resist hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy resulting from flooding which is 2 feet above the
100-year frequency flood, and shall be designed so that minimal structural damage will occur if this
design is exceeded. The bottom of the lowest basement openings, such as doors and non-sealed
windows, must be placed at least 2 feet above the 100-year base flood elevation.
(2) The area surrounding the entire foundation must be filled at least to the 100-year base flood
elevation. Fill slope and stability requirements are the same as required by the State Building Code for
building on fill.
(3) Flood proofed basements shall not be constructed within the designated floodway.
(4) Basements constructed in accordance with this regulation shall not be for sleeping purposes
or for habitable space as stated and defined in the Minnesota State Building Code.
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 125
(5) A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of division
(A) or (B), as applicable and division (C), hereof, are incorporated in the building plans and
specifications.
(6) A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify the final elevations on the
structure and surrounding fill.
(7) In all instances, the building official retains the discretional authority to deny any request
for a building permit.
(8) No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has signed and recorded with the Polk
County Recorder a covenant restricting the use of the basement area to non-habitable purposes.
(9) The Building official, or authorized representative, shall make or require inspections of the
basement construction work to ascertain compliance with the above provisions.
(D) Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally dry flood proofed in accordance
with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an
accessory structure may be flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood proofing classification in the State
Building Code provided the accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment will not exceed 576
square feet in area and for a detached garage, the detached garage must be used solely for parking of
vehicles and limited storage. All flood proofed accessory structures must meet the following additional
standards, as appropriate:
(1) The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure and shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls;
and,
(2) Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be elevated to or above the Flood
Protection Elevation or properly flood proofed.
(E) Commercial structures generally must be constructed on fill with no first floor or basement floor
below the flood protection elevation. Accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks, and parking
lots may be lower elevations.
(F) Manufacturing and industrial buildings, structures, and appurtenant works shall be protected
to the flood protection elevation. Measures shall be taken to minimize interference with normal plant
operations. Certain accessory land uses such as yards and parking lots may be lower elevations. In
considering permit applications, the board shall give due consideration to needs of an industry whose
business requires that it be located in flood plain areas.
(1981 Code § 10.20, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 303, 3rd Series, passed
11-20-2007)
2010 S-1
126 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
§ 152.276 USES BY SPECIAL PERMIT.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this subchapter, the following are special
uses in an FF, Flood Fringe Overlay District, and require a special use permit based upon procedures
and criteria set forth in and regulated by § 152.022.
(A) All structures. All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above an elevation
not more than 2 feet below the flood protection elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted,
the board of adjustment must specify limitations on the period of use of occupancy of the structure for
times of flooding and only after determining that adequate flood warning time and local flood emergency
response procedures exist.
(B) Reserved.
(C) Commercial manufacturing and industrial structures. Shall ordinarily be elevated on fill as
provided in § 152.275(B), but may in special circumstances be flood proofed to FP-1 or FP-2
classification in accordance with the State Building Code. Non-resident basements may be allowed below
the flood protection elevation provided the basement is structurally dry flood proofed in accordance with
the State Building Code. Structurally dry flood proofing must meet the FP-1 or FP-2 classification
requirements, structures flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not be permitted.
(D) Storage of materials and equipment.
(1) The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding, flammable, explosive
or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited.
(2) Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable from the area
within the time available after a flood warning.
(E) Utilities, railroad tracks, streets, and bridges. Public utility facilities, roads, railroad tracks,
and bridges within the flood plain shall be designed to minimize increases in flood elevations and shall
be compatible with local comprehensive flood plain development plans. Protection to the flood
protection elevation shall be provided where failure or interruption of these public facilities would result
in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning
of the area. Where failure or interruption of service would not endanger life or health, a lesser degree
of protection may be provided for minor or auxiliary roads, railroads, or utilities.
(F) Waste treatment and waste disposal.
(1) No new construction, addition, or modification to existing waste treatment facilities shall
be permitted within the flood plain unless emergency plans and procedures for action to be taken in the
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 127
event of flooding are prepared, filed with, and approved by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
The emergency plans and procedures must provide for measures to prevent introduction of any pollutant
or toxic material into the flood waters.
(2) There shall be no disposal of garbage or solid waste materials within the FF District except
upon issuance of a special use permit for sites approved by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
(G) Flood control works.
(1) The minimum height and design of any dikes, levees, flood walls, or similar structural
works shall be based upon the flood profile of the regional flood confined between the structures subject
to the following:
(2) The minimum height and design of structural works shall be at least 3 feet above the
elevation of the regional flood as confined by structures.
(3) Modifications and additions to existing structural works shall assure that the work will
provide a means of decreasing the flood damage potential in the area. Any existing structural work,
which potentially threatens public health or safety shall be modified or reconstructed in order to meet
the standards contained herein.
(4) Flood protection elevations and floodway limits which reflect proposed measures for flood
control shall not be effective until such measures are constructed and operative.
(5) Detailed plans shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for any new developments
placed on the flood plain landward from dikes, flood walls, and similar structures. The plans must
provide for ponding areas or other measures to protect against flooding from internal drainage.
(1981 Code § 10.20, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 303, 3rd Series, passed
11-20-2007)
GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 152.290 PURPOSE.
This subchapter is established to provide regulations of general applicability for property throughout
the city, to promote the orderly development and use of land, to protect and conserve the natural
environment, to minimize conflicts among land uses, and to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare.
(1981 Code § 10.21, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
2010 S-1
128 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
§ 152.291 APPLICATION.
The regulations set forth in this subchapter apply to all structures and all land uses, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter. No use or structure shall be operated or occupied so as to constitute
a dangerous, injurious, or noxious condition because of fire, explosion or other hazard, noise, vibration,
smoke, dust, fumes, odor or other air pollution, light, glare, heat, cold, dampness, electrical disturbance,
liquid or solid refuse or waste, water or soil pollution, or other substance or condition. In addition, no
use or structure shall be operated or occupied in a manner not in compliance with any performance
standard contained in this chapter or with any other applicable regulation.
(1981 Code § 10.21, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.292 ARCHITECTURAL REQUIREMENTS.
In all zoning use districts all building except 1- and 2-family dwellings must be designed by a
registered architect, unless permission to the contrary is granted by the council on recommendation of
the Planning Commission.
(1981 Code § 10.21, Subd. 3) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.293 BUILDING PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
(A) Dimensions. All residential structures shall possess a minimum width of 24 feet over at least
75% of its length; a minimum length of 30 feet; a minimum total square footage of 900 square feet; the
foregoing dimensions shall not take into account overhangs or other projections.
(B) Easements. No structure shall be located within an easement.
(C) Foundations. All dwellings shall be placed and secured to a permanent foundation of concrete
or masonry or wood construction and shall include frost footings, all in compliance with the building
code. On graded sites, the top of any exterior foundation shall extend above the elevation of the street
gutter at point of discharge or the inlet of an approved drainage device a minimum of 25 inches.
(D) Platting required for uses within all zoning districts. No building permits will be issued on
unplatted properties, except for the addition of accessory structures or additions to existing buildings.
(E) Residential dwelling roofs. All roofs shall be pitched; 4 units of horizontal measurement shall
require a minimum of 1 corresponding unit of vertical measurement. A soffitt at least 1 foot wide is
required at the eaves. Additions to a conforming and existing structure may have roofs at a flatter slope
subject to conformance with the building code. Metal roofs are prohibited.
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 129
(F) Yard requirements. On corner lots and through lots, both road lines shall be front lot lines for
applying the yard setback regulations of this chapter, all other lots lines shall be considered side lot lines.
(1981 Code § 10.21, Subd. 4) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.294 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS.
(A) These general landscaping standards serve as the minimum requirements for a landscaping plan,
or where landscaping/screening is otherwise required by this chapter.
(B) All landscaping incorporated in said plan shall conform to the following standards and criteria:
(1) Minimum size. All plants must meet the following minimum size requirements:
Potted/Bare Root or Balled and Burlapped
Shade trees 2.5-inch diameter 2.5-inch diameter
Ornamental trees (flowering crabs, hawthorns, etc.) 6 - 7 feet 2-inch diameter
Evergreen trees --- 6 feet
Tall shrubs and hedge material (evergreen or
deciduous)
3 - 4 feet 3 - 4 feet
Low shrubs, deciduous
Evergreen
Spreading evergreens
18 - 24 inches
18 - 24 inch potted
18 - 24 inch potted
24 - 30 inches
24 - 30 inches
18 - 24 inches
(2) Spacing.
(a) Plant material centers shall not be located closer than 3 feet from the fence line or
property line and shall not be planted to conflict with public plantings, sidewalks, trails, fences, parking
areas, and driveways based on the judgment of the planning department.
(b) Where plant materials are planted in 2 or more rows, plantings shall be staggered in
rows unless otherwise approved by the planning department.
(c) Deciduous trees intended for screening shall be planted not more than 30 feet apart.
Evergreen trees intended for screening shall be planted not more than 15 feet apart.
(d) Where massing of plants or screening is intended, large deciduous shrubs shall be
planted 4 feet on center or closer, and/or, evergreen shrubs shall be planted 3 feet on center or closer.
2010 S-1
130 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(3) Landscape guarantee. All new plants shall be guaranteed for 12 months from the time
planting has been completed. All plants shall be alive, of good quality, and disease free at the end of
the warranty period or be replaced. Any replacements shall be warranted for 12 months from the time
of planting.
(4) Landscape plans. Landscape plans shall be accompanied by a financial guarantee consistent
with § 152.027.
(1981 Code § 10.21, Subd. 5) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.295 MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS AND MOBILE HOMES.
(A) General. It is unlawful for any person to maintain any manufactured home used for human
habitation or to use any manufactured home for living, sleeping or business purposes on any premises
in the city unless said manufactured home is contained within a manufactured home court or, if located
within an R-l, R-2, R-3, or other zoning use district where single-family residences are permitted the
design criteria hereinafter set forth.
(B) Existing manufactured homes. The placement of new or replacement of manufactured homes
in existing manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are located in flood plain
districts will be treated as a new structure and may be placed only if elevated in compliance with this
chapter.
(1981 Code § 10.21, Subd. 6) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
Cross-reference:
Manufactured Home Building Code, see § 150.11
§ 152.296 REFUSE.
(A) In all zoning use districts, all refuse such as waste material, debris, useless or worthless items
and/or material, waste resulting from building construction or demolition, scrap metal, pipe, motor
vehicle tires and/or wheel rims, motor vehicle parts, and any and all other items commonly referred to
as junk or trash, regardless of whether such items are salvageable, shall be kept in a lawfully erected
enclosed building. The owner and/or the occupant of land shall be responsible for keeping such land
free of refuse.
(B) All dumpsters locations must be approved by Public Works Department, and screened
effectively.
(1981 Code § 10.21, Subd. 7) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 131
§ 152.297 RESIDENTIAL YARD STORAGE.
In all residential zoning use districts, all materials and equipment shall be stored within a building
or fully screened (so as not to be visible) from adjoining properties, except for the following:
playground equipment, equipment temporarily being used on the premises, off-street parking of
passenger automobiles and pick-up trucks.
(1981 Code § 10.21, Subd. 8) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.298 SCREENING.
(A) Screening shall be required in all zoning use districts where any off-street parking area contains
more than 6 parking spaces and is within 30 feet of an adjoining R-1, R-2, R-3, PUD, UER, and
UER-C zoning districts.
(B) Screening shall be required where any business or industrial use (i.e. structure, parking, or
storage) is adjacent to property zoned for residential use, that business or industry shall provide
screening along the boundary of the residential property.
(C) Landscaping being utilized for screening shall remain 10 feet from the street right-of-way or
property line. Any fence being utilized for screening shall remain 10 feet from the right-of-way.
(D) All the screening specifically required by this section shall be subject to 1 of the following
standards:
(1) A greenbelt planting strip shall consist of evergreen trees and/or deciduous trees and plants,
and shall be of a sufficient density to provide an 80% opaque visual screen and reasonable buffer viewed
at a 90-degree angle from the greenbelt planting strip. This planting strip shall be designed to provide
visual screening to a minimum height of 6 feet. The grade for determining height shall be the grade
elevation of the building or use for which the screening is providing protection, unless otherwise
established by the planning department. Earth berms may be used, but shall not be used to achieve more
than 3 feet of the required screen. The planting plan and type of plantings shall require the approval of
the planning department.
(2) A fence may also be installed. The fence shall be constructed of masonry, brick, or wood,
except as otherwise provided herein. Such fence shall provide an 80% opaque screening effect and shall
be a minimum of 6 feet in height, but shall not exceed 8 feet in height. The grade for determining height
shall be the grade elevation of the building or use for which the screening is providing protection, unless
otherwise established by the planning department. The design and materials used in constructing a
required screening fence shall be subject to the approval of the planning department.
(1981 Code § 10.21, Subd. 9) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
2010 S-1
132 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
§ 152.299 TRAVEL TRAILERS AND TRAVEL VEHICLES.
Travel trailers and travel vehicles are exempt from the requirements of this chapter, provided they
meet the following criteria:
(A) Have current licenses required for highway use.
(B) Are highway ready meaning on wheels or the internal jacking system, are attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities commonly used in campgrounds.
(C) The travel trailer/travel vehicle has no permanent structural type additions attached to it.
(D) Situated in an approved private or public recreational vehicle park or campground.
(E) Comply with the requirements of § 72.04.
(F) Shall not be used as a place of permanent residence or in lieu of a permanent place of residence.
(1981 Code § 10.21, Subd. 10) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.300 FLOOD CONTROL EASEMENTS.
Any development landward of the levee subject to the restrictive easement shall:
(A) Be developed consistent with these easements and must maintain the water storage and
conveyance capacity on the property.
(B) Maintain the open area adjacent to the toe of the levee. No planting of trees within 20 feet of
the toe of a levee or within 15 feet of the toe of a floodwall.
(C) Provide to the city a copy of the permit application submitted to the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, St. Paul District Office at least 30 days prior to the issuance for review and comment.
(Ord. 303, 3rd Series, passed 11-20-2007)
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
§ 152.315 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this subchapter is to establish general guidelines in the siting of, and to minimize
any possible adverse impacts caused by wireless communication antennas, towers and satellite dishes.
(1981 Code § 10.22, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 133
§ 152.316 PROCEDURE; SATELLITE DISHES.
(A) Any other section of this code notwithstanding, satellite dish antennas may be erected or
installed without a special use permit providing that such satellite dish antenna:
(1) Whether mounted on a roof or on the ground, has a diameter of 6 feet or less;
(2) If mounted on a roof, is mounted in such a manner that no portion of the satellite dish
antenna is visible from the street, avenue, drive, circle, court, etc., that is named in the common postal
address of the property; and
(3) If mounted on the ground, is mounted in such a manner that no portion of the satellite dish
antenna exceeds 12 feet in height above the average finished grade within a radius of 10 feet and is
located within the rear yard no closer than 6 feet to any property line.
(B) No satellite dish antenna that does not comply with the restrictions and conditions of division
(A) may be erected or installed until a special use permit has been obtained. A site plan showing the
proposed location of the satellite dish antenna must be submitted with all applications for a special use
permit for the installation or erection of a satellite dish antenna.
(1981 Code § 10.22, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.317 PROCEDURE; WIRELESS COMMUNICATION ANTENNAS AND TOWERS.
(A) Pre-application meeting. Any request for the placement of wireless communication equipment,
which may involve construction of a new tower or placement of an antenna upon an existing structure,
shall require a pre-application meeting with the City Planning Department. This meeting is intended to
provide significant preliminary information on the project, discuss development alternatives, and
determine the appropriate review procedure.
(B) Decision to deny to be in writing. Any decision to deny a request to place, construct or modify
a wireless communication antenna and/or tower shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence
contained in a written record from the Planning Department and/or from the proceedings of the Planning
Commission meeting(s) and Council meeting(s) so as to comply with the Federal Telecommunications
Act of 1996.
(C) Application requirements.
(1) Applications for the placement of a wireless communications antenna shall include the
following:
(a) A complete set of plans and specifications including a report outlining the proposal.
2010 S-1
134 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(b) Written certification from a registered engineer that any antenna that will be utilized
for commercial purposes will be constructed in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local
regulations.
(c) Proof of ownership of the proposed site or authorization to utilize.
(d) Additional information may also be required, such as site line diagrams and color
samples, as needed to complete the review of the project.
(2) Applications for the construction of a wireless communications tower shall include the
following:
(a) A complete set of plans and specifications including a report with a description of the
tower with technical reasons for its design.
(b) Documentation establishing the structural integrity for the tower's proposed uses, the
general capacity of the tower.
(c) Written certification from a registered engineer that the tower is to be constructed in
compliance with all applicable federal, state and local regulations pertaining to the construction.
(d) A signed affidavit stating that any existing space on the proposed tower will be made
available for co-location of transmitting facilities, and that all requests for co-location of transmitting
facilities will be responded to within 30 days from the date of receipt of written request.
(e) Proof of ownership of the proposed site or authorization to utilize it.
(D) General requirements.
(1) The planning department and planning commission shall consider, and the applicant shall
demonstrate compliance with the following standards in determining whether to approve an application
for a wireless communication antenna and/or tower:
(a) Co-location of wireless communication facilities. As a condition of issuing a permit
to construct and operate a wireless communication tower utilized for commercial purposes within the
city's zoning jurisdiction, the applicant is required to demonstrate that a suitable location is not available
for the placement of an antenna on any of the existing structures within the geographic area to be served.
The city may request any feasibility studies associated with the said application which demonstrate that
locations on existing structures have been explored as the preferred siting alternative. If another
communication tower has been determined to be technically feasible by either the applicant or the city,
the applicant must show that it has requested to co-locate on the existing tower and provide a letter from
the communications carrier owning or operating the facility stating reasons for not permitting the
co-location of transmitting facilities.
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 135
(b) Wireless communication facilities. In all circumstances, owners of existing towers
being utilized for commercial purposes shall respond to a request for co-location of transmitting facilities
within 30 days from the date of receipt of a written request. In the event that a wireless communications
tower owner and/or operator has not responded to the said request, city council may defer the said
application until the co-location issue is resolved. In all cases, it shall be the intent of the city to
encourage the co-location of transmitting facilities.
(c) Condition to operate for commercial purposes. As a condition of issuing a permit to
construct and operate a tower to be utilized for commercial purposes in the city, the owner/operator of
the tower is required to allow co-location of wireless communication facilities until said tower has
reached full antenna capacity. Thus the applicant is required to submit an affidavit stating that space on
the proposed tower will be made available to future users when technically possible. Applicants cannot
be denied space on a tower unless mechanical, structural, or regulatory factors prevent sharing.
Agreement to this provision must be included in the lease by the landowner, if different from the
owner/operator of the tower. Written documentation must be presented to the planning commission
evidencing that the landowner of the property on which the tower is to be located has agreed to the terms
of this section as well as the requirements, regulations, and standards established in this chapter. As an
additional condition of issuing the permit to construct and operate the tower within the city's zoning
jurisdiction, the owner/operator of the tower is required to sign a statement that all disputes with future
providers concerning the terms and conditions of co-location of wireless communication facilities shall
be submitted to commercial arbitration under a system selected by the parties; but if the parties are
unable to agree, then under the auspices of the Commercial Arbitration Provisions of the American
Arbitration Association.
(d) Least conspicuous placement. Efforts shall be made to utilize a location for the
proposed wireless communication tower, which results in the least conspicuous or most aesthetically
pleasing installation possible, while still providing reasonable signal access.
(e) Location in Residential Zoning District. As a condition of issuing a permit to place
a commercially utilized antenna in a Residential Zoning District, the applicant is required to provide
proof that no suitable locations exist for a tower or antenna facility within any other permitted use or
special use areas in the local code.
(2) All wireless communication towers, antennas and associated equipment facilities shall meet
the following applicable requirements:
(a) Height and setback requirements.
1. Wireless communication antennas shall not exceed 30 feet above the maximum
building height as per zoning district regulations.
2010 S-1
136 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
2. Wireless communication antennas located outside a Residential Zoning District
shall be set back a minimum of 200 feet from any Residential Zoning Districts.
3. Wireless communication towers being utilized for commercial purposes shall only
be constructed to the least height that is technically feasible to service the geographical service area of
the applicant.
4. Wireless communication towers being utilized for commercial purposes shall be
set back a minimum of 600 feet from any sensitive receptors.
5. Wireless communication towers being utilized in a Residential Zoning District for
non-commercial purposes shall not exceed 30 feet above the maximum building height as per zoning
district regulations.
6. Wireless communication towers located in non-residential zoning districts, with
the exception of guyed towers, shall be setback from the lot line and any type of development (i.e.
buildings, parking lots, etc.) a distance equaling at least 115% of the tower height to ensure the safety
of surrounding uses.
7. Guyed wireless communication towers shall setback from the lot line and any type
of development (i.e. buildings, parking lots, etc.) according to the following ratios of distances:
Number of Levels of Guy
Along Height of Tower
Ratio of Height of Tower to Distance
From Base to Property Line
2 or less 1:1
3 3:2
4 2:1
5 5:2
6 3:1
(b) Guyed wireless communication towers. When guyed wireless communication towers
are used, all anchor points from the guys are required to be on the same property as the tower.
(c) Wireless communication towers as monopoles. In Commercial Zoning Districts
wireless communication towers shall only be permitted as monopoles, lattice towers and guyed towers
shall be prohibited.
(d) Communication antennas for commercial purposes. In Residential Zoning Districts,
communication antennas being utilized for commercial purposes shall only be situated either within
existing high-tension lattice towers or as architectural components upon non-residential buildings.
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 137
(e) Not in front yard or front half of side yard. Wireless communication towers being
utilized for non-commercial purposes shall be prohibited from locating in a front-yard or in the front half
of a side-yard within a residential zoning district.
(f) Color and materials. Wireless communication antenna and/or tower design shall utilize
colors and materials that effectively reduces their visual impact.
(g) Three providers and 3 users located on structure. Wireless communication towers
being utilized for commercial purposes shall be designed to have sufficient structural capacity to allow
for 3 providers to be located on the structure. The wireless communication facility shall also be designed
to show that the applicant has sufficient space on its site plan for an equipment building large enough to
accommodate 3 users. If an equipment building is initially constructed to accommodate only 1 user,
space shall be reserved on site for equipment building expansions to accommodate 3 users.
(h) Minimum setback to be met. All types of development, with the exception of any
required equipment buildings or bufferyards, are prohibited from occurring within the minimum setbacks
as required by division (D)(2)(a)(6) and division (D)(2)(a)(7).
(i) Bufferyard. A landscaped bufferyard of not less than 15 feet in depth shall be placed
around the entire perimeter of the wireless communication facility being utilized for commercial
purposes. The landscaped yard is required to consist of the following plantings per each 100 feet of
bufferyard:
1. Two shade trees.
2. Four ornamental trees.
3. Eight evergreen trees.
4. Thirteen shrubs.
5. Minimum size of the plantings shall conform with § 152.294.
6. The landscaping shall be continuously maintained and promptly restored if
necessary. A chain linked or a solid wood fence of at least 6 feet in height shall also be required within
the bufferyard for aesthetic and public safety reasons. NO TRESPASSING signs shall be posted around
the wireless communication facility with a telephone number of a person to contact in the event of an
emergency.
(j) Wireless communication facility discontinued or no longer in use. Any wireless
communication facility that is no longer needed and its use discontinued shall be reported immediately
2010 S-1
138 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
by the service provider to the city planning staff. Any antenna or tower utilized for commercial purposes
that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner
of such antenna or tower shall agree to remove the same within 90 days of a receipt of notice. If such
antenna or tower is not removed within said 90 days, the governing authority may remove such antenna
or tower at the owner's expense.
(k) Consent to inspection. The owner/operator of the antenna and/or tower shall sign a
written consent consenting to annual inspection of the wireless communication facility by the building
inspections department.
(l) Illumination. Except as required by law, an antenna and/or tower shall not be
illuminated and lighting fixtures or signs shall not be attached to the antenna or tower. If lighting is
required by FAA regulations, white strobe lights shall not be permitted at night unless no other
alternative is permitted by the FAA and all lights shall be oriented inward so as not to project onto
surrounding property. Lighting for security purposes shall be permitted at the wireless communication
facility with a prior approval of the planning commission.
(m)Airspace. Wireless communication towers shall be located in accordance with the
regulations of the airport approach zones and Federal Aviation Regulations for clearance around VOR
and DVOR stations.
(n) Compliance with FCC. All wireless communication antennas and/or towers shall
maintain compliance with the FCC at all times, including current radio frequency emissions standards
and maintenance of all equipment at the tower site.
(o) Advertising. No advertising shall be permitted on any wireless communications
facility.
(E) Permits.
(1) FCC and FAA licenses. Prior to receiving building permits, all applicable licenses;
including FCC and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) licenses, needed to construct the tower at
the proposed tower site, shall be submitted to the building inspections department.
(2) Documentation to be submitted to FCC. Prior to receiving final inspection by the building
inspections department, documented certification shall be submitted to the FCC, with a copy to the
building inspections department, certifying that the wireless communication facility complies with all
current FCC regulations for non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation.
(3) Liability. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of a wireless
communication tower until and unless the applicant for the building permit deposits with the
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 139
Clerk-Treasurer a policy of liability insurance indemnifying the city from liability for personal injury
or property damage in the sum of at least $500,000. The policy of insurance so deposited shall contain
a clause obligating the company issuing the same to give at least 10-days’ written notice to the
clerk-treasurer before cancellation thereof, the building permit to be automatically revoked upon the
lapse or termination of said policy.
(4) Permit required to erect antenna/tower if in amount of $1,000 or more. No wireless
communication antenna and/or tower shall be erected, constructed, or altered in the amount of $1,000
or more, on any lot or structure within the city's zoning jurisdiction without having first secured a permit
for such antenna and/or tower from the building inspector.
(F) Certification of registered engineer. The city may require a review by an independent registered
engineer engaged by the city and paid for by the applicant for the construction of wireless communication
towers. Among other things, the engineer may review and approve the written certification of the
applicant's engineer and may review and approve the applicant's studies showing the necessity for and
location of the tower; and may review and approve the structural integrity, electrical integrity and
electrical safeness of the wireless communication facility in its projected uses so as to assure the
protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.
(1981 Code § 10.22, Subd. 3) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 303, 3rd Series, passed
11-20-2007)
LIMITED LIVESTOCK RAISING
§ 152.330 PURPOSE.
(A) Limited livestock raising is permitted in the UER zoning district, which fits in with the rural
characteristics of the district. Each property shall have a minimum of 2 productive acres for the first
animal unit and 1 productive acre for each additional animal unit. Animal units will be calculated
according to the table below.
(B) To determine the animal unit measure for any animal not specified below, divide the average
adult weight by 1,000.
2010 S-1
140 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
Animal
Unit
Animal
Unit per
Acre
Equivalent Animal
Units
250 500
(1) Slaughter Steer or Heifer 1.0 1.0 250 417
(1) Cow and Calf Pair 1.2 .8 208 500
Mature Dairy Cow
(1) Over 1,000 lbs. 1.4 .7 179 357
(1) Under 1,000 lbs. 1.0 1.0 250 500
Swine
(1) Over 300 lbs .4 2.5 625 1,250
(1) Between 55–300 lbs. .3 3.3 833 1,667
(1) Under 55 lbs. .05 20.0 5,000 10,000
(1) Sheep .4 2.5 625 1,250
(1) Duck .01 100.0 25,000 50,000
Turkey
(1) Over 5 lbs. .018 55.6 13,889 27,779
(1) Under 5 lbs. .005 200.0 50,000 100,000
Chicken (Dry manure)
(1) Over 5 lbs. .005 200.0 50,000 100,000
(1) Under 5 lbs. .003 333.3 83,333 166,667
(1) Chicken (Liquid manure) .033 30.3 7,576 15,152
(1) Horse 1.0 1.0 250 500
(1981 Code § 10.23, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 303, 3rd Series, passed
11-20-2007)
§ 152.331 PRIVATE STABLES.
(A) If the private stable property is less than 40 acres, the property shall have a minimum of 2
productive acres for the first equine and 1 productive acre for each additional equine.
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 141
(B) Private riding arenas may be allowed in all zoning districts, except the Commercial and
Industrial Zoning Districts, provided they meet the following conditions:
(1) Private riding arenas must be located on lots having an area of 10 acres or greater.
(2) Private riding arenas may be exempted from the zoning district accessory building size
standard. No private riding arena shall exceed 10,000 square feet in gross floor area.
(3) Private riding arenas shall be setback 100 feet from the nearest property line.
(1981 Code § 10.23, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
PARKING/OFF-STREET LOADING AREAS AND ACCESS
§ 152.345 PURPOSE.
Parking and loading regulations are established to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public
right-of-way, to provide for the parking and loading needs of uses and structures, to enhance the
compatibility between parking and loading areas and their surroundings, and to regulate the number,
design, maintenance, and location of required off-street parking and loading spaces, and access
driveways and aisles.
(1981 Code § 10.24, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.346 APPLICATION.
The regulations and requirements set forth herein shall apply to all off-street parking and loading
facilities in all zoning districts of the city.
(1981 Code § 10.24, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.347 CHANGE OF USE.
No change of use or occupancy of land already dedicated to a parking area, parking spaces or
loading spaces shall be made, nor shall any subdivision of land be made which reduces area necessary
for parking, parking stalls, or parking requirements below the minimum prescribed by this chapter. Any
change of use or occupancy of any building or buildings, including additions thereto, requiring more
parking area shall not be permitted until there is furnished such additional parking spaces as required by
this chapter.
(1981 Code § 10.24, Subd. 3) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
2010 S-1
142 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
§ 152.348 EXISTING FACILITIES.
Existing parking and loading facilities shall not be reduced below the requirements for a similar new
use or, if less than the requirements for a similar new use, they shall not be reduced further.
(1981 Code § 10.24, Subd. 4) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.349 USE OF PARKING FACILITIES.
(A) Required parking and loading spaces and the driveways providing access to them shall not be
used for open storage, storage of inoperable vehicles, or for sale or rental of goods, except as specifically
permitted by this chapter.
(B) No more than 1 commercial motor vehicle that is 25 feet or more in length or over 12,000
pounds gross weight capacity, no semi-trailer, truck tractor, or combination thereof, and no
commercially licensed trailer shall be parked or stored in a residential district except when loading,
unloading, or rendering a service.
(C) The number of passenger automobiles or permitted commercial vehicles parked at a residence
may not exceed the number that can be garaged and parked within permitted off-street parking spaces.
Those vehicles parked on the driveway that are not garaged must be currently licensed, operable, and
in good repair. In cases of permitted 2-family and multi-family dwellings, the same shall apply.
(D) Vehicles may be located completely on an established driveway, provided that: The vehicle is
kept entirely on the vehicle owner's property, the vehicle does not obstruct the public sidewalk, that the
vehicle does not by any part enter or protrude into the public right-of-way.
(E) Passenger automobiles and recreational vehicles may be advertised FOR SALE within a
residential area provided the vehicle is owned by the property owner where the vehicle is parked and the
vehicle is currently licensed, operable, and parked entirely on a hard surfaced driveway. At no time shall
any commercially licensed vehicle be parked within a residential area advertised FOR SALE. The
number of vehicles sold from a residential location within a given year shall not exceed that allowed by
the Minnesota Department of Public Safety.
(F) Passenger, commercial, and recreational vehicles shall not be displayed FOR SALE within
nonresidential districts unless part of an approved sales dealership or for short-term parking (8 hours or
less) if the vehicle is owned by an employee of said business where the vehicle is parked.
(1981 Code § 10.24, Subd. 5) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.350 DESIGN OF PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES.
Each space shall contain approximately 285 square feet per required space and any parking lots or
spaces required shall comply with design standards in Table 1 and in Parking Diagram A.
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 143
DIAGRAM A
Parking Standard Diagram
2010 S-1
144 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
TABLE I
Parking Layout Required Minimum Dimensions (In Feet)
For 9-Foot Stalls At Various Angles
Parking Angle
Dimension On Diagram 45E 60E 75E 90E
Stall width parallel to aisle A 12.7 10.4 9.3 9.0
Stall length of line B 25.0 22.0 20.0 18.5
Stall depth C 17.5 19.0 19.5 18.5
Aisle width between stall line D 12.0 16.0 23.0 26.0
Stall depth, interlock E 15.3 17.5 18.8 18.5
Module, edge of pavement to
interlock
F 44.8 52.5 61.3 63.0
Module, interlocking G 42.6 51.0 61.0 63.0
Module, interlock to curb face H 42.8 50.2 58.8 60.5
Bumper overhang (typical) I 2.0 2.3 2.5 2.5
Offset J 6.3 2.7 0.5 0.0
Unpaved side and rear yard
setback
K All districts: 5 feet
Cross aisle, 1-way L 14.0 14.0 14.0 14.0
Cross aisle, 2-way – 24.0 24.0 24.0 24.0
Unpaved front yard setback
except driveways
M All residential districts as required for buildings
Setback from principal
building
N R-3 District: 10 feet
All nonresidence districts: 5 feet
Front lot line to drive
(landscape area)
O All districts: 10 feet
Side and rear lot line to drive
(landscape area)
P All districts: 5 feet
(1981 Code § 10.24, Subd. 6) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 303, 3rd Series, passed
11-20-2007)
2010 S-1
Zoning Code 144A
§ 152.351 ACCESSIBILITY REQUIREMENTS.
All accessibility requirements under the Americans with Disability Act (ADA), as amended, must
be complied with.
(1981 Code § 10.24, Subd. 7) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.352 COMPUTING REQUIREMENTS.
(A) FLOOR SPACE shall mean gross floor area of the specific use.
(B) Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the nearest
whole number.
(C) The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as
required for a use of similar nature as determined by the planning staff.
(1981 Code § 10.24, Subd. 8) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.353 LOCATION OF PARKING FACILITIES.
Required off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the principal building or use,
except where otherwise provided for in this subchapter. Any area within 20 feet of the front of the
drive-in garage doors may notbe used to satisfy any portion of the parking requirements.
(1981 Code § 10.24, Subd. 9) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.354 COMBINED PARKING FACILITIES.
(A) (1) Combined or joint parking facilities serving different districts shall not be permitted;
(2) Except: Limited combined or joint parking facilities may be located, constructed and used
within and for buildings or uses in C-1, I-1 and I-2 districts, provided that such parking facility is on an
adjoining lot and the plan for such facility is approved by the Planning Commission.
(B) All limited, combined or joint parking facilities authorized hereunder shall provide the total
number of parking spaces as the sum of the requirements for each building or use being served thereby.
(C) All limited, combined or joint parking facilities or adjoining parking facilities on separate lots
as authorized and constructed adjacent to a common lot line separating 2 or more parking areas are not
required to observe the parking area setback from such common lot line.
(1981 Code § 10.24, Subd. 10) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
2010 S-1
144B East Grand Forks - Land Usage
Zoning Code 145
§ 152.355 EXEMPTIONS FROM PARKING REGULATIONS.
(A) Establishments in any district which have paid an assessment for the provision of off-street city
parking lots shall be exempt from the provisions of this section which refers to off-street parking.
(B) (1) If the current parking regulations cannot be met as a result of the replacement of an
existing structure, a 20% exception on the total parking requirement will be allowed up to a maximum
of 50 stalls. The applicant will be required to pay for each stall according to the following formula.
PEC = N(Cc + Pc)
PEC = Parking Exception Cost
Pc = Property cost: Estimated cost of 285
square feet of property in development
area as determined by the city assessing
department
Cc = Construction cost: Construction cost of
285 square feet of parking space (6 inches
Portland concrete) as determined by the
City Engineering Department
N = Number of stalls considered for exception
(2) Upon payment of the parking exception cost (PEC) based upon the herein described formula
to the city by the applicant in cash, such property shall be exempt from the strict provisions this section
with refer to off-street parking. The money paid by the applicant shall go into an account to be used for
street maintenance.
(C) The City Planning Commission may reduce the total parking spaces required by up to 5% if the
developer provides the needed accommodations for transit facilities and vehicles; and a reduction of up
to 3% of the total parking spaces required may be permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission
if the developer provides bicycle racks and bicycle access to his or her property.
(1981 Code § 10.24, Subd. 11) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
146 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
§ 152.356 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
(A) Proper surface drainage provided. In all districts, parking areas and access drive hereinafter
constructed shall be paved and provided with proper surface drainage.
(B) Maintain in neat and adequate manner. The operator of the principal building or use shall
maintain parking and loading areas, access drives, and yard areas in a neat and adequate manner so that
they are accessible.
(C) Surfacing and drainage. Off-street parking areas shall be improved with a durable and dustless
surface. Such areas shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulation within
the area. These requirements shall also apply to open sales lots for cars, trucks and other equipment.
Parking and driveway areas located within 35 feet of the street pavement shall have curbs.
(1981 Code § 10.24, Subd. 12) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.357 LIGHTING.
All off-street parking facilities shall provide adequate lighting to ensure the safe operation of motor
vehicles and the safety of pedestrians. Prior to installation of any such exterior lighting or substantial
modification thereto, an exterior lighting plan shall be submitted to the planning staff for determination
as to whether the requirements of this subchapter have been met. Lighting shall be directed away from
the public right-of-way and nearby or adjacent residential districts.
(1981 Code § 10.24, Subd. 13) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.358 OFF-STREET PARKING.
(A) Off-street parking, residential and nonresidential. Off-street parking areas of sufficient size for
patrons, customers, suppliers, visitors, and employees shall be provided for residential and non
residential uses on the premises as specified below.
(1) The minimum size of each parking stall shall be 9 feet by 18½ feet, exclusive of aisle width
for open area parking lots.
(2) The minimum size of each parking stall shall be 8½ feet by 17½ feet for enclosed parking
such as parking garages and parking ramps.
(B) Agricultural, nursery or tree farms. One space per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 per
company vehicle, plus 1 space per 500 square feet of inside sales or display.
Zoning Code 147
(C) Residential.
(1) Bed and breakfast. One parking space for each 1 lodging room.
(2) Convalescent or nursing homes. One space per 6 patient beds, plus 1 space per employee
on the largest work shift, plus 1 space per staff member and visiting doctor.
(3) Dormitory. One parking space for each 3 beds.
(4) Elderly housing. Seven-tenths’ space per unit.
(5) Fraternity and sorority houses. One parking space for each 2 beds.
(6) Residential care facilities. No less than 4 parking spaces; provided, however, that in
addition sufficient undeveloped spaces shall be provided for additional parking as necessary to comply
with parking requirements in the zoning district in which the group home is located in the event the use
of the property shall change after construction of the group home.
(7) Multifamily (including townhomes.)
(a) One bedroom. One and one-half off-street spaces.
(b) Two bedrooms. Two and one-quarter off-street spaces.
(c) Three bedrooms or more. Two and one-half off-street spaces.
(D) Institutional.
(1) Institutional uses, except as specifically designated herein. One space per 3 patrons to the
maximum capacity, plus 1 space per employee on the largest work shift.
(2) Other institutional uses.
(a) Churches. One space per 6 seats based on design capacity.
(b) Nursery school. One space per teacher/employee on the largest work shift, plus 1
off-street loading space per 6 students.
(c) Libraries and museums. One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area or 1 space
per 4 seats to a maximum capacity, whichever is greater, plus 1 space per employee on the largest work
shift.
148 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(d) Research, experimental, or testing. One off-street parking space for each employee
on the major shift or 1 off-street space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area within the building,
whichever is greater.
(e) Schools.
1. Elementary and middle school. One space per teacher and staff member, plus 1
space per 2 classrooms.
2. Senior high. One space per staff member on the largest work shift, plus 1 space
per 5 nonbused students.
3. University/college. One space per staff member on the largest work shift, plus 1
space per 2 students of the largest class attendance period.
(E) Commercial.
(1) Commercial uses except as specifically designated herein. One space per 150 square feet
of gross floor area of customer sales dn service, plus 1 space per 200 square feet of storage and/or office
gross floor area, or , if the use has at least 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, 5½ spaces per 1,000
square feet of gross floor area.
(2) Other commercial uses.
(a) Auditoriums and theaters. One parking space per 4 seats.
(b) Banks. One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area, and 1 space per employee
on the largest work shift, plus 4 off-street waiting (loading) spaces per drive-in lane.
(c) Bars, taverns, dance halls, night clubs and lounges. One space per 50 square feet of
gross floor area, plus 1 space per employee on the largest shift.
(d) Bowling alley. Five spaces per lane, plus 1 space per employee on the largest work
shift.
(e) Car wash (full-serve.) Six stacking spaces per bay, plus 1 space per employee on
largest work shift.
(f) Car wash (self-serve.) Four stacking spaces per bay.
(g) Convenience, grocery, and gas/service. One space per 150 square feet of retail floor
area.
Zoning Code 149
(h) Fast-food restaurants. One space for 50 square feet of gross floor area, plus 5
off-street waiting spaces per drive-in lane, plus 1 space per employee on the largest work shift.
(i) Funeral homes. One space per 4 patron seats or 25 spaces per chapel unit, whichever
is greater.
(j) Furniture and appliance stores. One parking space for each 330 square feet of gross
floor area for the first 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, and 1 parking space for each 500 square feet
of gross floor area over 5,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(k) Golf courses (9- and 18-hole.) Sixty spaces per 9 holes, plus 1 space per employee
on the largest shift, plus 50% of the spaces otherwise required for any accessory uses (e.g. bars,
restaurants, etc.)
(l) Golf driving ranges. One space per tee, plus 1 space per employee on the largest work
shift.
(m)Grocery or supermarket. Five spaces for 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(n) Hospitals. One space for each 1 hospital bed, plus 1 space for each 2,000 square feet
of gross floor area, plus 1 parking space for each employee on the largest shift.
(o) Hotel or motel. One space per room or suite, plus 1 space per every 3 employees on
largest work shift, plus 1 space per 3 persons to a maximum capacity for each public meeting and/or
banquet room, plus 50% of the spaces otherwise required for accessory uses (e.g. restaurants, bars, etc.)
(p) Laundromat. One parking space for each 2 washing machines.
(q) Liquor store (off-sale.) One parking space per 400 square feet of gross floor area.
(r) Miniature golf. One and one-half spaces per hole, plus 1 space per employee on the
largest work shift.
(s) Private clubs or lodges. One space per 3 persons to the maximum capacity for the
facility.
(t) Racquetball, handball courts. Three spaces per court, plus 1 space per employee on
the longest largest work shift.
(u) Repair services (excluding vehicles.) One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area,
plus 1 space per employee on the largest work shift.
(v) Restaurants, cafes. One off-street parking space for each 75 square feet of gross floor
area.
150 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(w)Shopping center. Four spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, less mall
or common area.
(x) Swimming facility. One space per 75 square feet of gross water area, plus 1 space per
employee on the largest work shift.
(y) Vehicle repair and maintenance services (including salvage yards.) One space per 400
square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 space per employee on the largest work shift.
(z) Vehicle sales and service (boats, cars, trucks, trailers, R.V.s, implement, etc.) Six
parking spaces, plus 1 parking space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area over 1,000 square feet.
(F) Office.
(1) Office spaces except as specifically designated herein. Five spaces, plus 1 space for each
300 square feet of gross floor area.
(2) Other office uses.
(a) Beauty and barber shops. Three spaces per operator or 1 space per 100 square feet
of gross floor area, whichever is greater, plus 1 space per employee on the largest work shift.
(b) Medical offices. Three spaces per doctor, plus 1 space per employee on the largest
work shift.
(G) Industrial.
(1) Light industrial uses except as specifically designated herein. One space per employee on
the largest work shift or 1 space for each 2,000 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater, plus
1 space per company vehicle regularly stored on the premises.
(2) Heavy industrial. One space per employee on the largest shift plus 1 spacer per company
vehicle normally left on the premises.
(1981 Code § 10.24, Subd. 14) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.359 ACCESS.
(A) Private accesses shall meet the requirements set forth in § 96.06.
(B) At no time shall any part of a truck or van be allowed to extend into the right-of-way of a public
thoroughfare while the truck or van is being loaded or unloaded.
(1981 Code § 10.24, Subd. 15) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
Zoning Code 151
§ 152.360 DRIVEWAY WIDTH STANDARDS.
The following standards shall apply to all new construction of driveways proceeding the adoption
date of this chapter.
(A) Lots less than 75 feet in average width.
(1) No driveway shall exceed 24 feet in width at the sidewalk line.
(2) No driveway shall exceed 30 feet in width at the curb line.
(B) Lots 75 feet to 100 feet in average width.
(1) No driveway shall exceed 30 feet in width at the sidewalk line.
(2) No driveway shall exceed 36 feet in width at the curb line.
(C) Lots greater than 100 feet in average width.
(1) No driveway shall exceed 36 feet in width at the sidewalk line.
(2) No driveway shall exceed 42 feet in width at the curb line.
(D) Two driveways serving same residential property. When 2 driveways serve the same residential
property, they shall be separated by at least 20 feet measured at the sidewalk line.
(E) Street intersection on a corner lot. No driveway shall be provided nearer than 20 feet to the
street intersection on a corner lot.
(F) Common driveways. A common driveway to serve 2 lots may be permitted at the line common
to the properties provided that such common driveway shall not exceed 30 feet in width at the sidewalk
line nor 36 feet in width at the curb line.
(1981 Code § 10.24, Subd. 16) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 303, 3rd Series, passed
11-20-2007)
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM
§ 152.370 WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM.
(A) Special use permit. Each wind energy conversion system shall require a special use permit for
the zoning use district in which it is proposed to locate said system.
2010 S-1
152 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(B) Certification. Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied with certification
by an independent registered professional engineer or independent testing agency that the tower design
is sufficient to withstand load requirements for structures as established by the local building construction
code, and a dimensional representation of the tower including the conversion system, base and footings,
and an accurate plan containing the following information:
(1) Property lines;
(2) Proposed location of tower on site;
(3) Location of all existing structures on site;
(4) All above ground utility lines;
(5) All underground utility lines with a radius equal to the WECS height;
(6) Boundaries of all adjacent utility easements or reserved areas.
(C) Setback. Towers shall be setback from the lot line and any type of development (i.e. buildings,
parking lots, etc.) a distance equaling at least 115% of the tower height (including any portion of the
rotor or axis extending above the tower) to ensure the safety of surrounding uses. There shall be no
height limitation imposed upon the said tower so long as it is in compliance with the setback regulation.
(D) Tower access. Climbing access to the WECS tower shall be limited either by means of a fence
6 feet high around the tower base with a locking portal, or by limiting tower climbing apparatus to no
lower than 12 feet from the ground.
(E) Wind access. Contiguous property owners and planned developments may construct a WECS
for their use in common. If property held by more than a single owner is used to meet the setback
requirements, a site plan establishing easements or reserved areas must be submitted for approval.
(F) Noise. A WECS operation shall not produce noise in excess of the limits set forth in the
following table, to-wit:
Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use Districts in Decibels
Day
(7:00 a.m –10:00p.m.)
Night
(10:00 p.m.–7:00 a.m.)
Land use districts L10 L50 L10 L50
Residential 65 60 55 60
Commercial 70 65 70 65
Zoning Code 153
Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use Districts in Decibels
Day
(7:00 a.m –10:00p.m.)
Night
(10:00 p.m.–7:00 a.m.)
Land use districts L10 L50 L10 L50
Industrial 80 75 80 75
L10: Means the sound level, expressed in decibels (dBA) which is exceeded 10% of the time for a 1-hour
period, as measured by a sound level meter having characteristics as specified in the latest standards of S1.4,
of the American National Standards Institute, using approved test procedures and equipment.
L50: Means the sound level similarly expressed and measured which is exceeded 50% of the time for a
1-hour period.
The limits of the most restrictive district shall apply at the boundaries between different land use categories.
The determination of land use shall be by its zoned designation.
(G) Limited use. Wind energy conversion systems installed in accordance with the requirements
of this Subdivision shall not generate power as a commercial enterprise as defined by the Public Utilities
Commission.
(H) Electromagnetic interference. A WECS shall not be installed in any location along the major
axis of an existing microwave communications link where the operation of the WECS is likely to produce
an unacceptable level of electromagnetic interference unless the applicant provides evidence indicating
the degree of expected and the possible effect on the microwave communications link of which is at a
level satisfactory to the planning staff.
(I) Airspace. A WECS shall be located or installed in accordance with the regulations of the
airport approach zones and Federal Aviation Regulations for clearance around VOR and DVOR stations.
(J) Interconnect. A WECS, if interconnected to an electric utility distribution system, shall meet
the interconnect requirement of the Electric Utility Company. In any case the interconnect shall include
a manual disconnect which complies with the National Electric Code.
(K) Codes. Construction, design and installment of a WECS shall comply with all local, state and
national electrical codes in effect at the time of installation.
(L) Liability. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of a WECS until and unless
the applicant for the building permit deposits with the Clerk-Treasurer a policy of liability insurance
indemnifying applicant from liability for personal injury or property damage in the sum of at least
$500,000. The policy of insurance so deposited shall contain a clause obligating the company issuing the
same to give at least 10-days’ written notice to the Clerk-Treasurer before cancellation thereof, the
building permit to be automatically revoked upon the lapse or termination of said policy.
(1981 Code § 10.25) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
154 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
HOME OCCUPATIONS
§ 152.380 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
(A) The activity must be clearly secondary to the principle use as a residence.
(B) Not more than 25% of the floor area of the main building shall be devoted to such activity, and
in no case more than a total of 400 square feet on any premises.
(C) No one other than a member of the family residing on the premises shall be employed on the
premise in the conduct of the activity.
(D) There shall be no signs, other than 1 non-illuminated sign not exceeding 2 square feet in area
attached to the building, and no displays or alterations to the exterior of the building that would
distinguish it as being devoted to any non-dwelling use.
(E) No mechanical equipment or machinery shall be used in the conduct of the activity that produces
noise, smoke, odor, vibration or other effects discernable beyond the property lines.
(F) No outside storage shall be permitted.
(G) No stock-in-trade shall be displayed so as to be visible from any street.
(1981 Code § 10.26) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
SIGNS
§ 152.390 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(A) Permit. Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, any person wishing to erect a sign
shall first obtain a permit from the city. Application shall be made to the building official on forms
provided by the city. At the time of application, the applicant shall pay a fee based on valuation as set
forth by the permit fee schedule.
(1) At the request of the building official, 2 blueprints or ink drawings of the plans and
specifications and method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground shall be
submitted with the application.
(2) At the request of the building official, a copy of stress sheets and calculations showing how
the structure is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by this
and all other laws and city code provisions shall be submitted with the application.
Zoning Code 155
(3) If a complete sign permit application is found by the building official to be consistent with
this subchapter, the permit shall be granted.
(4) Each permit issued shall be valid provided the sign is installed within 6 months of permit
issuance.
(B) Building permits. No building permit shall be issued for any construction, enlargement,
alteration or repair, demolition or moving of any building or structure on any lot or parcel until all
requirements of these regulations have been fully met.
(C) Non-conforming.
(1) Non-conforming signs. Any permanent, non-abandoned sign which does not comply with
this subchapter shall be allowed to continue after the effective date of this subchapter, provided, that the
sign support structure not be rebuilt (excluding general maintenance), altered, replaced or relocated; and
further provided that the advertising message not be changed or altered.
(2) Non-conforming billboards. Non-conforming billboards shall retain legal non-conforming
status if only the sign sheet or changeable letter or symbols are altered or replaced. However, if the sign
board or sign support structure is rebuilt or replaced, the entire non-conforming billboard must comply
with this subchapter.
(3) Non-exempt temporary signs. Any non-exempt temporary sign must comply with this
subchapter upon adoption. Any temporary sign existing upon the effective date of this subchapter shall
be removed within 30 days. A temporary sign may be continued subject to the requirements of
§ 152.392(I).
(D) Abandoned signs. Any sign that advertises any activity, business, product or service no longer
conducted or available on the site on which the sign is located is prohibited. Any sign which is located
on property which becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of 3 months or more or any sign which
pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned.
Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change in ownership or
management of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a
period of 6 months. Abandoned signs shall be removed by the owner of the sign or owner of the
premises within 30 days of abandonment. All sign supports and structure shall also be removed, except
that pylon structures may be allowed to remain. Failure to remove the sign shall be cause for the city
to remove such sign and to charge the property owner for such removal. Any abandoned sign existing
upon the effective date of this subchapter shall be removed within 30 days.
(E) A comprehensive sign plan. A comprehensive sign plan shall be provided for business premises
which occupy a shopping center, industrial park, or scenic area development. Such a plan, which shall
include the location, size, height, lighting and orientation of all signs shall be submitted for preliminary
156 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
plan approval regulations to the planning commission. Provided such a comprehensive plan is presented,
exceptions to the sign performance standards of this Section may be permitted if the sign areas and
densities for the plan as a whole are in conformity with the intent of this Section and if such exception
results in an improved relationship between the various parts of the plan.
(F) Appeals. Any decision of the city regarding enforcement or application of this subchapter may
be appealed in accordance with §§ 152.020 et seq.
(1981 Code § 10.27, Subd. 1) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.391 SAFETY, VISIBILITY, AND NUISANCE PROVISIONS.
(A) Maintenance and repair. Every sign, including, but not limited to, those signs for which no
permits or permit fees are required, shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good structural
material condition at all times, including the replacement of defective parts, painting, repainting,
cleaning, and maintaining the immediate surrounding premises in a clean, sanitary, and inoffensive
condition free of obnoxious substances, rubbish, and weeds. Signs in good repair are not corroded, do
not have deteriorated paint of finished surfaces, and do not have loose members, broken parts, or similar
deterioration.
(B) Dangerous or defective signs. It is unlawful for any person to maintain or permit to be
maintained on any premises owned or controlled by him any sign which is in a dangerous or defective
condition. Any such sign shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the sign or the owner of the
premises.
(C) Traffic and visibility and safety. No sign shall, by reason of its location, color, illumination,
or intensity, obstruct vision of drivers or pedestrians or obscure visibility of any traffic control device,
sign, or signal. Illumination must be effectively shielded so as not to impair vision of any operator of
a motor vehicle. Illumination with flashing lights is prohibited. Any sign which imitates or resembles
an official traffic sign or signal or which bears the words Stop, Go Slow, Caution, Danger, Warning,
or similar words is prohibited.
(D) Unlawful signs. It is unlawful to erect any sign which bears or contains statements, words, or
pictures of an obscene, pornographic, immoral character. It is also unlawful to erect any sign which
emits audible sound, odor, or visible matter. It is also unlawful to place, erect or post any sign in a
street right-of-way.
(1981 Code § 10.27, Subd. 2) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
Zoning Code 157
§ 152.392 SIGN PERFORMANCE STANDARDS; BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICTS.
(A) Marquees (or canopies) and awnings.
(1) Maximum projection over public sidewalk. Sixty percent of the distance between the
building line and the curb line in C-1 zone. In all other areas, no canopy projection over public
right-of-way shall be permitted.
(2) Minimum clearance above grade. Clearance above grade less than 8 feet; no projection is
permitted. Clearance above grade over 8 feet; 1-inch projection is permitted for each additional inch
of clearance.
(3) Maximum length. A marquee projecting more than 2/3 of the distance from the property
line to the curb line shall not exceed 25 feet in length along the direction of the street.
(4) Maximum area for signs affixed to marquee or awning facia (non-suspending.) One square
foot per linear foot of business frontage figured as part of wall area as defined in aggregate sign area in
division (F).
(B) Freestanding signs.
(1) Maximum sign area (in square feet) and height (in feet.)
Pylon Sign Ground Sign
Lot Area Max. Ht. Max. Area Max. Ht. Max. Area
Less than 6,000 20 50 5 50
6,000–12,000 24 80 6 100
12,000–24,000 28 120 7 150
24,000–48,000 32 160 8 175
More than 48,000 36 180 9 200
(2) Maximum number per business. One per 300 feet of business lot frontage. (One for
frontage up to 300 feet with additional sign allowed for every 300 feet beyond initial 300-foot frontage.)
(3) Minimum setback, pylon. Pylon structure shall be situated within lot line boundaries. In
all zoning areas, no sign attached to a pylon structure shall project over the public right-of-way.
(4) Minimum setback, ground sign. Three feet from lot lines in C-1 and C-2. Five feet from
lot lines in all other areas.
158 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(C) Building face sign maximum.
(1) Two square feet per linear foot of business frontage.
(2) One square foot for each front foot of building siding on a street (side of corner lot.)
(3) One square foot for each linear foot of building rear, viewable by pedestrians or vehicular
traffic.
(4) Maximum area for any building face sign shall be 100 square feet in C-1 and 180 square
feet in Highway Commercial and Industrial Districts.
(D) Suspended sign. Not permitted.
(E) Projecting signs. Not permitted.
(F) Combination of signs and maximum aggregate sign area. Maximum aggregate sign area of all
signs on premise (except for exempt signs): 2 square feet per linear foot of business frontage plus 1
square foot for each linear foot on side street plus 1 square foot for each linear foot of building rear
viewable by pedestrian or vehicular traffic and having a public entrance. For purpose of calculating the
maximum aggregate sign area for 1 side of a building, only the maximum area for that side of the
building may be used. The maximum allowable areas for all sides of a building shall not be added
together to determine the maximum area for 1 side.
(G) Billboard industrial areas only.
(1) Billboards are hereby confined to areas abutting federal highways located in C-2, I-1 or I-2
Districts.
(2) Maximum area: 350 square feet.
(3) Minimum height: 12 feet from bottom of billboard.
(4) Minimum setback from highway right-of-way: 45 feet.
(5) Minimum spacing: They shall be spaced a minimum of 750 feet apart along any 1 side of
a highway, no closer than 600 feet to residential and installed on a single pole pylon.
(H) Signs by conditional use permit. Wall graphic, billboard.
Zoning Code 159
(I) Signs by temporary (30-day) use permit. Portable signs or banners: A temporary sign permit
may be granted for 30 days. The owner of the sign or owner of the premises may apply for up to 2
temporary 30-day permits per year. All temporary signs shall be designed, constructed and installed
in conformance to wind load requirements as stated in the building code.
(1981 Code § 10.27, Subd. 3) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.393 SIGN PERFORMANCE STANDARDS; RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
(A) Maximum area-wall signs.
(1) Single-family to 4-plex identification signs (such as address and/or name plates): 2 square
feet.
(2) Identification sign for multi-family building of 5 or more units: 8 square feet.
(3) Identification sign for schools and churches: 1 square foot per each 1 foot of building
frontage.
(B) Maximum area; freestanding signs.
(1) Identification sign for multi-family buildings of 5 or more units, schools and churches: 32
square feet.
(2) Identification signs and construction signs used at residential subdivisions and development
project sites: 32 square feet.
(C) Maximum height (freestanding signs.)
(1) Identification sign for multi-family buildings of 5 or more units, churches, schools, and
remodeling construction projects: 12 feet.
(2) Identification signs and construction signs for residential subdivisions and other
development project sites: 12 feet.
(3) Minimum setback from street: 5 feet from property line for any part of the sign.
(D) Maximum number of signs.
(1) Single-family–multiple-family wall identification signs: 1 per building.
(2) Multi-family building, church, and school freestanding identification signs.: 1 per 150 feet
of lot frontage. (One freestanding sign allowed for frontage up to 150 feet; 1 additional freestanding sign
allowed for each additional 150 feet frontage beyond the initial 150 feet.)
160 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(3) Identification signs and construction signs for residential subdivisions and other new
development projects: 1 per 500 feet of lot frontage. (One freestanding sign for each frontage up to 500
feet, then 1 additional sign for each additional 500 feet frontage beyond initial 500 feet.)
(1981 Code § 10.27, Subd. 4) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.394 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
(A) Abandoned sign.
(B) Animated sign.
(C) Flashing sign.
(D) Indexing sign: Sign having multi-prisms that turn to show 3 advertising messages in the same
sign area.
(E) Projecting signs: Sign erected on private property projecting over public property except signs
physically a part of canopies and marquees.
(F) Roof sign: Except for a sign that forms a parapet wall above the roof line, is flush with or set
back from the building face, does not cause the overall height of the building (including the sign) to
exceed the height limitation for principal buildings in subject zoning district, and does not exceed the
maximum area for a building face sign.
(G) Rotating ground sign.
(H) Advertising signs painted on the side or roof portion of any building.
(1981 Code § 10.27, Subd. 5) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.395 EXEMPT SIGNS.
The following signs are generally exempt from provisions of this subdivision, with exceptions as
noted.
(A) Directional or instructional signs. Signs which provide direction or instruction and are located
entirely on the property to which they pertain and do not in any way advertise a business and do not
exceed 4 square feet in area, signs identifying rest rooms, public telephones, walkways, or signs
providing direction such as parking lot entrance and exit signs and those of similar nature.
(B) Flags. The flags, emblems, or insignia of any nation or political subdivision or corporate flag.
Flag poles, however, shall not exceed a height of 30 feet.
Zoning Code 161
(C) Governmental signs. Governmental signs for control of traffic and other regulatory purposes,
street signs, danger signs, railroad crossing signs, and signs of public service companies indicating
danger and aids to service and safety which are erected by or on the order of, a public officer in the
performance of his or her public duty.
(D) Integral building signs. Signs lettered into a building face to give the name and/or date of
construction of the building itself.
(E) Interior signs. Signs located within the interior of any building or within an enclosed lobby or
court of any building, and signs for and located within the inner or outer lobby, court or entrance of any
theater, that are not visible from the public right-of-way. This does not, however, exempt such signs
from the structural, electrical, or material specifications as set out in this subchapter.
(F) Memorial signs. Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut
into any masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part of the building or when constructed of bronze or other
incombustible material.
(G) Notice bulletin boards. Notice bulletin boards not over 24 square feet in area for medical,
public, charitable or religious institutions and clustered service club signs where the same are located
on the premises of said institution.
(H) No Trespassing or No Dumping signs. No Trespassing or No Dumping signs not to exceed 1½
square feet in area per sign and not exceeding 4 in number per lot, except that special permission may
be obtained from the Administrator for additional signs under proven special circumstances.
(I) Public notices. Official notices posted by public officers or employees in the performance of
their duties.
(J) Public signs. Signs required or specifically authorized for a public purpose by any law, statutes
or City Code provisions; which may be of any type, number, area, height above ground, location,
illumination, or animation, required by law, statute or city code provision under which the signs are
erected.
(K) Permanent window signs. Except in residential zones, not more than 2 permanent signs (for
each occupant of a building) may be painted on or otherwise displayed from the inside surface of any
window, showcase, or other similar facility. Said signs shall be in addition to those signs permitted
under the other provisions of this subchapter. The total copy area of such signs, however, shall not
exceed a maximum of 25% of the total window area, or 1 square foot per lineal front foot of the
premises occupied, whichever is the lesser.
(L) Signs in the display window. Signs in the display window of a business use which are
incorporated with a display of merchandise of a display relating to services offered which comply with
division (K) above.
162 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(M) Symbols or insignia. Religious symbols, commemorative plaques of recognized historical
agencies, or identification emblems of religious orders or historical agencies, provided that no such
symbol, plaque, or identification emblem shall exceed 4 square feet in area, and provided further that
all such symbols, plaques and identification emblems shall be placed flat against a building.
(N) Temporary signs for civic, philanthropic, educational, or religious activities. Temporary signs
not exceeding 4 square feet in area pertaining to drives or events of civic, Philanthropic, educational,
or religious organizations, provided that said signs are posted only during said drive or no more than 30
days before said event and are removed no more than 15 days after an event.
(O) Warning signs. Signs warning the public of the existence of danger, but containing no
advertising material, of a size as may be necessary to be removed upon subsidence of danger.
(P) Real estate signs. Signs advertising property for sale and containing the name, address and
phone number of the real estate firm or seller. The area of each real estate sign, however, shall be
limited to 10 square feet. The number of real estate signs erected per property shall be limited to the
number of real estate firms or sellers of the property. Maximum height of said sign shall be 4 feet.
(Q) Campaign signs. Signs advertising a particular candidate for political office. The area of such
sign, however, shall be limited to 5 square feet, a 4-foot height, and may be posted from August 1 in
general election year until 10 days following the general election. Such signs may not be placed, erected
or posted in any street right-of-way.
(R) Construction sign. Small scale remodeling or rehab. Signs advertising the contractor working
on a remodeling or rehab job for a single building rather than a major site redevelopment or new site
construction such as a new subdivision or new commercial/industrial facility. Signs advertising a
contractor or such small-scale rehab or remodeling projects shall be exempt from the sign permit
process. However, such signs shall not exceed 6 square feet or 4 feet in height, nor shall they be set
back less than 5 feet from the property line.
(1981 Code § 10.27, Subd. 6) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
(A) Violations. The violation of any provision of this chapter or the violation of the conditions or
provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof, the violator shall be subject to fine or imprisonment or both, as set forth in Minnesota Statutes,
plus in either case, the cost of prosecution.
(B) Penalties. Unless otherwise provided, each act of violation and every day in which such
violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense.
Zoning Code 163
(C) Application to city personnel. The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any
official duty imposed by this chapter shall not subject the officer or employee to a penalty imposed for
violation unless a penalty is specifically provided for such failure.
(D) City Attorney. The City Attorney shall have the authority to issue citations to a person or entity
who violates, fails to comply with, or assists, authorizes or permits violation of any provision of this
chapter.
(E) Denial of application, revocation of permit. Any violation of this chapter for which a citation
has been issued shall constitute sufficient grounds for denial of any application required by this chapter
or revocation of a permit that is related to the violation.
(F) Injunction. In the event of a violation or the threatened violation of any provision of this
chapter, or any provision or condition of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the city, in addition
to other remedies, may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate
such violation or threatened violation.
(G) Other actions. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other actions as
are permitted under law, and the penalties provided here shall be cumulative.
(1981 Code § 10.02, Subd. 8) (Ord. 273, 3rd Series, passed - -2003)
164 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
CHAPTER 153: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section
153.01 Statement of intent
153.02 Definitions
153.03 Scope
153.04 Storm water pollution prevention plan; application
153.05 Storm water pollution prevention plan; review
153.06 Storm water pollution prevention plan; approval standards
153.07 Storm water pollution prevention plan; permits
153.08 Enforcement
153.99 Penalty
§ 153.01 STATEMENT OF INTENT.
(A) This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for storm water pollution prevention plans within
the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. It is the intent of the City Council that the requirements and
standards contained in this chapter comply with all applicable local, state and federal laws.
(B) In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of a
erosion and sediment control, shoreland protection, or floodplain ordinance, or other regulations adopted
by the city, county, Water Resource District, state or federal authorities, the more restrictive standard
prevails.
(C) The objective of this chapter are:
(1) To promote, preserve, and enhance the natural resources within the City of East Grand
Forks and its extraterritorial jurisdiction;
(2) To protect and promote the health, safety, and welfare of the people and property through
effective storm water management practices;
(3) To protect the city's natural resources from adverse impacts occasioned by development
or other activities;
165
2010 S-1
166 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(4) To regulate land disturbing, or other activities that may have an adverse and potentially
irreversible impact on water quality and environmentally sensitive lands;
(5) To minimize conflicts and encourage compatibility between land disturbing and
development activities and environmentally sensitive issues (i.e. land, water, habitat, etc.);
(6) To require detailed review standards and procedures for land disturbing activities that may
have an adverse and potentially irreversible impact on water quality and environmentally sensitive lands;
(7) To provide for adequate construction site storm water runoff control and appropriate storm
water runoff design as necessary to protect public and private property, water quality, and existing
natural resources. This chapter establishes and provides for the following storm water pollution
prevention plan criteria:
(a) The regulation of development through the issuance of storm water permits and through
the enforcement of general storm water drainage requirements throughout the city, it also authorizes
inspection and enforcement activities, and provides for the setting of applicable fees for the equitable
distribution of prevention program established herein.
(b) Penalties for violating the provisions of this chapter, and the orders, rules, regulations
and permits issued hereunder.
(c) Applies within the city limits of the City of East Grand Forks, Minnesota, and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction. Except as otherwise provided, herein, the City Engineer shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 298, 3rd Series, passed 2-20-2007)
§ 153.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives, shall
have the meaning as stated below. When inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future tense. Words in plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word SHALL is always mandatory and the word MAY is always
permissive.
APPLICANT. Any person wishing to perform any land disturbing activity or obtain a conditional
use permit or detailed development plan approval.
BMP'S. Measures designed to:
(1) Prevent pollutants from leaving a specific area;
2010 S-1
Storm Water Management 167
(2) Reduce/eliminate the introduction of pollutants;
(3) Protect sensitive areas; or
(4) Prevent the interaction between precipitation and pollutants.
CITY. The geographic limits of the City of East Grand Forks or the City Council of the City of East
Grand Forks.
CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the City of East Grand Forks or authorized agent.
CONTROL MEASURE. A practice or combination of practices to control erosion and attendant
pollution.
CONVEYANCE STRUCTURE. A pipe, open channel, or other facility that transports runoff from
one location to another.
COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of East Grand Forks.
DEVELOPER. A person, firm, corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership, federal or state
agency, or political subdivision thereof engaged in a land disturbance and/or land development activity.
EROSION. Any process that wears away at the surface of the land by the action of water, wind,
ice, or gravity. Erosion can be accelerated by the activities of man and nature.
EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION. Land within an area extending 2 miles beyond the East
Grand Forks city limits.
FINAL STABILIZATION. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and a
uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70% of the native cover for unpaved areas and areas
not covered by permanent structures, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of
riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed.
FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.
FLOODPLAIN. The area of land adjoining a watercourse, which have been, or hereafter may be
covered by the regional flood.
FLOODWAY. The channel or the watercourse, and those portions of the adjoining floodplains,
which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the regional flood.
2010 S-1
168 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
HYDRIC SOILS. Soils that are saturated, flooded, or covered by water long enough during the
growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part of the soil profile.
HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION. Macrophyic plant life growing in water, soil or on a substrate
that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content.
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any manmade change of the land surface including removing
vegetative cover, excavating, filling, grading, construction or demolition of buildings, roads, parking
lots, paved storage areas, and similar facilities but not including agricultural land uses such as planting,
growing, cultivating and harvesting of crops; growing and tending of gardens, pasturing or yarding of
livestock and planting and harvesting trees.
MANAGEMENT PRACTICE. A practice or combination of practices to control erosion and water
quality degradation.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. Any
permit or requirement enforced by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency pursuant to the Clean Water
Act as amended for the purposes of regulating storm water discharge.
OUTLET. Any outlet including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse,
pond ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater.
OWNER or OCCUPANT. Any person owning or using a lot, parcel of land, or premises connected
to and discharging storm water into the storm water system of the city, and who pays for and is legally
responsible for the payment of storm water rates or charges made against the lot, parcel of land, building
or premises, if connected to the storm water system or who would pay or be legally responsible for such
payment.
PERMANENT DEVELOPMENT. Any buildings, structures, landscaping and related features
constructed as part of a development project approved under a storm water permit.
PERMITTEE. Any person who applies for and receives a storm water permit from the city.
PERSON. Any developer, individual, firm, corporation, partnership, franchise, association, owner,
occupant or property or agency, public or private.
PUBLIC DRAINAGE CHANNEL. A drainage channel located entirely within a naturally occurring
or constructed watercourse.
PUBLIC STORM SEWER. A storm sewer located entirely within publicly owned land or
easements and maintained by the city.
2010 S-1
Storm Water Management 169
PRIVATE DRAINAGE CHANNEL. A drainage channel on privately-owned land or easements
which eventually discharge into a public drainage channel or public storm sewer.
PRIVATE STORM SEWER. A storm sewer on privately-owned land or easements which eventually
discharge into a public drainage channel or public storm sewer.
RUNOFF. The rainfall, snowmelt, dewatering or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface
and into open channels, underground storm sewers, and detention or retention ponds.
SEDIMENT. Solid material or organic material that, in suspension, is being transported or has been
moved by air, water, gravity, or ice and deposited at another location.
SITE. The entire area included in the legal description of the parcel or other land division on which
the land development or land disturbing activity is proposed in the permit application.
STABILIZE. To make the site steadfast or firm, minimizing soil movement by mulching and
seeding, sodding, landscaping, concrete, gravel or other measures.
STATE. The State of Minnesota.
STORM SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying storm waters, surface runoff, street and wash
waters, and drainage, excluding sewage and industrial wastes.
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A written description and/or
drawing that indicates the number, locations, sizes, and other pertinent information about best
management practice methods designed to meet the requirements of this chapter.
STORM WATER SYSTEM. Any storm sewer, open channel, pond, or conveyance structure located
entirely within publicly owned land or easements and maintained by the city.
STRUCTURE. Anything manufactured, constructed, or erected which is normally attached to or
positioned on land, including portable structures, earthen structures, roads, parking lots, and paved
storage areas.
URBAN AREA. Land associated with, or part of, an incorporated city.
WETLANDS. Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is
usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water. For purposes of this definition,
wetlands must have the following 3 attributes:
(1) A predominance of hydric soils;
2010 S-1
170 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(2) Are inundated or saturated by the surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions; and
(3) Under normal circumstances support the prevalence of such vegetation.
(Ord. 298, 3rd Series, passed 2-20-2007)
§ 153.03 SCOPE.
(A) Every applicant for a subdivision approval greater than or equal to 1 acre, a building permit
within a subdivision greater than or equal to 1 acre or a permit to allow land disturbing activities of
greater than or equal to 1 acre must submit a storm water pollution prevention plan to the City Engineer.
No building permit, subdivision approval, or permit to allow land disturbing activities of greater than
or equal to 1 acre shall be issued until approval of the storm water pollution prevention plan or a waiver
of the approval requirement has been obtained in strict conformance with the provisions of the section.
(B) Exemptions to the requirements of the section include:
(1) Any parcel for which a building permit has been approved on or before the effective date
of this chapter:
(2) Installation of a fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds of posts or
poles; or
(3) Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property.
(4) Land disturbing activity involving less than 1 acre that is not required to submit a SWPPP
as provided in division (A) above or § 153.07(B)(4) is not required to apply or to submit a storm water
pollution prevention plan to the City Engineer, however construction must comply with BMP's or any
existing permitted SWPPP for the subdivision and must comply with the Single Family Residential
Construction Erosion/Sediment Control Standards.
(Ord. 298, 3rd Series, passed 2-20-2007)
§ 153.04 STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN; APPLICATION.
(A) Application. A written application for storm water pollution prevention plan approval, along
with the proposed storm water pollution prevention plan, shall be filed concurrently with the detailed
development plan, site plan, building permit or subdivision application.
2010 S-1
Storm Water Management 171
(B) Copies. Two sets of legible copies of the drawings and required information shall be submitted
to the City Engineer and shall be accompanied by a receipt from the city to document the payment of all
required fees for processing and approval as set forth in division (D) of this section. Plans shall be
prepared to a scale appropriate to the site of the project and suitable for the review to be performed.
(C) Contents of the storm water pollution prevention plan. At a minimum, the storm water pollution
prevention plan shall contain the following information:
(1) For subdivision approval. A map of existing site conditions showing the site and
immediately adjacent areas, including:
(a) The name and address of the applicant, the section, township and range, and the north
point, date and scale of drawing, and number of sheets;
(b) The location of the tract by an insert map at a scale sufficient to clearly identify the
location of the property that provides such information as the names and numbers of adjoining roads,
railroads, utilities, subdivisions, or other defining landmarks;
(c) Existing topography with a contour interval appropriate to the topography of the land,
but in no case having a contour interval greater than 2 feet and/or providing spot elevations;
(d) The 100-year flood plains, flood fringes, and floodways.
(2) For site plan and/or detailed development plan approval. A site construction plan shall be
provided, including:
(a) All information as required in division (C)(1) of this section;
(b) Location and dimensions of the existing storm water drain systems and natural drainage
patterns on and immediately adjacent to the site delineating the direction and the rate storm water is
conveyed from the site, identifying the receiving stream, river, public ditch, or wetland, and identifying
those areas of the unaltered site where storm water collects or passes;
(c) Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing activities and any phasing
or scheduling of those activities;
(d) Approximate locations of all temporary soil and dirt stockpile areas;
(e) Location and description of all construction site erosion control measures necessary
to meet the requirements of this chapter;
2010 S-1
172 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(f) A schedule of anticipated starting and completion dates for each land disturbing
activity, including the installation of construction site erosion control measures needed to meet the
requirements of the chapter; and
(g) Provisions for maintaining the construction site erosion control measures prior to,
during and after construction.
(D) Fees. All applications for storm water pollution prevention plan approval shall be accompanied
by a processing and approval fee established by the City Council.
(Ord. 298, 3rd Series, passed 2-20-2007)
§ 153.05 STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN; REVIEW.
(A) Process. Storm water pollution prevention plans meeting the requirements of § 153.04 shall
be submitted to the City Engineer for review and compliance with the standards of § 153.06.
(B) Duration. The permit shall be in affect until the permittee requests termination of coverage and
receives approval to terminate coverage from the City Engineer.
(1) Permittees wishing to terminate coverage must submit a Notice of Termination or other
written request identifying the facility, reason why the permit is no longer needed and signed by the
permittee. Compliance with the conditions of the storm water permit is required until a Notice of
Termination is submitted.
(2) Permittees may only submit a Notice of Termination after 1 of the following conditions has
been met.
(a) Final stabilization has been achieved on all portions of the site for which the permittee
is responsible.
(b) Another operator/permittee has assumed control, in accordance with the requirements
of § 153.07(B)(4), over all areas of the site that have not been finally stabilized.
(c) For residential construction only, temporary erosion protection and down gradient
perimeter control for individual lots has been completed and the residence has been transferred to the
homeowner. Additionally, the permittee must distribute a "homeowner fact sheet" to the homeowner to
inform the homeowner of the need for, and benefits of, final stabilization.
(C) Conditions. A storm water pollution prevention plan may be approved subject to compliance
with conditions reasonable and necessary to insure that the requirements contained in this chapter are
met. Such conditions may, among other matters, require replacement of vegetation, stage the work over
2010 S-1
Storm Water Management 173
time, require alteration of the site design in insure buffering, the City Engineer may specify special
requirements for specific watersheds within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. Approval of a
plan shall bind the applicant to perform all of the conditions and requirements of the plan prior to any
land disturbing activities.
(Ord. 298, 3rd Series, passed 2-20-2007)
§ 153.06 STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN; APPROVAL STANDARDS.
(A) General. This section describes approval standards against which proposed storm water
pollution prevention plans will be measured. A storm water pollution prevention plan which fails to meet
the standards contained in this section shall not be approved. In the event 2 or more standards issued by
state and/or federal agencies having jurisdiction conflict, the more restrictive standard shall apply.
(B) Applicant responsible for required permits. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
obtain any required permits from other local, state or federal governmental agencies having jurisdiction
over the work to be performed.
(C) Storm water pollution prevention plan design guidelines. The storm water pollution prevention
plan design guidelines shall conform to all of the current MPCA requirements as set forth in the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System/State Disposal System (NPDES/SDS) General Stormwater
Permit for Construction Activity.
(D) Construction activities.
(1) Site dewatering. Water pumped from the site shall be treated by temporary sedimentation
basins, grit chambers, sand filters, upflow chambers, hydro-cyclones, soil concentrators or other
appropriate controls as deemed necessary. Water may not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion,
sedimentation, or flooding on the site, the receiving channels, or any wetland.
(2) Waste and material disposal. All waste and unused building materials (including garbage,
debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater, toxic materials, or hazardous materials) shall be properly disposed
of off-site and not allowed to be carried by runoff into a receiving channel, storm sewer system, or
wetland.
(3) Tracking management. Each site shall have roads, access drives and parking areas of
sufficient width, length and surfacing to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private
roadways. Any material reaching or placed on a public or private road shall be removed (not by flushing)
before the end of each work day.
2010 S-1
174 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(4) Water quality protection. The construction contractor shall be required to control oil and
fuel spills, and the discharge of any chemicals to prevent such spills or discharges from entering any
water course, sump, sewer system, water body, or wetland.
(5) Site erosion and sedimentation control. Construction operations must include erosion and
sedimentation control measures meeting accepted design criteria, standards and specifications contained
in the storm water pollution prevention plan design guidelines.
(E) Storm water pollution prevention plan applicability. A plan approved under this chapter runs
with the land and is a condition of the site plan, building permit or subdivision approval. Any owner or
subsequent owner of any parcel within the plat must comply with the plan or any approval, revision or
modification of the plan.
(Ord. 298, 3rd Series, passed 2-20-2007) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.07 STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN; PERMITS.
(A) Storm water pollution prevention. It is unlawful to initiate land development, land disturbance
greater than or equal to 1 acre without having first complied with the terms of this chapter.
(B) Storm water pollution prevention permits.
(1) Mandatory permits. Every applicant for a subdivision approval greater than or equal to 1
acre, a building permit within a subdivision greater than or equal to 1 acre or a permit to allow land
disturbing activities of greater than or equal to 1 acre must submit a storm water pollution prevention
plan to the City Engineer or a designated agent.
(2) Permit application. All persons subject to meeting the requirements for a mandatory storm
water permit shall complete and file with the City Engineer or a designated agent an application in the
form prescribed by the City Engineering Department and accompanied by fee established by the City
Council. The permit application shall be accompanied by a storm water pollution prevention plan as
prescribed under § 153.04. The City Engineer or a designated agent will evaluate the data furnished as
part of the storm water pollution prevention plan, the City Engineer or a designated agent may issue a
storm water permit subject to any terms and conditions deemed necessary.
(3) Permit amendments. Storm water permits may be amended only by a written request
submitted by the permittee to the City Engineer or a designated agent. This request shall contain the
reason for the change and documentation related to any additional impacts which may result from
amendment approval. Amendment requests submitted prior to issuance of a storm water permit shall be
considered part of the original submittal, Amendment requests filed after permit approval shall be
considered and reviewed under the same procedures and guidelines as used for the storm water permit
applications under this chapter.
2010 S-1
Storm Water Management 175
(4) Permit transfer. A storm water permit runs with the property it covers and is transferable
to new owners in its entirety or by parcel, with each parcel being subject to the permit and any
conditions which apply to that parcel. The new owner or operator must submit a written request for
permit transfer/modification 7 days prior to assuming control of the site or commencing work on-site,
or of the legal transfer, sale or closing on the property. The new owner or operator can implement the
original storm water pollution prevention plan created for the site or develop, submit for approval and
implement their own storm water pollution prevention plan. Permittee(s) shall ensure either directly or
through coordination with other operators that their storm water pollution prevention plan meets all
requirements of this chapter and that their activities do not interfere with another party's storm water
pollution prevention plan.
(Ord. 298, 3rd Series, passed 2-20-2007) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.08 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Inspection. The City Engineer or a designated agent may inspect the best management practice
of any permittee to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter. A permittee shall allow
the City Engineer or a designated agent to enter upon the premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose
of inspection or record examination.
(B) Notification. Whenever the City Engineer or a designated agent finds that any person has
violated or is violating this section, storm water permit and/or its conditions, or any prohibition,
limitation or requirement contained herein, the City Engineer or a designated agent shall provide upon
such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within a time frame set by the City
Engineer or a designated agent due to the nature of the violation, a plan for the satisfactory correction
thereof must be submitted to the City Engineer or the designated agent. If a plan is not submitted to the
City Engineer or the designated agent in the designated time frame the City Engineer or the designated
agent may issue a stop work order until a satisfactory plan is submitted.
(C) Appeals process. If the violation is not corrected by timely compliance, the City Engineer or
the designated agent may require any permittee who causes or allows a violation to a storm water permit
to show cause before the City Administrator why the order of the City Engineer or the designated agent
should not be upheld.
(D) Owner responsible for removal and costs. The discharge of deposited or eroded materials
within the City of East Grand Forks and its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be considered an offense
and may result in an order to remove such materials. Removal of such material shall be at the owner's
expense based on the properties from which they originated. The City Engineer or a designated agent
shall serve upon such person a written notice stating a designated time frame after receiving the notice
to take corrective action. Under the City Engineer's direction, if action is not completed in the designated
time frame, the city will take corrective action and any cost of such corrective action shall be paid by
the owner.
2010 S-1
176 East Grand Forks - Land Usage
(E) For all land disturbing activity involving less than 1 acre that is not required to submit a SWPPP
as provided in § 153.03(A) or § 153.07(B)(4), the City Building Inspector or a designated agent shall
have all of the same authority conferred upon the City Engineer as expressed in this article to enforce
compliance with this chapter.
(F) Legal action. If any person commences any land disturbing activities contrary to the provisions
of this chapter, federal or state requirements or any order of the city, the City Attorney may commence
action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief. Any action commenced by the City Attorney shall
be in addition to any other rent proceedings, penalties, fines, or remedies provided by law.
(Ord. 298, 3rd Series, passed 2-20-2007)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
(A) Fines. Any person who is found to have violated an order of the City Engineer, Board of
Appeals (City Administrator), or City Council, or the control authority, or who willfully or negligently
failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, and the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued
hereunder, shall be fined not more than $1,000 for each offense. Each day on which a violation shall
occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
(B) Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation
or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other document filed or required to be
maintained pursuant to this chapter, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine
of not more than $1,000 per incident.
(Ord. 298, 3rd Series, passed 2-20-2007)
2010 S-1
PARALLEL REFERENCE
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to 1981 Code of Ordinances
References to Ordinances
1
2 East Grand Forks - Parallel Reference
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
M.S. Section Code Section
12.25 34.01; 34.04
12.31 34.06
15.99 151.027; 152.022–152.024
16B.70 150.02
18.023 97.03; 97.09
35.71 95.08
44 31.62; 32.05
65B.48, Subd. 5 74.03
84.81–84.91 73.01
84.873 73.06
88.16–88.22 93.45
115.01(8) 53.001
115.07 53.001
134.07–134.15 31.45; 31.46
144.391 116.01
151.40, Subd. 2 131.21
152.01 et seq. 150.09
152.02 111.09
152.02, Schedules I through V 98.55
152.19, Subdivisions 2 and 4 131.25
168 94.20
168B.011, Subd. 3 98.20
169 70.01; 70.02, 73.01; 74.05;
77.13, 77.16, 94.20; 96.01
169.01 70.02
169.045 74.07
169.045. Subd. 7 77.13
169.70 74.05
169.345 77.03
169.522 77.14
171 74.05
171.01 70.01
171.02 70.01
171.08 70.01
171.22 70.01
171.23 70.01
3
2010 S-1
4 East Grand Forks - Parallel Reference
M.S. Section Code Section
171.24 70.01
203B.13 31.02
245A.02, Subd. 10 152.006
260.185 130.02
260.315 150.09
326.83–326.991 150.10
327 152.006
327.31 150.11
329 112.03
340A.414 117.16
340A.503 150.09
340.701 150.09
340.702 150.09
340.703 150.09
340A.802 117.02
364.06 99.01, 99.02
364.09 99.01, 99.02
394.21–394.37 152.004
412.591 30.09
415.11 30.12
429 97.07
429.011 96.06
429.061 98.24
429.101 96.08; 97.07; 98.01; 98.02;
98.24; 98.43
444.075 54.01
444.075, Subd. 3 54.01
462.357, Subd. 1e 150.14
463.15–463.26 98.01
463.17 98.23
471.191 31.60
514.67 98.01
604.224 150.09
609.66 et.seq. 150.09
609.72 150.09
609.74 150.09
609.321, Subdiv.9 150.09
609.745 150.09
617.241 152.006
624.717 132.04
626.862 10.20
2010 S-1
REFERENCES TO 1981 CODE OF ORDINANCES
1981 Code 2006 Code
2.01 30.01
2.02 30.02
2.03 30.03
2.04 30.04
2.05 30.05
2.06 30.06
2.07 30.07
2.08 32.01
2.30 32.02
2.31 32.03
2.32 30.13
2.32, Subd. 1 94.20–94.28
2.32, Subd. 2 94.01
2.32, Subd. 3 94.02
2.32, Subd. 4 94.03
2.50, Subd. 1 31.20
2.50, Subd. 2 31.21
2.50, Subd. 3 31.22
2.50, Subd. 4 31.23
2.50, Subd. 5 31.24
2.50, Subd. 6 31.25
2.50, Subd. 7 31.26
2.50, Subd. 8 31.27
2.50, Subd. 9 31.28
2.50, Subd. 10 31.29
2.50, Subd. 11 31.30
2.50, Subd. 12 31.31
2.51, Subd. 1 31.45
2.51, Subd. 2 31.46
2.51, Subd. 3 31.47
2.51, Subd. 4 31.48
2.52 32.05
2.53, Subd. 1 92.01
2.53, Subd. 2 92.02
5
6 East Grand Forks - Parallel Reference
1981 Code 2006 Code
2.53, Subd. 3 92.03
2.53, Subd. 4 92.04
2.53, Subd. 5 92.05
2.53, Subd. 6 92.06
2.54 31.01
2.55, Subd. 1 31.60
2.55, Subd. 2 31.61
2.55, Subd. 3 31.62
2.55, Subd. 4 31.63
2.55, Subd. 5 31.64
2.56 31.02
2.70, Subd. 1 91.01
2.70, Subd. 2 91.02
2.70, Subd. 3 91.03
2.70, Subd. 4 91.04
2.70, Subd. 5 91.05
2.70, Subd. 6 91.06
2.80 32.04
2.81 30.08
2.82 30.09
2.84 33.01
2.85 30.11
4.01 150.01
4.03 150.02
4.04 150.03
4.05 150.04
4.06 150.03
4.10 150.05
4.11 150.06
4.20 150.07
4.21 150.09
4.30 150.08
5.01 110.01
5.02 110.02
5.03 110.03
5.04 110.04
5.05 110.05
5.06 110.06
5.08 110.07
5.09 110.08
5.10 110.09
5.11 110.10
2010 S-1
References to 1981 Code of Ordinances 7
1981 Code 2006 Code
5.31 110.25
5.32 110.26
5.33, Subd. 1 111.01
5.33, Subd. 2 111.02
5.33, Subd. 3 111.03
5.33, Subd. 4 111.04
5.33, Subd. 5 111.05
5.33, Subd. 6 111.06
5.33, Subd. 7 111.07
5.33, Subd. 8 111.08
5.33, Subd. 9 111.09
5.33, Subd. 10 111.10
5.33, Subd. 11 111.11
5.50 110.27
5.52 110.28
5.53 110.29
5.54 110.30
5.55, Subd. 1 113.01
5.55, Subd. 2 113.02
5.55, Subd. 4 113.03
5.55, Subd. 6 113.04
5.55, Subd. 7 113.05
5.55, Subd. 8 113.06
5.56 110.31
5.57 110.32
5.58 110.33
5.59 110.34
5.60, Subd. 1 114.01
5.60, Subd. 2 114.02
5.60, Subd. 3 114.03
5.60, Subd. 4 114.04
5.60, Subd. 5 114.05
5.60, Subd. 6 114.06
5.60, Subd. 7 114.07
5.60, Subd. 8 114.08
5.60, Subd. 9 114.09
5.60, Subd. 10 114.10
5.62 110.35
5.63 33.02
5.64, Subd. 1 115.01
5.64, Subd. 2 115.02
8 East Grand Forks - Parallel Reference
1981 Code 2006 Code
5.64, Subd. 3 115.03
5.64, Subd. 4 115.04
5.64, Subd. 5 115.05
5.64, Subd. 6 115.06
5.64, Subd. 7 115.07
5.64, Subd. 8 115.08
5.64, Subd. 9 115.09
5.64, Subd. 10 115.10
5.64, Subd. 11 115.11
5.64, Subd. 12 115.12
5.64, Subd. 13 115.13
5.64, Subd. 14 115.13
5.64, Subd. 15 115.13
5.64, Subd. 16 115.14
5.64, Subd. 17 115.15
5.64, Subd. 18 115.16
5.64, Subd. 19 115.17
5.64, Subd. 20 115.18
6.01 96.01
6.02 96.02
6.03 96.03
6.04 96.04
6.05 96.05
6.06 96.18
6.07 96.06
6.08 96.07
6.09 96.08
6.10 96.09
6.11 96.10
6.14 96.11
6.15 96.12
6.16 96.13
6.17 96.14
6.18 96.15
6.19 96.16
6.20 96.17
7.01 71.01
7.03 71.02
7.04 70.01
7.09 71.03
7.10 71.04
7.11 71.05
2010 S-1
References to 1981 Code of Ordinances 9
1981 Code 2006 Code
7.12 71.06
7.13, Subd. 1 74.01
7.13, Subd. 2 Ch. 76, Sched. I
7.13, Subd. 3 74.02
7.13, Subd. 4 74.03
7.13, Subd. 5 74.04
7.13, Subd. 6 74.05
7.13, Subd. 7 74.06
7.13, Subd. 8 74.07
7.50, Subd. 1 75.01
7.50, Subd. 2 75.02
7.50, Subd. 3 75.03
7.50, Subd. 4 75.04
7.50, Subd. 5 75.05
7.50, Subd. 6 75.06
7.50, Subd. 7 75.07
7.50, Subd. 8 75.08
8.01 72.01
8.02 72.02
8.03 72.03
8.04 72.04
8.05 72.05
8.06 72.06
8.07 72.07
8.08 72.08
8.09 72.09
8.10 72.10
8.11 72.11
8.12 72.12
8.13 72.13
8.14 72.14
8.15 72.15
8.16 72.16
8.17 72.17
8.18 72.17
9.08 50.05
9.20, Subd. 1 132.01
9.20, Subd. 2 132.02
9.20, Subd. 3 132.03
9.20, Subd. 5 132.05
9.20, Subd. 6 132.06
10 East Grand Forks - Parallel Reference
1981 Code 2006 Code
9.21, Subd. 1 95.01
9.21, Subd. 2 95.02
9.21, Subd. 3 95.03
9.21, Subd. 4 95.04
9.21, Subd. 5 95.05
9.21, Subd. 6 95.06
9.21, Subd. 7 95.07
9.21, Subd. 8 95.08
9.21, Subd. 9 95.09
9.21, Subd. 10 95.10
9.21, Subd. 11 95.11
9.21, Subd. 12 95.12
9.21, Subd. 13 95.13
9.21, Subd. 14 95.14
9.21, Subd. 15 95.15
9.27 130.01
9.29 95.16
9.33 130.03
9.34, Subd. 1 131.20
9.34, Subd. 2 131.21
9.34, Subd. 3 131.22
9.34, Subd. 4 131.23
9.34, Subd. 5 131.24
9.34, Subd. 6 131.25
9.35 131.01
9.36 130.04
9.37 95.17
9.70 130.05
9.80, Subd. 1 93.20
9.80, Subd. 2 93.21
9.80, Subd. 3 93.22
9.80, Subd. 4 93.23
9.80, Subd. 5 93.24
9.81, Subd. 1 97.01
9.81, Subd. 2 97.02
9.81, Subd. 3 97.03
9.81, Subd. 4 97.04
9.81, Subd. 5 97.05
9.81, Subd. 6 97.06
9.81, Subd. 7 97.07
9.81, Subd. 8 97.08
References to 1981 Code of Ordinances 11
1981 Code 2006 Code
9.81, Subd. 9 97.09
9.81, Subd. 10 97.10
9.81, Subd. 11 97.11
9.81, Subd. 12 97.12
9.81, Subd. 13 97.13
9.83 130.06
9.84 90.01
9.89 93.01
9.90 130.07
10.01, Subd. 1 152.001
10.01, Subd. 2 152.002
10.01, Subd. 3 152.003
10.01, Subd. 4 152.004
10.01, Subd. 5 152.005
10.01, Subd. 6 152.006
10.02 152.020
10.02, Subd. 1 152.021
10.02, Subd. 2 152.022
10.02, Subd. 3 152.023
10.02, Subd. 4 152.024
10.02, Subd. 5 152.025
10.02, Subd. 6 152.026
10.02, Subd. 7 152.027
10.02, Subd. 8 152.999
10.03, Subd. 1 152.040
10.03, Subd. 2 152.041
10.03, Subd. 3 152.042
10.03, Subd. 4 152.043
10.04, Subd. 1 152.055
10.04, Subd. 2 152.056
10.04, Subd. 3 152.057
10.04, Subd. 4 152.058
10.04, Subd. 5 152.059
10.04, Subd. 6 152.060
10.04, Subd. 7 152.061
10.07, Subd. 1 152.075
10.07, Subd. 2 152.076
10.07, Subd. 3 152.077
10.07, Subd. 4 152.078
10.07, Subd. 5 152.079
10.08, Subd. 1 152.090
12 East Grand Forks - Parallel Reference
1981 Code 2006 Code
10.08, Subd. 2 152.091
10.08, Subd. 3 152.092
10.08, Subd. 4 152.093
10.08, Subd. 5 152.094
10.09, Subd. 1 152.105
10.09, Subd. 2 152.106
10.09, Subd. 3 152.107
10.09, Subd. 4 152.108
10.09, Subd. 5 152.109
10.10, Subd. 1 152.120
10.10, Subd. 2 152.121
10.10, Subd. 3 152.122
10.10, Subd. 4 152.123
10.10, Subd. 5 152.124
10.10, Subd. 6 152.125
10.11, Subd. 1 152.135
10.11, Subd. 2 152.136
10.11, Subd. 3 152.137
10.11, Subd. 4 152.138
10.11, Subd. 5 152.139
10.12, Subd. 1 152.155
10.12, Subd. 2 152.156
10.12, Subd. 3 152.157
10.12, Subd. 4 152.158
10.12, Subd. 5 152.159
10.13, Subd. 1 152.175
10.13, Subd. 2 152.176
10.13, Subd. 3 152.177
10.13, Subd. 4 152.178
10.13, Subd. 5 152.179
10.14, Subd. 1 152.195
10.14, Subd. 2 152.196
10.14, Subd. 3 152.197
10.14, Subd. 4 152.198
10.14, Subd. 5 152.199
10.15, Subd. 1 152.215
10.15, Subd. 2 152.216
10.15, Subd. 3 152.217
10.15, Subd. 4 152.218
10.16, Subd. 1 152.230
10.16, Subd. 2 152.231
References to 1981 Code of Ordinances 13
1981 Code 2006 Code
10.16, Subd. 3 152.232
10.16, Subd. 4 152.233
10.17, Subd. 1 152.245
10.17, Subd. 2 152.246
10.17, Subd. 3 152.247
10.17, Subd. 4 152.248
10.19, Subd. 1 152.260
10.19, Subd. 2 152.261
10.19, Subd. 3 152.262
10.19, Subd. 4 152.263
10.20, Subd. 1 152.275
10.20, Subd. 2 152.276
10.21, Subd. 1 152.290
10.21, Subd. 2 152.291
10.21, Subd. 3 152.292
10.21, Subd. 4 152.293
10.21, Subd. 5 152.294
10.21, Subd. 6 152.295
10.21, Subd. 7 152.296
10.21, Subd. 8 152.297
10.21, Subd. 9 152.298
10.21, Subd. 10 152.299
10.22, Subd. 1 152.315
10.22, Subd. 2 152.316
10.22, Subd. 3 152.317
10.23, Subd. 1 152.330
10.23, Subd. 2 152.331
10.24, Subd. 1 152.345
10.24, Subd. 2 152.346
10.24, Subd. 3 152.347
10.24, Subd. 4 152.348
10.24, Subd. 5 152.349
10.24, Subd. 6 152.350
10.24, Subd. 7 152.351
10.24, Subd. 8 152.352
10.24, Subd. 9 152.353
10.24, Subd. 10 152.354
10.24, Subd. 11 152.355
10.24, Subd. 12 152.356
10.24, Subd. 13 152.357
10.24, Subd. 14 152.358
14 East Grand Forks - Parallel Reference
1981 Code 2006 Code
10.24, Subd. 15 152.359
10.24, Subd. 16 152.360
10.25 152.370
10.26 152.380
10.27, Subd. 1 152.390
10.27, Subd. 2 152.391
10.27, Subd. 3 152.392
10.27, Subd. 4 152.393
10.27, Subd. 5 152.394
10.27, Subd. 6 152.395
11.01, Subd. 1 151.001
11.01, Subd. 2 151.002
11.01, Subd. 3 151.003
11.01, Subd. 4 151.004
11.01, Subd. 5 151.005
11.01, Subd. 6 151.006
11.01, Subd. 7 151.007
11.01, Subd. 8 151.008
11.01, Subd. 9 151.009
11.01, Subd. 10 151.010
11.01, Subd. 11 151.011
11.02 151.025
11.02, Subd. 1 151.026
11.02, Subd. 2 151.027
11.02, Subd. 3 151.028
11.02, Subd. 4 151.029
11.03 151.045
11.03, Subd. 1 151.046
11.03, Subd. 2 151.047
11.03, Subd. 3 151.048
11.04 151.060
11.04, Subd. 1 151.061
11.04, Subd. 2 151.062
11.04, Subd. 3 151.063
11.05 151.075
11.05, Subd. 1 151.076
11.05, Subd. 2 151.077
11.05, Subd. 3 151.078
11.06, Subd. 1 151.090
11.06, Subd. 2 151.091
11.06, Subd. 3 151.092
References to 1981 Code of Ordinances 15
1981 Code 2006 Code
11.07 151.105
11.07, Subd. 1 151.106
11.07, Subd. 2 151.107
11.07, Subd. 3 151.108
11.07, Subd. 4 151.109
11.07, Subd. 5 151.110
11.07, Subd. 6 151.111
11.07, Subd. 7 151.112
11.07, Subd. 8 151.113
11.07, Subd. 9 151.114
11.08, Subds. 1–7 151.120
11.09 151.130
11.09, Subd. 1 151.131
11.09, Subd. 2 151.132
11.10 151.145
11.99 151.999
12.01 50.01
12.02 50.02
12.03 50.03
12.04, Subd. 2 50.21
12.04, Subd. 3 50.22
12.04, Subd. 4 50.23
12.04, Subd. 5 50.24
12.04, Subd. 6 50.25
12.04, Subd. 7 50.26
12.04, Subd. 8 50.27
12.04, Subd. 9 50.28
12.04, Subd. 10 50.29
12.04, Subd. 11 50.30
12.05 50.04
12.20, Subd. 1 52.01
12.20, Subd. 2 52.02
12.20, Subd. 3 52.03
12.20, Subd. 4 52.03
12.20, Subd. 5 52.05
12.20, Subd. 6 52.06
12.20, Subd. 7 52.07
12.20, Subd. 8 52.08
16 East Grand Forks - Parallel Reference
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
33 12-16-1901 TSO III
68 4-29-1909 110.34
73 4-8-1910 TSO I
74 5-6-1910 110.34
79 8-8-1910 TSO I
117 12-5-1910 TSO I
140 10-14-1949 TSO II
147 4-29-1954 TSP III
148 11-11-1954 110.34
150 1-13-1955 TSO III
152 11-6-1956 32.05
154 1-12-1956 TSO III
157 11-22-1956 TSO III
165 6-2-19581 TSO III
166 11-3-1958 TSO III
167 12-25-1958 TSO III
168 5-14-1959 TSO III
170 5-23-1959 33.01
174 1-19-1961 TSO III
176 1-19-1961 TSO III
177 3-9-1961 TSO III
179 9-15-1961 TSO III
180 10-26-1961 TSO III
181 11-30-1961 31.20; 31.31
182 1-11-1962 TSO III
183 3-29-1962 TSO III
184 8-23-1962 TSO III
185 6-20-1963 TSO III
189 6-4-1964 TSO III
190 7-16-1964 TSO III
191 8-27-1964 TSO III
192 9-3-1964 TSO II
196 5-22-1969 110.27
17
18 East Grand Forks - Parallel Reference
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
197 5-22-1965 TSO III
198 6-24-1965 TSO III
199-2 - - TSO IV
199-4 2-13-1969 TSO IV
199-5 6-12-1970 TSO IV
199-6 2-12-1970 TSO IV
199-7 12-28-1970 TSO IV
199-8 1-20-1970 TSO IV
199-9 (237) 9-15-1971 TSO IV
199-10 5-24-1972 TSO IV
199-11 12-13-1972 TSO IV
199-13 6-13-1973 TSO IV
200 7-8-1965 110.34
203 1-27-1966 31.45–31.48
205 5-26-1966 TSO III
207 2-16-1967 TSO III
209 7-20-1967 TSO III
211(199-1) 9-27-1967 TSO IV
213 3-28-1968 92.06
221 5-22-1969 150.08
225 10-30-1969 30.09
227 12-25-1969 TSO III
233 9-2-1970 TSO III
238 11-17-1971 TSO III
240 5-24-1972 TSO III
241 4-11-1973 TSO III
242 7-25-1973 TSO III
244 12-29-1999 72.10
2, 2nd Series 10-20-1973 TSO IV
5, 2nd Series 1-5-1974 TSO IV
6, 2nd Series 3-16-1974 TSO IV
8, 2nd Series 6-15-1974 TSO III
9, 2nd Series 7-13-1974 TSO IV
10, 2nd Series 8-24-1974 TSO IV
13, 2nd Series 9-28-1974 TSO IV
17, 2nd Series 5-17-1975 TSO IV
118, 2nd Series 5-31-1975 TSO III
119, 2nd Series 5-17-1975 TSO IV
121, 2nd Series 8-16-1975 TSO III
122, 2nd Series 11-15-1975 TSO IV
123, 2nd Series 11-15-1975 TSO III
124, 2nd Series 12-27-1975 TSO IV
References to Ordinances 19
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
126, 2nd Series 6-19-1976 114.02; 114.06; 114.10
127, 2nd Series 7-17-1976 71.04
128, 2nd Series 7-24-1976 TSO III
130, 2nd Series 10-2-1976 TSO III
131, 2nd Series 12-18-1976 TSO IV
132, 2nd Series 12-18-1976 TSO IV
134, 2nd Series 1-29-1977 TSO IV
135, 2nd Series 3-17-1977 TSO II
136, 2nd Series 5-14-1977 TSO III
137, 2nd Series 8-2-1977 TSO II
138, 2nd Series 8-13-1977 TSO IV
139, 2nd Series 8-13-1977 TSO IV
140, 2nd Series 9-17-1992 TSO IV
143, 2nd Series 12-6-1977 TSO II
145, 2nd Series 2-18-1978 TSO IV
146, 2nd Series 3-25-1978 TSO IV
147, 2nd Series 4-15-1978 TSO IV
148, 2nd Series 6-24-1978 91.01–91.06
149, 2nd Series 7-15-1978 TSO III
150, 2nd Series 9-2-1978 TSO IV
155, 2nd Series 1-30-1979 TSO II
163, 2nd Series 11-17-1979 TSO IV
165, 2nd Series 12-15-1979 TSO III
166, 2nd Series 12-15-1979 TSO IV
171, 2nd Series 6-28-1980 TSO III
173, 2nd Series 7-6-1980 TSO III
174, 2nd Series 7-26-1980 TSO IV
2, 3rd Series 6-6-1981 30.07; 30.13; 31.21;
94.20–94.28
5, 3rd Series 5-21-1981 110.31–110.34; 114.02
5, 3rd Series 6-6-1981 110.10; 110.25–110.29; 110.35
6, 3rd Series 6-6-1981 96.01; 96.02; 96.05; 96.09;
96.17
7, 3rd Series 6-6-1981 71.03; 71.06
8, 3rd Series 6-6-1981 72.04; 72.09; 72.11; 72.16
9, 3rd Series 6-6-1981 95.06; 95.12; 95.15; 95.16;
97.01–97.13; 130.01; 130.03
10, 3rd Series 6-6-1981 50.02; 52.02
12, 3rd Series 7-16-1981 TSO I
16, 3rd Series 2-19-1982 111.04; 111.11
20 East Grand Forks - Parallel Reference
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
17, 3rd Series 4-24-1982 TSO III
19, 3rd Series 5-29-1982 72.17
20, 3rd Series 6-13-1982 131.20–131.25
21, 3rd Series 6-19-1982 TSO IV
28, 3rd Series 8-12-1983 TSO III
32, 3rd Series 11-4-1983 TSO IV
34, 3rd Series 12-16-1983 132.01–132.03; 132.05; 132.06
35, 3rd Series 12-16-1983 150.07
36, 3rd Series 12-28-1983 TSO IV
38, 3rd Series 6-1-1984 92.06
41, 3rd Series 5-17-1984 110.30
41, 3rd Series 6-1-1984 113.04
42, 3rd Series 6-1-1984 96.02
44, 3rd Series 6-1-1984 72.14
45, 3rd Series 6-1-1984 95.08; 130.03
51, 3rd Series 5-24-1985 96.07
55, 3rd Series 5-31-1985 TSO IV
58, 3rd Series 8-23-1985 93.20–93.24
60, 3rd Series 11-22-1985 TSO III
61, 3rd Series 1-17-1986 TSO I
66, 3rd Series 5-16-1986 114.01; 114.02; 114.07
68, 3rd Series 5-16-1986 50.05
69, 3rd Series 5-16-1986 50.27
73, 3rd Series 7-4-1986 95.16
75, 3rd Series 9-12-1986 31.02
77, 3rd Series 10-24-1986 TSO I
78, 3rd Series 10-4-1986 72.10
79, 3rd Series 10-3-1986 TSO IV
80, 3rd Series 1-16-1987 31.60–31.64
81, 3rd Series 4-17-1987 52.04
83, 3rd Series 10-16-1987 TSO IV
85, 3rd Series 11-26-1987 150.02; 150.08
89, 3rd Series 3-4-1988 150.04
93, 3rd Series 6-24-1988 150.03
97, 3rd Series 8-26-1988 95.13
99, 3rd Series 8-1-1989 33.02
102, 3rd Series 10-13-1989 72.10
103, 3rd Series 11-9-1989 TSO II
104, 3rd Series 11-17-1989 110.35
107, 3rd Series 1-12-1990 72.10
109, 3rd Series 3-2-1990 93.01
References to Ordinances 21
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
110, 3rd Series 3-21-1990 TSO IV
111, 3rd Series 3-23-1990 95.14
112, 3rd Series 5-4-1990 32.01; 94.02
114, 3rd Series 5-4-1990 150.04
115, 3rd Series 5-4-1990 111.05
116, 3rd Series 5-4-1990 96.07; 96.08
118, 3rd Series 5-4-1990 131.01
120, 3rd Series 5-25-1990 TSO III
121, 3rd Series 10-12-1990 150.03
122, 3rd Series 10-12-1990 33.02
124, 3rd Series 12-14-1990 72.10
128, 3rd Series 7-12-1991 115.01–115.18
130, 3rd Series 9-27-1991 TSO I
131, 3rd Series 9-26-1991 TSO I
134, 3rd Series 5-29-1992 72.02
135, 3rd Series 5-29-1992 96.14
137, 3rd Series 7-1-1949 TSO I
137, 3rd Series 8-28-1992 95.07
138, 3rd Series 9-11-1992 130.06
139, 3rd Series 9-2-1949 TSO I
139, 3rd Series 9-8-1982 TSO II
141, 3rd Series 12-4-1992 52.03
143, 3rd Series 12-4-1992 30.03
146, 3rd Series 12-4-1992 96.15
153, 3rd Series 8-25-1994 150.03
154, 3rd Series 6-23-1993 TSO III
155, 3rd Series 6-4-1993 TSO IV
156, 3rd Series 5-26-1993 33.02
157, 3rd Series 6-4-1993 130.04
158, 3rd Series 7-23-1993 TSO IV
159, 3rd Series 7-23-1993 TSO III
160, 3rd Series 10-21-1993 TSO IV
161, 3rd Series 12-24-1993 130.01
164, 3rd Series 2-18-1994 50.21–50.30
165, 3rd Series 4-29-1994 TSO IV
166, 3rd Series 5-1-1994 130.07
167, 3rd Series 6-2-1994 TSO IV
168, 3rd Series 6-2-1994 150.03
170, 3rd Series 5-25-1994 TSO IV
171, 3rd Series 2-16-1995 TSO III
172, 3rd Series 4-20-1995 30.01; 30.02
22 East Grand Forks - Parallel Reference
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
174, 3rd Series 4-20-1995 70.01
175, 3rd Series 4-20-1995 72.14
176, 3rd Series 4-20-1995 95.17
177, 3rd Series 4-20-1995 TSO IV
178, 3rd Series 4-20-1995 TSO III
179, 3rd Series 4-27-1995 TSO IV
180, 3rd Series 6-29-1995 72.11
181, 3rd Series 6-29-1995 50.04
182, 3rd Series 6-29-1995 TSO I
183, 3rd Series 7-13-1995 TSO IV
184, 3rd Series 7-27-1995 TSO IV
188, 3rd Series 11-16-1995 TSO IV
189, 3rd Series 12-5-1995 150.01
190, 3rd Series 12-5-1995 72.17
191, 3rd Series 12-5-1995 96.09
195, 3rd Series 12-21-1995 TSO III
196, 3rd Series 3-21-1996 72.17
197, 3rd Series 5-16-1996 114.02
198, 3rd Series 7-2-1996 TSO II
199, 3rd Series 7-18-1996 TSO IV
200, 3rd Series 7-18-1996 74.01–74.07; Ch. 76, Sched. I
201, 3rd Series 9-3-1996 TSO IV
202, 3rd Series 11-21-1996 TSO IV
203, 3rd Series 11-21-1996 TSO IV
205, 3rd Series 1-16-1997 72.04
209, 3rd Series - - 52.02
210, 3rd Series 8-5-1997 TSO IV
212, 3rd Series 9-2-1997 TSO III
213, 3rd Series 9-11-1997 TSO IV
215, 3rd Series 10-16-1997 TSO IV
216, 3rd Series 12-2-1997 TSO III
219, 3rd Series 1-6-1997 150.03
220, 3rd Series 1-6-1998 TSO III
221, 3rd Series 2-3-1998 150.01
222, 3rd Series 2-26-1998 TSO III
224, 3rd Series 3-10-1998 TSO III
225, 3rd Series 3-10-1998 TSO III
227, 3rd Series 3-10-1998 TSO III; TSO IV
228, 3rd Series 4-16-1998 TSO IV
229, 3rd Series 6-2-1998 31.46
230, 3rd Series 8-4-1998 TSO IV
References to Ordinances 23
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
231, 3rd Series 9-8-1998 TSO IV
233, 3rd Series 11-5-1998 114.02
235, 3rd Series 2-2-1998 150.08
236, 3rd Series 2-2-1999 TSO III
238, 3rd Series 4-15-1999 TSO IV
240, 3rd Series 5-4-1999 TSO IV
242, 3rd Series 9-16-1999 95.13
246, 3rd Series 1-4-2000 TSO IV
248, 3rd Series 7-6-2000 TSO IV
249, 3rd Series 8-8-2000 TSO III
250, 3rd Series 8-8-2000 150.08
253, 3rd Series 4-3-2001 30.10
254, 3rd Series 1-8-2000 TSO III
255, 3rd Series 1-8-2002 TSO III
256, 3rd Series 3-21-2002 96.06–96.08
257, 3rd Series 4-2-2002 TSO IV
260, 3rd Series 1-7-2003 94.20–94.28
263, 3rd Series 1-7-2003 116.01–116.10; 116.98; 116.99
264, 3rd Series 1-7-2003 131.02
266, 3rd Series 1-7-2003 33.02
268, 3rd Series 4-8-2003 TSO III
271, 3rd Series 8-21-2003 TSO III
272, 3rd Series 9-2-2003 72.18
273, 3rd Series - -2003 152.001–152.006;
152.020–152.027;
152.040–152.043;
152.055–152.061;
152.075–152.079;
152.090–152.094;
152.105–152.109;
152.120–152.125;
152.135–152.139;
152.155–152.159;
152.175–152.179;
152.195–152.199;
152.215–152.218;
152.230–152.233;
152.245–152.248;
152.260–152.263; 152.275;
152.276; 152.290–152.299;
152.315–152.317; 152.330;
2010 S-1
24 East Grand Forks - Parallel Reference
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
152.331; 152.345–152.360;
152.370; 152.380;
152.390–152.395; 152.999
274, 3rd Series 12-11-2003 151.001–151.011;
151.025–151.029;
151.045–151.048;
151.060–151.063;
151.075–151.78;
151.090–151.092;
151.105–151.114; 151.120;
151.130–151.132; 151.155;
151.999
275, 3rd Series 12-18-2003 TSO III
276, 3rd Series 12-18-2003 TSO III
277, 3rd Series 2-3-2004 TSO II
277-1, 3rd Series 2-3-2004 30.02
278, 3rd Series 2-17-2004 117.01–117.17;
117.30–117.35;
117.45–117.50;
117.65–117.67; 117.99
280, 3rd Series 3-16-2004 TSO III
281, 3rd Series 12-7-2004 TSO III
282, 3rd Series 3-1-2005 TSO III
283, 3rd Series 12-21-2004 152.125
284, 3rd Series 5-17-2005 152.078; 152.093; 152.108;
152.124; 152.196
285, 3rd Series 5-17-2005 152.217
286, 3rd Series 6-21-2005 TSO I
287, 3rd Series 8-16 -2005 117.01; 117.16; 117.34;
117.48; 117.49; 117.66
288, 3rd Series 11-1-2005 98.01; 98.02; 98.15–98.24;
98.35–98.43; 98.55; 98.99
289, 3rd Series 11-15-2005 TSO I
290, 3rd Series - - TSO I
290, 3rd Series 11-15-2005 TSO I
291, 3rd Series 6-20-2006 117.80–117.85, 117.99
292, 3rd Series 8-1-2006 70.02, 72.11
293, 3rd Series 8-1-2006 99.01, 99.02
294, 3rd Series 8-15-2006 152.079, 152.094, 152.109,
152.125, 152.233
2010 S-1
References to Ordinances 25
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
295, 3rd Series 12-19-2006 54.01
296, 3rd Series 12-19-2006 72.10
297, 3rd Series 1-2-2007 117.01, 117.16, 117.34,
117.48, 117.49, 117.66
298, 3rd Series 2-20-2007 153.01–153.08, 153.99
299, 3rd Series 4-17-2007 TSO III
300, 3rd Series 6-6-2007 98.37, 98.38, 98.40
301, 3rd Series 8-21-2007 77.01–77.16, 77.19
302, 3rd Series 8-21-2007 TSO III
303, 3rd Series 11-20-2007 150.13, 152.006, 152.023,
152.062, 152.233, 152.260,
152.263, 152.275, 152.276,
152.300, 152.317, 152.330,
152.350, 152.360
304, 3rd Series 10-16-2007 TSO IV
305, 3rd Series 10-16-2007 30.12
307, 3rd Series 1-20-2009 32.02
308, 3rd Series 3-3-2009 117.01, 117.02
2010 S-1
26 East Grand Forks - Parallel Reference
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
I. FRANCHISES
II. NAMING STREETS
III. ANNEXATIONS
IV. ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
1
2 East Grand Forks - Table of Special Ordinances
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
73 4-8-1910 Granting to Tri-State Telephone and
Telegraph Company the right to use the
streets and alleys in the city for the
purpose of erecting and constructing
poles, conduits, manholes, wires and
fixtures.
79 8-8-1910 Granting authority to R. B. Griffith, J.
D. Bacon and T. D. Campbell the right
to erect and maintain street railway
lines in the city.
117 12-5-1910 Granting the right to the City of Grand
Forks, North Dakota, to lay and
maintain water mains and erect and
maintain a pumping station in the city.
12, 3rd Series 7-16-1981 Granting to Surveillance, Inc. to
operate and maintain a community fire
alarm surveillance system in the city
for a period of 10 years.
61, 3rd Series 1-17-1986 Granting Northern States Power
Company the nonexclusive right and
privilege of erecting a gas plant and
using the public ways and public
grounds of the city for the purpose of
installing, operating, repairing and
maintaining all gas pipes, mains, and
appurtenances necessary for the
furnishing of gas through the limits of
the city for a period of 20 years.
3
4 East Grand Forks - Table of Special Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
77, 3rd Series 10-24-1986 Imposing a gas franchise fee on
Northern States Power Company.
130, 3rd Series 9-27-1991 Granting to TCI Cablevision of
Minnesota, Inc. for the purpose of
constructing, operating and maintaining
a system in the city for a cable
television franchise for a term of 13
years.
131, 3rd Series 9-26-1991 Granting to increase the franchise fee
from 2% to 3%, and by adopting by
reference City Code Chapter 1 and
section 12.99, which among other
things contain penalty provisions.
137, 3rd Series 7-1-1949 Granting to Great Northern Railway
Company the right to erect and
maintain a spur track across Warner
Avenue in the city.
139, 3rd Series 9-2-1949 Granting to Great Northern Railway
Company the right to erect and
maintain a railway track and platform
along the east 25 feet of Warner
Avenue.
182, 3rd Series 6-29-1995 Granting to the Water, Light, Power
and Building Commission, for a period
extending to December 31, 2000, the
right to transmit, furnish, deliver or
receive electric energy within the limits
of the city.
Franchises 5
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
286, 3rd Series 6-21-2005 Granting of cable services franchises
for use of public rights-of-way within
the City of East Grand Forks, including
the definition of terms, requirements
for community service channels,
requirements regarding the charging of
fees for use of rights-of-way, customer
service standards, technical standards
and other provisions relating to cable
services franchises.
289, 3rd Series 11-15-2005 Granting to Northern States Power
Company permission to erect a gas
distribution system for the purposes of
constructing, operating, repairing and
maintaining in the City of East Grand
Forks the necessary gas pipes, mains
and appurtenances for the transmission
or distribution of gas.
290, 3rd Series - - Granting the Northern States Power
Company d/b/a Xcel Energy
permission to erect a gas distribution
system for the purposes of
constructing, operating, repairing and
maintaining in the City of East Grand
Forks the necessary gas pipes, mains
and appurtenances for the transmission
or distribution of gas.
290, 3rd Series 11-15-2005 Implementing a gas service franchise
fee on Northern States Power Company
d/b/a Xcel Energy for providing gas
service within the city.
2010 S-1 Repl.
6 East Grand Forks - Table of Special Ordinances
TABLE II: NAMING STREETS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
140 10-14-1949 Providing for the naming and changing
the names of streets, lanes, avenues,
public highways and parks in the city.
192 9-3-1964 Providing for amendment of Ord. 140
with reference to naming of Gateway
Drive.
135, 2nd Series 3-17-1977 Naming, renaming, and changing the
name of streets, avenues, drives,
courts, lanes and public highways.
137, 2nd Series 8-2-1977 Naming and renaming parks and
repealing portions of Ord. 140.
143, 2nd Series 12-6-1977 Amending Ord. 135, 2nd Series, by
naming Bygland Road S.E. and
Rhinehart Drive S.E.
155, 2nd Series 1-30-1979 Amending Ord. 135, 2nd Series, by
renaming Garden Circle N.W.,
Fourteenth Avenue N.E. and James
Circle S.E.
103, 3rd Series 11-9-1989 Renaming a portion of A.V.T.I. Drive
as College Drive Northeast.
139, 3rd Series 9-8-1992 Amending Ord. 137, 2nd Series, to
change the name of Rivers’ Edge Park
to LaFave Park.
198, 3rd Series 7-2-1996 Amending and changing what was
indicated as 11th Street southeast to 12th
Street southeast.
7
8 East Grand Forks - Table of Special Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
277, 3rd Series 2-3-2004 Changing Sherlock Way to 8th Street
NW.
TABLE III: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
33 12-16-1901 Annexing Lot 7, Section 2, Township
151, North of Range 50, except portion
heretofore conveyed.
147 4-29-1954 Annexing a tract of land in the NW 1/4
of 35-152-50.
150 1-13-1955 Annexing a tract of land in the NW 1/4
of 35-152-50.
154 1-12-1956 Annexing a tract of land in the NW 1/4
of 35-152-50.
157 11-22-1956 Annexing a tract of land in the NW 1/4
of 35-152-50.
165 6-2-1958 Annexing Government Lot 9 of 12-
151-50.
166 11-3-1958 Annexing a tract of land in the NW 1/4
of 35-152-50.
167 12-25-1958 Annexing tracts of land in the West 1/2
of 36-152-50.
168 5-14-1959 Annexing a tract of land in NW 1/4 of
35-152-50.
174 1-19-1961 Annexing a tract of land in SW 1/4 of
36-152-50.
176 1-19-1961 Annexing south 40 feet of NE 1/4 of
35-152-50.
9
10 East Grand Forks - Table of Special Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
177 3-9-1961 Annexing south 1/2 of SE 1/4 of 36-
152-50.
179 9-15-1961 Annexing a tract of land in SE 1/4 of
SW 1/4 of 36-152-50.
180 10-26-1961 Annexing a tract of land in North 1/2
of South 1/2 of SW 1/4 of 36-152-50.
182 1-11-1962 Annexing a tract of land in SE 1/4 of
NE 1/4 of 35-152-50.
183 3-29-1962 Annexing a tract of land in SW 1/4 of
SW 1/4 of SW 1/4 of 36-152-50.
184 8-23-1962 Annexing a tract of land in North ½ of
SW 1/4 of 12-151-50.
185 6-20-1963 Annexing a tract of land in
Government Lot 9, 12-151-50.
189 6-4-1964 Annexing a tract of land in
Government Lot 9, 12-151-50.
190 7-16-1964 Annexing a tract of land in NW 1/4 of
35-152-50.
191 8-27-1964 Annexing a tract of land in NW 1/4 of
35-152-50.
197 5-22-1965 Annexing all of NE 1/4 of NE 1/4 of
Government Lot 1, 34-152-50.
198 6-24-1965 Annexing a tract of land in Section 36-
152-50.
205 5-26-1966 Annexing a tract of land in SW 1/4 of
NW 1/4 of 36-152-50.
207 2-16-1967 Annexing a tract of land in SW 1/4 of
NE 1/4 of 35-152-50.
Annexations 11
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
209 7-20-1967 Annexing all that part of NE 1/4 of NE
1/4 and Government Lot 1, 34-152-50.
227 12-25-1969 Annexing a tract of land in West 1/2 of
NE 1/4 of 35-152-50.
233 9-2-1970 Annexing a tract of land in West 1/2 of
NE 1/4 of 35-152-50.
238 11-17-1971 Annexing a tract of land in NE 1/4 of
NE 1/4 and Government Lot 1, 34-
152-50, and a tract of land in
Government Lot 1, 27-152-50.
240 5-24-1972 Annexing a tract of land in NE 1/4 of
NE 1/4 and Government Lots 2 and 3
of Section 34-152-50.
241 4-11-1973 Annexing a tract of land in the West
1/2 of Section 36-152-50.
242 7-25-1973 Annexing a tract of land in the East 1/2
of Section 35-152-50.
8, 2nd Series 6-15-1974 Annexing a tract of land North and
East of Garden Valley Addition
(Garden Valley 2nd and 3rd Addition)
118, 2nd Series 5-31-1975 Annexing three tracts of land in Section
31-152-49 (American Inn & Etc.)
121, 2nd Series 8-16-1975 Annexing a tract of land in Section 36
(East of 9th Ave. So. and North of
Highway #2).
123, 2nd Series 11-15-1975 Annexing a tract of land in Section 35-
152-50 and NE 1/4, 36-152-50 (Garden
Valley 4th Addition).
128, 2nd Series 7-24-1976 Annexing tracts in East ½ of NE 1/4,
35-152-50 and NE 1/4, 36-152-50.
12 East Grand Forks - Table of Special Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
130, 2nd Series 10-2-1976 Annexing tract in NW 1/4, 35-152-50.
136, 2nd Series 5-14-1977 Annexing a tract of land in Section 35-
150-52 (Wurden’s 7th Addition).
149, 2nd Series 7-15-1978 Annexing Wurden’s 7th Addition.
165, 2nd Series 12-15-1979 Annexing Holtman Property (by
American Inn).
171, 2nd Series 6-28-1980 Annexing Government Lot 8 in 7-151-
49.
173, 2nd Series 7-6-1980 Annexing tract in NW 1/4, 35-152-50.
17, 3rd Series 4-24-1982 Annexing a tract of land in 31-152-49
(Hertweck Property).
28, 3rd Series 8-12-1983 Annexing a tract of land in the SE 1/4
of SW 1/4, 31-152-49.
60, 3rd Series 11-22-1985 Annexing a tract in the SE 1/4 of SE
1/4, 31-142-49 (Minnesota Department
of Transportation).
120, 3rd Series 5-25-1990 Annexing part of Government Lots 3
and 5 and SE 1/4 of SW 1/4, 7-151-49
(KLK Investments).
154, 3rd Series 6-23-1993 Annexing a tract of land in the SE 1/4
of SW 1/4, 31-152-49 and a tract of
land in the SW 1/4 of SE 1/4, 31-152-
49.
159, 3rd Series 7-23-1993 Annexing Government Lot 5, 7-151-
49.
171, 3rd Series 2-16-1995 Annexing part of SE ½ of SE 1/4, 27-
152-50.
178, 3rd Series 4-20-1995 Annexing a tract of land in SW 1/4 and
SE 1/4 of SE 1/4, 12-151-50.
Annexations 13
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
195, 3rd Series 12-21-1995 Annexing the south 55 feet of Section
26, Township 152 North, Range 50
West of the 5th Principal Meridian.
212, 3rd Series 9-2-1997 Annexing a portion of the SE 1/4 of the
SW 1/4 of Section 7, Township 151
North, Range 49 West of the 5th
Principal Meridian.
216, 3rd Series 12-2-1997 Annexing a portion of the SE 1/4 of the
SW 1/4 and of the Westerly 10 acres of
the SW 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of Section 7,
Township 151 North, Range 49 West
of the 5th Principal Meridian.
220, 3rd Series 1-6-1998 Annexing a portion of the NE 1/4 of
the NE 1/4 of Section 13, Township
151 North, Range 50 West of the 5th
Principal Meridian.
222, 3rd Series 2-26-1998 Annexing a portion of the NE 1/4 and
East ½ of the NE 1/4, all in Section
18, Township 151 North, Range 49
West of the 5th Principal Meridian.
224, 3rd Series 3-10-1998 Annexing a portion of the NE 1/4 of
the NE 1/4 of Section 13, Township
151 North, Range 50 West of the 5th
Principal Meridian.
225, 3rd Series 3-10-1998 Annexing a portion of the W ½ of the
SW 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of Section 12,
Township 151 North, Range 50 West
of the 5th Principal Meridian.
227, 3rd Series 3-10-1998 Annexing property located in the NE
1/4 of the NE 1/4 of Section 13-151-50
to Planned Unit Development (PUD)
and Scholarship Addition to R-1
(Single-Family Residence).
14 East Grand Forks - Table of Special Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
236, 3rd Series 2-2-1999 Annexing a portion of the W ½ of the
SW 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of Section 12,
Township 151 North, Range 50 West
of the 5th Principal Meridian.
249, 3rd Series 8-8-2000 Annexing a portion of County State
Aid Highway 72 situated in Section 7-
151-49 and Section 18-151-49 in
Huntsville Township.
254, 3rd Series 1-8-2002 Annexing a portion of the NE 1/4 of
Section 13, Township 151 North of
Range 50 West of the 5th Principal
Meridian, Rhinehart Township.
255, 3rd Series 1-8-2002 Annexing a portion of the NW 1/4 of
Section 13, Township 151 North of
Range 50 West of the 5th Principal
Meridian, Rhinehart Township.
268, 3rd Series 4-8-2003 Annexing the SW 1/4 of Section 26,
Township 152 North, Range 50 West
of the 5th Principal Meridian, Grand
Forks Township.
271, 3rd Series 8-21-2003 Annexing part of Government Lots 1
and 2, Section 18, and the South 3/4 of
Government Lot 4, Section 7, and part
of the NE 1/4 of the NW 1/4 of Section
18, all in Township 151 North, Range
49 West of the 5th Principal Meridian,
Huntsville Township.
275, 3rd Series 12-18-2003 Annexing part of the SW 1/4 of the SE
1/4 and Government Lot 4 in Section
27, Township 152 North, Range 50
West of the 5th Principal Meridian,
Grand Forks Township.
Annexations 15
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
276, 3 Series rd 12-18-2003 Annexing part of the NW 1/4 of the SE
1/4 and part of the SW 1/4 of the SE
1/4 of Section 26, Township 152
North, Range 50 West of the 5th
Principal Meridian, Grand Forks
Township.
280, 3rd Series 3-16-2004 Annexing Government Lot 7 in Section
12, Township 151 North, Range 50
West of the 5th Principal Meridian; and
part of Government Lots 1, 2, 6, 7,
and 9, and part of the NE 1/4 of the
NW 1/4, Section 7, Township 151
North, Range 49 West of the 5th
Principal Meridian; and part of
Government Lot 7, Section 6,
Township 151 North, Range 49 West
of the 5th Principal Meridian,
Huntsville Township.
281, 3rd Series 12-7-2004 Annexing part of the Southwest
Quarter of the Southeast Quarter (SW
1/4, SE 1/4), Section 7, Township 151
North, Range 49 West of the 5th
Principal meridian, Huntsville
Township, Polk County, Minnesota.
282, 3rd Series 3-1-2005 Annexing parts of government Lot 1
and government Lot 7, and parts of the
Northeast Quarter of the Northwest
Quarter (NE 1/4, NW 1/4) and the
Northwest Quarter of the Northeast
Quarter (NW 1/4, NE 1/4) , Section 7,
Township 151 North, Range 49 West
of the 5th principal meridian, Huntsville
Township, Polk County, Minnesota.
16 East Grand Forks - Table of Special Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
299, 3rd Series 4-17-2007 Annexing a portion of the Northwest
Quarter of the Northwest Quarter
(NW¼NW¼) of Government Lot 1,
Section 18, Township 151 North,
Range 49 West of the 5th Principal
Meridian, Polk County.
302, 3rd Series 8-21-2007 Annexing a portion of the Northeast
Quarter of the Southeast Quarter
(NE¼SE¼) of Section 27, Township
152 North, Range 50 West of the 5th
Principal Meridian, Polk County.
2010 S-1
TABLE IV: ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
211 (199-1) 9-27-1967
199-2 - -
199-4 2-13-1969
199-5 6-12-1970
199-6 2-12-1970
199-7 12-28-1970
199-8 1-20-1970
199-9 (237) 9-15-1971
199-10 5-24-1972
199-11 12-13-1972
199-13 6-13-1973
2, 2nd Series 10-20-1973
5, 2nd Series 1-5-1974
6, 2nd Series 3-16-1974
9, 2nd Series 7-13-1974
10, 2nd Series 8-24-1974
13, 2nd Series 9-28-1974
17
18 East Grand Forks - Table of Special Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
17, 2nd Series 5-17-1975
119, 2nd Series 7-19-1975
122, 2nd Series 11-15-1975
124, 2nd Series 12-27-1975
131, 2nd Series 12-18-1976
132, 2nd Series 12-18-1976
134, 2nd Series 1-29-1977
138, 2nd Series 8-13-1977
139, 2nd Series 8-13-1977
140, 2nd Series 9-17-1977
145, 2nd Series 2-18-1978
146, 2nd Series 3-25-1978
147, 2nd Series 4-15-1978
150, 2nd Series 9-2-1978
163, 2nd Series 11-17-1979
166, 2nd Series 12-15-1979
174, 2nd Series 7-26-1980
21, 3rd Series 6-19-1982
32, 3rd Series 11-4-1983
36, 3rd Series 12-28-1983
55, 3rd Series 5-31-1985
Zoning Map Amendments 19
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
79, 3rd Series 10-3-1986
83, 3rd Series 10-16-1987
110, 3rd Series 3-21-1990
155, 3rd Series 6-4-1993
158, 3rd Series 7-23-1993
160, 3rd Series 10-21-1993
165, 3rd Series 4-29-1994
167, 3rd Series 6-2-1994
170, 3rd Series 5-25-1994
177, 3rd Series 4-20-1995
179, 3rd Series 4-27-1995
183, 3rd Series 7-13-1995
184, 3rd Series 7-27-1995
188, 3rd Series 11-16-1995 Zoning Maplewood Second Addition
and Maplewood Third Resubdivision as
R-1.
199, 3rd Series 7-18-1996 Changing the zoning of Gaddie’s
Second Resubdivision from Planned
Unit Development (PUD) to R-1
Single- Family Residence.
201, 3rd Series 9-3-1996 Changing the zoning of Lot 2, Block 1,
North Parkview Second Addition from
R-1 Single-Family Residence to
Planned Unit Development (PUD).
20 East Grand Forks - Table of Special Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
202, 3rd Series 9-19-1996 Changing the zoning of Lot 1, Block 1,
Burlington Northern Redevelopment
First Addition from I-1 General
Industry to Planned Unit Development
(PUD).
203, 3rd Series 11-21-1996 Zoning Lots 2 and 3, Block 1, BN
Redevelopment First Addition to C-2
Highway Commercial.
210, 3rd Series 8-5-1997 Zoning the John P. Bushee Addition to
R-1 Single-Family Residence; zoning a
portion of the W 1/2 SW 1/4 SE 1/4 of
Section 12-151-50 to R-1
Single-Family Residence; zoning the
Hartsville First Addition to R-1
Single-Family Residence; and by
zoning the Riverview 6th Addition to R-
1 Single Family Residence except Lots
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 and
19, Block 3 and all of Block 4,
Riverview 6th Addition which are zoned
Planned Unit Development (PUD)
District.
213, 3rd Series 9-11-1997 Changing the zoning of Good
Samaritan Nursing Home property
from R-1 Single-Family Residence to
Planned Unit Development (PUD).
215, 3rd Series 10-16-1997 Rezoning Lots 1, 2, 3, and 4, Block 4,
Wurden’s 5th Addition from Planned
Unite Development (PUD) to R-1
(Single-Family Residential).
227, 3rd Series 3-10-1998 Rezoning Outlot 67 of Auditor’s Plat of
Outlots 65-93 from C-2 to R-1
(Single-Family Residence), all of Block
1, Garden Valley 2nd Addition from
PUD to R-1 (Single-Family
Residence), all
Zoning Map Amendments 21
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
of Noah’s Addition from PUD to R-1
(Single-Family Residence), and Lots
18, 19, 20, 21, and 22, Block 7, Grand
Forks East Addition from R-2 to R-5
(High Density Multi-Family Low Rent
Housing and Housing for the Elderly).
228, 3rd Series 4-16-1998 Zoning the recently annexed portion of
the NW 1/4 NW 1/4 of Section 13,
Township 151 North, Range 50 West
to Planned Unit Development (PUD).
230, 3rd Series 8-4-1998 Rezoning a portion of Outlot 18 of
Auditor’s Plat of Outlots 1 - 23 from
Planned Unit Development (PUD) to
C-2 Highway Commercial; and
rezoning the northerly 1/5 of Stauss
Park and General Residence District.
231, 3rd Series 9-8-1998 Changing the zoning of a portion of the
Burlington Northern Triangle to
Planned Unit Development (PUD).
238, 3rd Series 4-15-1999 Zoning Block 3 and Block 4, Grand
Forks East Addition as C-1; all of
Block 1 and Block 2, Budge’s 1st
Addition as C-1; Lot 4 of BN
Redevelopment 1st Addition as C-1;
rezoning Lots 1 through 14, Block 1,
Lots 1 through 12, Block 2, and Lots 1
through 12, Block 3, Budge’s 4th
Addition, to C-1; rezoning Lots 1, 3
and 4, Block 1 and all of Block 3 and
all of Block 4, Burlington Heights 1st
Addition, to C-1.
22 East Grand Forks - Table of Special Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
240, 3rd Series 5-4-1999 Rezoning Lot 3, Block 3, Burlington
Heights First Addition as proposed to
C-1 General Commercial; rezoning
Lots 11, 12, 13, and 14, Block 2, and
all of Block 3, Burlington Commercial;
and rezoning all property located north
of Block 4, Traill’s Addition and south
of Tenth Avenue NE to C-2 Highway
Commercial.
246, 3rd Series 1-4-2000 Rezoning Lot 1, Block 1, Rural
American Addition from R-1
Single-Family Residence to C-2
Commercial Highway and Lots 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14 and 15, Block 2,
Mikkelson & Reilly’s 3rd Addition from
C-1 General Commercial to C-2
Highway Commercial.
248, 3rd Series 7-6-2000 Changing the zoning of a portion of
Lot 2, Block 1, Rural American
Addition to C-2 Highway Commercial
and a portion of Lot 2, Block 1, Rural
American Addition to Planned Unit
Development (PUD).
257, 3rd Series 4-2-2002 Zoning the recently annexed portion of
the North 1/2 of Section 13-151-50 to
R-1 Single Family Residential.
304, 3rd Series 10-16-2007 Changing the zoning of Point of Woods
5th Addition, Outlot B to Planned Unit
Development (PUD); Waters Edge 3rd
Addition, Lots 1-13 inclusive and
dedicated street right-of-way to
Planned Unit Development (PUD);
Waters Edge 3rd Addition, Lot 14 to
R-1 Single-Family Residential.
2010 S-1
INDEX
1
2 East Grand Forks - Index
INDEX
3.2% MALT LIQUOR (See also ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES)
Hours and days of sales, 117.34
License fees, 117.31
License required, 117.30
Massage parlors
Liquor, 114.08
Penalty, 117.99
Restrictions and regulations, 117.33
Temporary 3.2% malt liquor license, 117.32
Unlawful acts, 117.35
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES, EXCESS PROPERTY AND UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles
Auction or sale, 94.25
Contracts and disposal, 94.28
Custody, 94.21
Definitions, 94.20
Disposal of vehicles, 94.27
Notice, 94.23
Operator’s deficiency claim, 94.26
Right to reclaim, 94.24
Sale; waiting periods, 94.22
Disposal of excess property, 94.02
Disposal of unclaimed property, 94.01
Persons who may not purchase; exception, 94.03
ABSENTEE BALLOT COUNTING BOARD (See also DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND
COMMISSIONS)
Generally, 31.02
ACCESS SPACING STANDARDS (See also SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS)
Generally, 151.145
AIR QUALITY (See also FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION)
Burning ban or air quality alert, 93.44
3
4 East Grand Forks - Index
ALARM SYSTEMS
Appeal from denial, suspension or revocation, 115.12
Application for alarm agent permit, 115.07
Application for alarm business permit, 115.06
Application for alarm user permit, 115.08
Charges for false alarms, 115.13
Definitions, 115.02
Emergency reporting system; prohibitions, 115.15
Fire alarms, 115.04
Investigation and issuance, 115.10
Limitation of liability, 115.18
Permit fees, 115.05
Permit not assignable, 115.14
Permit required; exceptions, 115.03
Person ineligible for permit, 115.09
Possession, display and surrender of permits, 115.16
Prohibitions, 115.17
Purpose, 115.01
Suspension or revocation of permit, 115.11
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (See also 3.2% MALT LIQUOR; ON-SALE WINE)
Administrative offenses, 117.98
Alcoholic beverages in certain buildings and grounds, 117.13
Applications and licenses; procedure and administration, 117.02
Conduct on licensed premises, 117.05
Consumption and display, 117.16
Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages on streets, public property, and private
parking lots to which the public has access, 117.12
Definitions, 117.01
Financial responsibility of licensees, 117.09
Gambling prohibited, 117.10
Insurance certificate requirements, 117.08
License condition and unlawful act, 117.07
License restrictions, 117.03
Suspension or revocation, 117.98
Mandatory Alcohol Server Training
Application, 117.82
Certificates, issuance of, 117.84
Employee requirements
Alcohol server training required, 117.80
Grandfather clause, 117.80
Renewal, 117.80
2010 S-1
Index 5
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (Cont'd)
Mandatory Alcohol Server Training (Cont'd)
Employer requirements
Hiring of certified employees, 117.81
Record keeping, 117.81
Fees, 117.85
Tests, 117.83
Training programs, 117.83
Massage parlors
Liquor, 114.08
Nudity or obscenity prohibited, 117.17
Penalty, 117.99
Sale by employee, 117.06
Sports or convention facilities license, 117.14
Temporary intoxilyzing liquor license, 117.15
Unlawful acts, 117.04
Unlawful acts of minors, 117.11
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
Additional authority required, 74.07
Definition, 74.01
Insurance, 74.03
Permit application, 74.02
Permit fee, 74.06
Permit regulations, 74.05
Times of operation, 74.04
AMATEUR RADIO (See also BUILDING REGULATIONS)
Amateur radio support towers, 150.12
AMUSEMENT CENTERS AND MACHINES
Applications, 111.03
Certain machines not regulated, 111.10
Definitions, 111.01
Display of license, 111.06
Inspection, 111.05
License required, 111.02
Licenses, 111.04
Location of machines, 111.07
Locations where amusement centers permitted, 111.11
Restrictions, 111.09
Use for gambling or payoffs, 111.08
2010 S-1
6 East Grand Forks - Index
ANIMALS
Animal pound, 95.08
Fees, 95.03
Immobilization of dogs and cats, 95.12
Immunization, 95.06
Keeping, transportation, treatment and housing of animals and fowl, 95.16
License period, 95.04
License required, 95.02
Limitation on number, 95.13
Muzzling proclamation, 95.11
Notice of impounding, 95.09
Persons in possession of animals, 95.15
Quarantine for certain animals, 95.14
Release from animal pound, 95.10
Running at large prohibited, 95.01
Tag required, 95.05
Unlawful acts, 95.07
Wild animals, 95.17
ANNEXATIONS, TSO III
APARTMENT REGULATIONS (See RENTAL DWELLING CODE)
APPLIANCES (See also BUSINESS LICENSING)
Business licensing
Installation, alterations, servicing and repairing of gas and oil piping, appliances, and
appurtenances, 110.33
Household furnishings and appliances stored on private property, 130.06
Penalty, 130.99
ARCHITECTURE (See also ZONING CODE)
Architectural requirements, 152.292
ARROW (See also WEAPONS)
Use of bow and arrow, 132.06
ASSAULT WEAPON (See also WEAPONS)
Transportation of an assault weapon or firearm, 132.03
ATTORNEY (See also CITY GOVERNMENT)
City Attorney, 30.08
2010 S-1
Index 7
AUTO DEALER (See also BUSINESS LICENSING)
Second hand auto dealers, 110.29
BACKGROUND CHECK; MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES AND APPOINTEES
Application for license or permit; issuance, 99.02
Criminal history background, 99.01
BASEMENTS
Elevation below basement floor, 53.061
Open pits, basements and other excavations, 130.05
Penalty, 130.99
BICYCLES
Carrying articles, 75.06
Hitching rides, 75.03
Lighting and brake equipment, 75.07
Manner and number riding, 75.02
Right-of-way; sidewalks, 75.05
Sale with reflectors, 75.08
Traffic laws apply, 75.01
Where to ride, 75.04
BOW (See also WEAPONS)
Use of bow and arrow, 132.06
BRAKES (See also BICYCLES)
Lighting and brake equipment, 75.07
BUILDING CODE (See also BUILDING REGULATIONS)
Building Code adopted, 150.01
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Adoption of the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code, 150.04
Amateur radio support towers, 150.12
Building Code adopted, 150.01
Compliance with code, 150.14
Contractor's license required, 150.10
Fees, 150.02
Fence regulations, 150.08
Housing Code adopted, 150.07
Location of sexually oriented businesses, 150.13
2010 S-1
8 East Grand Forks - Index
BUILDING REGULATIONS (Cont'd)
Manufactured homes, 150.11
Permits and special requirements for moving buildings, 150.03
Plumbing permit fees, 150.06
Plumbing permits and inspections, 150.05
Rental Dwelling Code, 150.09
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS (See also SEWER REGULATIONS)
Building sewer permits, 53.056
Conformance to State Building and Plumbing Code requirements, 53.060
Costs and expenses, 53.057
Elevation below basement floor, 53.061
Excavations, 53.063
Licenses, 53.064
Old building sewers; restrictions on use, 53.059
Restrictions on new connections, 53.055
Separate building sewers required, 53.058
Surface runoff or groundwater connections prohibited, 53.062
BURIAL PERMITS (See also CEMETERY)
Burial permits, 92.04
BURNING (See also FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION)
Open Burning
Burning ban or air quality alert, 93.44
Definitions, 93.35
Denial of open burning permit, 93.43
Permit application for open burning; permit fees, 93.39
Permit holder responsibility, 93.41
Permit process for open burning, 93.40
Permit required for open burning, 93.37
Prohibited materials, 93.36
Purposes allowed for open burning, 93.38
Revocation of open burning permit, 93.42
Rules and laws adopted by reference, 93.45
Penalty, 93.99
BUS (See also PARKING)
House trailer, camping trailer, other trailers and bus parking, 72.04
2010 S-1
Index 9
BUSINESS LICENSING
Action on application for license, 110.03
Applications, 110.02
Business Regulations
Dances, 110.35
Garbage and refuse haulers, 110.32
Installation, alterations, servicing and repairing of gas and oil piping, appliances, and
appurtenances, 110.33
Junk dealers, 110.27
Photographers, 110.30
Plumbers, 110.34
Second hand auto dealers, 110.29
Second hand dealers, 110.28
Shows, 110.25
Tobacco, 110.26
Vending wagons, 110.31
Carrying or posting, 110.04
Conditional licenses, 110.08
Definitions, 110.01
Fixing license fees, 110.07
Insurance requirements, 110.10
License denial and fixing rates; hearing, 110.09
Penalty for property owners, 110.05
Responsibility of licensee, 110.06
CAMPING TRAILER (See also PARKING)
House trailer, camping trailer, other trailers and bus parking, 72.04
CATS (See also ANIMALS)
Immobilization of dogs and cats, 95.12
CEMETERY
Burial permits, 92.04
Cemetery Commission; duties, 92.05
Handling of funds, 92.03
Illegal acts, 92.06
Location, plat, prohibition of other cemeteries, 92.01
Sale of lots, 92.02
CITY ADMINISTRATOR (See also CITY GOVERNMENT)
City Administrator/Clerk Treasurer position description, 30.10
Clerk and Treasurer offices combined, 30.09
2010 S-1
10 East Grand Forks - Index
CITY ATTORNEY (See also CITY GOVERNMENT)
City Attorney, 30.08
CITY COUNCIL (See also CITY GOVERNMENT)
Organizational Council meetings; rules and procedures, 30.01
Regular Council meeting; rules and procedures, 30.02
Salaries of Mayor and Council Members, 30.12
Special Council meeting; rules and procedures, 30.03
CITY FORESTER (See also SHADE DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION)
Additional duties of City Forester, 97.11
CITY GOVERNMENT (See also BACKGROUND CHECK; MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES AND
APPOINTEES)
City Administrator/Clerk Treasurer position description, 30.10
City Attorney, 30.08
Clerk and Treasurer offices combined, 30.09
Interim emergency succession, 30.05
Organizational Council meetings; rules and procedures, 30.01
Personnel policies, 30.13
Regular Council meeting; rules and procedures, 30.02
Right to administrative appeal, 30.06
Robert’s Rules of Order to govern meetings, 30.04
Rules of procedure for meetings, appeals and other hearings, 30.07
Salaries of certain board and commission members, 30.11
Salaries of Mayor and Council Members, 30.12
Special Council meeting; rules and procedures, 30.03
CITY PARKING LOTS (See also PARKING)
Parking rules in municipal parking lots and ramps, 72.12
CITY POLICIES (See also BACKGROUND CHECK; MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES
AND APPOINTEES)
City seal, 32.04
Civil service system, 32.05
Claims and disbursements, 32.02
Facsimile signatures, 32.03
Personnel policies, 30.13
Worker’s compensation, 32.01
CITY RAMPS (See also PARKING)
Parking rules in municipal parking lots and ramps, 72.12
2010 S-1
Index 10A
CITY SEAL (See also CITY POLICIES)
Generally, 32.04
CITY UTILITIES (See also UTILITIES GENERALLY)
Rules and Regulations Relating to City Utilities
Application, connection and sale of service, 50.21
City utility service outside the city, 50.29
City utility services and charges a lien, 50.27
Damage to city utility plant, fixture, equipment or appurtenance, 50.28
Disconnection for late payment, 50.20
Discontinuance of service, 50.22
Limitation of liability for interruption of electric service, 50.30
Meter test, 50.25
Ownership of city utilities, 50.23
Right of entry, 50.24
Unlawful acts, 50.26
CIVIL FORFEITURE (See also DRUG-RELATED OFFENSES)
Generally, 131.25
CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM (See also CITY POLICIES)
Generally, 32.05
CLANDESTINE DRUG LABS (See also NUISANCES)
Clandestine drug lab sites, 98.55
Penalty, 98.99
2010 S-1
10B East Grand Forks - Index
Index 11
CLERK (See also CITY GOVERNMENT)
City Administrator/Clerk Treasurer position description, 30.10
Clerk and Treasurer offices combined, 30.09
CODE OF ORDINANCES, GENERAL PROVISIONS
Adoption of statutes and rules by reference, 10.19
Application to future ordinances, 10.03
Captions, 10.04
Copies of code, 10.18
Definitions, 10.05
Effective date of ordinances, 10.14
Enforcement, 10.20
Errors and omissions, 10.09
General penalty, 10.99
Official time, 10.10
Ordinances repealed, 10.12
Ordinances unaffected, 10.13
Ordinances which amend or supplement code, 10.16
Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities, 10.17
Reasonable time, 10.11
Reference to offices, 10.08
Reference to other sections, 10.07
Repeal or modification of ordinance, 10.15
Rules of interpretation, 10.02
Severability, 10.06
Supplemental administrative penalties, 10.98
Title of code, 10.01
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS (See also ZONING CODE)
Downtown commercial district
(C-1) Downtown Commercial District
Design guidelines, 152.198
District performance standards, 152.199
Permitted uses, 152.196
Purpose, 152.195
Special uses, 152.197
Highway commercial district
(C-2) Highway Commercial District
District performance standards, 152.218
Permitted uses, 152.216
Purpose, 152.215
Special uses, 152.217
12 East Grand Forks - Index
CONVENTION FACILITY
Alcoholic beverages
Sports or convention facilities license, 117.14
COUNCIL (See also CITY GOVERNMENT)
Organizational Council meetings; rules and procedures, 30.01
Regular Council meeting; rules and procedures, 30.02
Salaries of Mayor and Council Members, 30.12
Special Council meeting; rules and procedures, 30.03
CURBS (See also PARKING; SIDEWALKS; STREETS)
Construction and reconstruction of roadway surfaces, sidewalks and curbs and gutters, 96.06
Curb and gutter street and sidewalk painting or coloring, 96.16
Curb setback, 96.14
General parking prohibitions, 72.02
Streets without curb, 72.08
CURFEW
Generally, 130.02
Penalty, 130.99
DANCES (See also BUSINESS LICENSING)
Generally, 110.35
DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS (See also LIBRARY BOARD; PLANNING
COMMISSION; SENIOR CITIZENS BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS)
Absentee Ballot Counting Board, 31.02
Boards and commissions generally, 31.01
DISEASE CONTROL (See also MASSAGE PARLORS)
Health and disease control, 114.05
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
Generally, 130.01
Penalty, 130.99
DOGS (See also ANIMALS)
Immobilization of dogs and cats, 95.12
Index 13
DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (See also ZONING CODE)
(C-1) Downtown Commercial District
Design guidelines, 152.198
District performance standards, 152.199
Permitted uses, 152.196
Purpose, 152.195
Special uses, 152.197
DRUG-RELATED OFFENSES (See also CLANDESTINE DRUG LABS)
Drug Paraphernalia
Civil forfeiture, 131.25
Definitions, 131.21
Evidence, 131.23
Offenses, 131.24
Purpose and intent, 131.20
Unlawful acts, 131.22
Tobacco and minors, 131.02
Unlawful use and furnishing of tobacco, 131.01
DRUGS (See also DRUG-RELATED OFFENSES)
Clandestine drug lab sites, 98.55
Penalty, 98.99
ELECTRIC SERVICE (See also UTILITIES GENERALLY)
Electric energy franchise, 50.04
Limitation of liability for interruption of electric service, 50.30
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Definitions, 34.02
Emergency management a government function, 34.07
Emergency regulations, 34.06
Establishment of emergency management organization, 34.03
Local emergencies, 34.05
Participation in labor disputes or politics, 34.08
Penalty, 34.99
Policy and purpose, 34.01
Powers and duties of Director, 34.04
EXCAVATIONS
Building sewers and connections
Excavations, 53.063
Open pits, basements and other excavations, 130.05
Penalty, 130.99
14 East Grand Forks - Index
EXCESS PROPERTY (See also ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES, EXCESS PROPERTY AND
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY)
Disposal of excess property, 94.02
FAIR HOUSING
Civil enforcement procedure, 91.06
Declaration of policy, 91.01
Definitions, 91.02
Enforcement procedures, 91.04
Prohibited acts in regard to housing, 91.03
Statute of limitations, 91.05
FENCES (See also BUILDING REGULATIONS)
Fence regulations, 150.08
FINANCE AND TAXATION
Lodging tax, 33.02
Revenue from sanitary sewerage service, 33.01
FIRE ALARMS (See also ALARM SYSTEMS)
Generally, 115.04
FIRE HOSE (See also WATER SERVICE)
Private fire hose connections, 52.07
Restricted hours for sprinkling, 52.06
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Firewood Storage
Conditions of storage, 93.22
Exemptions, 93.23
Existing wood piles, 93.24
Scope, 93.21
Statement of policy, 93.20
Open burning of dried leaves, 93.01
Open Burning
Burning ban or air quality alert, 93.44
Definitions, 93.35
Denial of open burning permit, 93.43
Permit application for open burning; permit fees, 93.39
Permit holder responsibility, 93.41
Permit process for open burning, 93.40
Permit required for open burning, 93.37
Index 15
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION (Cont’d)
Open Burning (Cont’d)
Prohibited materials, 93.36
Purposes allowed for open burning, 93.38
Revocation of open burning permit, 93.42
Rules and laws adopted by reference, 93.45
Penalty, 93.99
FIREARM (See also WEAPONS)
Discharging firearms, 132.04
Transportation of an assault weapon or firearm, 132.03
FIREWOOD (See also FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION)
Firewood Storage
Conditions of storage, 93.22
Exemptions, 93.23
Existing wood piles, 93.24
Scope, 93.21
Statement of policy, 93.20
Penalty, 93.99
FLOOD FRINGE OVERLAY DISTRICT (See also ZONING CODE)
(FF) Flood Fringe Overlay District
Uses by special permit, 152.276
Uses permitted, 152.275
FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT (See also ZONING CODE)
(FW) Floodway Overlay District
General requirements, 152.263
Structural approval, 152.262
Uses by special use permit, 152.261
Uses permitted, 152.260
FORESTER (See also SHADE DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION)
Additional duties of City Forester, 97.11
FORFEITURE (See also DRUG-RELATED OFFENSES)
Civil forfeiture, 131.25
FOUR-WHEEL VEHICLES (See also TRAFFIC REGULATIONS)
Designated roadways for use by four-wheel all-terrain vehicles, Ch. 76, Sched. I
FOWL (See also ANIMALS)
Keeping, transportation, treatment and housing of animals and fowl, 95.16
16 East Grand Forks - Index
FRANCHISES
Electric energy franchise, 50.04
Granted franchises, TSO I
FURNISHINGS
Household furnishings and appliances stored on private property, 130.06
GAMBLING (See also ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; AMUSEMENT CENTERS AND
MACHINES)
Alcoholic beverages
Gambling prohibited, 117.10
Use for gambling or payoffs, 111.08
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Collection of leaves, trees or tree limbs, 51.14
Container required; placement, 51.03
Containers to be kept sanitary and secure, 51.05
Definitions, 51.01
Licensing for collection, 51.13
Manner of collection and transportation, 51.12
Meddling with trash receptacles prohibited, 51.04
Nonresidential customers; container types; collection schedules, 51.11
Prohibited acts, 51.10
Removal of building materials, 51.09
Reserved, 51.08
Sanitation collection service required, 51.02
Sanitation service: city options., 51.07
Unauthorized private collections prohibited, 51.06
GAS PIPING (See also BUSINESS LICENSING)
Installation, alterations, servicing and repairing of gas and oil piping, appliances, and
appurtenances, 110.33
GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (See also ZONING CODE)
(I-2) General Industrial District
District performance standards, 152.248
Permitted uses, 152.246
Purpose, 152.245
Special uses, 152.247
GOLF CARTS (See SPECIAL USE VEHICLES)
GROUNDWATER CONNECTIONS (See also SEWER REGULATIONS)
Surface runoff or groundwater connections prohibited, 53.062
2010 S-1 Repl.
Index 17
GUTTERS (See also SIDEWALKS; STREETS)
Construction and reconstruction of roadway surfaces, sidewalks and curbs and gutters, 96.06
Curb and gutter street and sidewalk painting or coloring, 96.16
HEALTH (See also MASSAGE PARLORS)
Health and disease control, 114.05
HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (See also ZONING CODE)
(R-3) High Density Residential District
District performance standards, 152.109
Permitted accessory uses, 152.107
Permitted uses, 152.106
Purpose, 152.105
Special uses, 152.108
HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (See also ZONING CODE)
(C-2) Highway Commercial District
District performance standards, 152.218
Permitted uses, 152.216
Purpose, 152.215
Special uses, 152.217
HITCHING (See also BICYCLES)
Hitching rides, 75.03
HOME OCCUPATIONS (See also ZONING CODE)
Generally, 152.380
HOUSE TRAILER (See also PARKING)
House trailer, camping trailer, other trailers and bus parking, 72.04
HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS
Household furnishings and appliances stored on private property, 130.06
Penalty, 130.99
HOUSING (See also FAIR HOUSING)
Prohibited acts in regard to housing, 91.03
HYDRANTS (See also WATER SERVICE)
Opening hydrants, 52.08
ICE (See also SIDEWALKS; STREETS)
Ice and snow on public sidewalks, 96.05
2010 S-1 Repl.
18 East Grand Forks - Index
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS (See also ZONING CODE)
General industrial district
(I-2) General Industrial District
District performance standards, 152.248
Permitted uses, 152.246
Purpose, 152.245
Special uses, 152.247
Light industrial district
(I-1) Light Industrial District
District performance standards, 152.233
Permitted uses, 152.231
Purpose, 152.230
Special uses, 152.232
INSURANCE
Business licensing
Insurance requirements, 110.10
Insurance certificate requirements, 117.08
INTOXICATING LIQUOR (See also ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES)
Hours and days of sales, 117.48
License fees, 117.46
License required, 117.45
Penalty, 117.99
Restrictions and regulations, 117.47
Sunday sales, 117.49
Unlawful acts, 117.50
JUNK DEALERS (See also BUSINESS LICENSING)
Generally, 110.27
LANDSCAPING (See also ZONING CODE)
Landscaping standards, 152.294
LEAVES (See also GARBAGE AND REFUSE)
Collection of leaves, trees or tree limbs, 51.14
2010 S-1 Repl.
Index 19
LIBRARY BOARD (See also DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS)
Establishment of library, 31.45
Funding, 31.47
Illegal acts, 31.48
Library Board, 31.46
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (See also ZONING CODE)
(I-1) Light Industrial District
District performance standards, 152.233
Permitted uses, 152.231
Purpose, 152.230
Special uses, 152.232
LIQUOR
Alcoholic beverages
Temporary intoxilyzing liquor license, 117.15
Massage parlors
Liquor, 114.08
LIVESTOCK (See also ZONING CODE)
Limited Livestock Raising
Private stables, 152.331
Purpose, 152.330
LODGING TAX
Generally, 33.02
MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLATS (See also SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS)
Procedure for Major Subdivision Plats
Final plat application for major subdivision plats, 151.077
Preliminary plat application for major subdivision plats, 151.076
Procedure for major subdivision plats, 151.075
Recording for major subdivision plats, 151.078
MALT LIQUOR (See also ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES)
Hours and days of sales, 117.34
License fees, 117.31
License required, 117.30
Penalty, 117.99
Restrictions and regulations, 117.33
Temporary 3.2% malt liquor license, 117.32
Unlawful acts, 117.35
20 East Grand Forks - Index
MANUFACTURED HOMES (See also BUILDING REGULATIONS; ZONING CODE)
Generally, 150.11
Zoning
Manufactured home courts and mobile homes, 152.295
MASSAGE PARLORS
Business hours and inspection, 114.07
Construction requirements, 114.04
Definitions, 114.01
Health and disease control, 114.05
License, 114.02
Licensing, suspended or revoked, 114.10
Liquor, 114.08
Maintenance of facilities, 114.06
Qualifications, 114.03
Solicitation, 114.09
MAYOR (See also CITY GOVERNMENT)
Salaries of Mayor and Council Members, 30.12
MEETINGS (See also CITY GOVERNMENT)
Interim emergency succession, 30.05
Organizational Council meetings; rules and procedures, 30.01
Regular Council meeting; rules and procedures, 30.02
Right to administrative appeal, 30.06
Robert’s Rules of Order to govern meetings, 30.04
Rules of procedure for meetings, appeals and other hearings, 30.07
Special Council meeting; rules and procedures, 30.03
MINNESOTA UNIFORM FIRE CODE (See also BUILDING REGULATIONS)
Adoption of the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code, 150.04
MINOR SUBDIVISION PLATS (See also SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS)
Procedure for Minor Subdivision Plats
Final plat application for minor subdivision plats, 151.062
Preliminary plat application for minor subdivision plats, 151.061
Procedure for minor subdivision plats, 151.060
Recording for minor subdivision plats, 151.063
2010 S-1
Index 21
MINORS
Alcoholic beverages
Unlawful acts of minors, 117.11
Curfew
Generally, 130.02
Penalty, 130.99
Tobacco and minors, 131.02
MOTORIZED VEHICLES (See also SIDEWALKS)
Motorized vehicles prohibited on sidewalks, 96.17
MUZZLE (See also ANIMALS)
Muzzling proclamation, 95.11
NOISE
Noisy parties, 130.03
Penalty, 130.99
NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS (See also ZONING CODE)
Legal non-conforming lots (lot of record), 152.041
Legal non-conforming structures, 152.042
Legal non-conforming uses, 152.043
Purpose, 152.040
NON-CONFORMING LOTS (See also ZONING CODE)
Legal non-conforming lots (lot of record), 152.041
Legal non-conforming structures, 152.042
Legal non-conforming uses, 152.043
Purpose, 152.040
NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES (See also ZONING CODE)
Legal non-conforming lots (lot of record), 152.041
Legal non-conforming structures, 152.042
Legal non-conforming uses, 152.043
Purpose, 152.040
NON-CONFORMING USES (See also ZONING CODE)
Legal non-conforming lots (lot of record), 152.041
Legal non-conforming structures, 152.042
Legal non-conforming uses, 152.043
Purpose, 152.040
22 East Grand Forks - Index
NUDITY
Alcoholic beverages
Nudity or obscenity prohibited, 117.17
NUISANCES (See also SEWER REGULATIONS; SHADE TREE DISEASE CONTROL AND
PREVENTION; SIGNS)
Assessable current services, 98.01
Nuisances
Abatement, 98.23
Building maintenance and appearance, 98.21
Duties of city officers, 98.22
Inoperable motor vehicles, 98.20
Nuisance parking and storage, 98.19
Public nuisances affecting health, 98.16
Public nuisances affecting morals and decency, 98.17
Public nuisances affecting peace and safety, 98.18
Public place, 98.15
Recovery of cost, 98.24
Penalty, 98.99
Shade tree diseases
Abatement of nuisance, 97.06
Signs
Safety, visibility, and nuisance provisions, 152.391
Tree diseases, 98.02
Use of public services
Discharges hazardous to life or constitute public nuisances, 53.083
OBSCENITY
Alcoholic beverages
Nudity or obscenity prohibited, 117.17
OFF-STREET LOADING AREAS AND ACCESS (See also ZONING CODE)
Access, 152.359
Accessibility Requirements, 152.351
Application, 152.346
Change of use, 152.347
Combined parking facilities, 152.354
Computing requirements, 152.352
Construction and maintenance, 152.356
Design of parking and loading facilities, 152.350
Driveway width standards, 152.360
Exemptions from parking regulations, 152.355
Existing facilities, 152.348
Index 23
OFF-STREET LOADING AREAS AND ACCESS (Cont’d)
Lighting, 152.357
Location of parking facilities, 152.353
Off-street parking, 152.358
Purpose, 152.345
Use of parking facilities, 152.349
OFFICIAL MAP (See also PLANNING COMMISSION; SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS)
Compliance with comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, and official map, 151.011
Official map of street extensions, 31.28
Zoning
Zoning map, 152.060
Zoning map amendments, TSO IV
OIL PIPING (See also BUSINESS LICENSING)
Installation, alterations, servicing and repairing of gas and oil piping, appliances, and
appurtenances, 110.33
ON-SALE WINE (See also ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES)
Hours and days of sales by on-sale wine licenses, 117.66
On-sale wine, 117.65
Penalty, 117.99
Unlawful acts, 117.67
OPEN BURNING
Burning ban or air quality alert, 93.44
Definitions, 93.35
Denial of open burning permit, 93.43
Permit application for open burning; permit fees, 93.39
Permit holder responsibility, 93.41
Permit process for open burning, 93.40
Permit required for open burning, 93.37
Prohibited materials, 93.36
Purposes allowed for open burning, 93.38
Revocation of open burning permit, 93.42
Rules and laws adopted by reference, 93.45
Penalty, 93.99
PARADES (See also SIDEWALKS; STREETS)
Ice and snow on public sidewalks, 96.05
2010 S-1
24 East Grand Forks - Index
PARAPHERNALIA (See also DRUG-RELATED OFFENSES)
Drug Paraphernalia
Civil forfeiture, 131.25
Definitions, 131.21
Evidence, 131.23
Offenses, 131.24
Purpose and intent, 131.20
Unlawful acts, 131.22
PARKING (See also SIDEWALKS; STREETS; TRAFFIC, GENERALLY; ZONING CODE)
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages on streets, public property, and private
parking lots to which the public has access, 117.12
Angle parking, 72.07
Calendar parking, 72.10
Courtesy parking, 72.16
Direction to proceed, 72.05
Envelope fees, 72.17
General parking prohibitions, 72.02
House trailer, camping trailer, other trailers and bus parking, 72.04
Impounding and removing vehicles, 72.13
Off-street loading areas and access
Access, 152.359
Accessibility Requirements, 152.351
Application, 152.346
Change of use, 152.347
Combined parking facilities, 152.354
Computing requirements, 152.352
Construction and maintenance, 152.356
Design of parking and loading facilities, 152.350
Driveway width standards, 152.360
Exemptions from parking regulations, 152.355
Existing facilities, 152.348
Lighting, 152.357
Location of parking facilities, 152.353
Off-street parking, 152.358
Purpose, 152.345
Use of parking facilities, 152.349
Parallel parking, 72.06
Parking hours, 72.09
Parking prohibited during recycling collection, 72.18
Parking rules in municipal parking lots and ramps, 72.12
Physically handicapped parking, 72.14
Index 25
PARKING (Cont’d)
Presumption, 72.01
Private use of public streets and parking lots, 96.13
Streets without curb, 72.08
Traffic and parking control, 96.02
Truck parking, 72.11
Unauthorized removal, 72.03
Vehicle repair on streets, 72.15
PARKS
Rules and regulations governing public parks, 90.01
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Definitions, 112.01
Exceptions to definitions, 112.02
Exclusion by placard, 112.09
License ineligibility, 112.04
License suspension and revocation, 112.05
License transferability, 112.06
Licensing; exemptions, 112.03
Prohibited activities, 112.08
Registration, 112.07
PERSONNEL POLICIES
Generally, 30.13
PHOTOGRAPHERS (See also BUSINESS LICENSING)
Generally, 110.30
PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED (See also PARKING)
Physically handicapped parking, 72.14
PITS
Open pits, basements and other excavations, 130.05
Penalty, 130.99
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (See also ZONING CODE)
Planned Unit Development (PUD) District
Administrative Procedures, 152.121
Permitted uses, 152.122
Permitted accessory uses, 152.123
Special uses, 152.124
District performance standards, 152.125
Purpose, 152.120
26 East Grand Forks - Index
PLANNING COMMISSION (See also DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS;
OFFICIAL MAP)
Adoption of program of work, 31.23
Composition, 31.21
Establishment of Commission, 31.20
List of recommended public works, 31.31
Means of executing plan, 31.26
Official map of street extensions, 31.28
Organization meetings and the like, 31.22
Plats, 31.29
Preparation of city plan, 31.24
Procedure for changes, 31.30
Procedure of adopting of plan, 31.25
Zoning plan, 31.27
PLUMBERS (See also BUSINESS LICENSING)
Generally, 110.34
PLUMBING (See also BUILDING REGULATIONS)
Plumbing permit fees, 150.06
Plumbing permits and inspections, 150.05
POLK COUNTY ZONING ORDINANCE (See also SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS)
Coordination of subdivision plat approval with Polk County Zoning Ordinance, 151.029
PREMATURE SUBDIVISIONS (See also SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS)
Burden of evidence, 151.132
Condition establishing premature subdivisions, 151.131
Premature subdivisions, 151.130
PRIVATE PROPERTY (See also ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; JUNK CARS)
Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages on streets, public property, and private
parking lots to which the public has access, 117.12
Household furnishings and appliances stored on private property, 130.06
PUBLIC CEMETERY
Burial permits, 92.04
Cemetery Commission; duties, 92.05
Handling of funds, 92.03
Illegal acts, 92.06
Location, plat, prohibition of other cemeteries, 92.01
Sale of lots, 92.02
2010 S-1 Repl.
Index 27
PUBLIC PROPERTY
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages on streets, public property, and private
parking lots to which the public has access, 117.12
Streets and sidewalks
Private use of public streets and parking lots, 96.12
PUBLIC SEWER
Installation of service connection to public sewer, 53.018
Private wastewater disposal
Public sewer not available, 53.035
Use of public sewers
Permitting substance or matter to flow or pass into public sewers, 53.091
PUBLIC WORKS (See also PLANNING COMMISSION)
List of recommended public works, 31.31
QUARANTINE (See also ANIMALS)
Quarantine for certain animals, 95.14
RAILWAYS (See also SIDEWALKS; STREETS)
Limiting time of railway-street crossing obstruction, 96.10
RECYCLING (See also PARKING)
Parking prohibited during recycling collection, 72.18
RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES (See also TRAFFIC REGULATIONS)
Recreational motor vehicle regulations, 71.04
REFUSE
Collection of leaves, trees or tree limbs, 51.14
Container required; placement, 51.03
Containers to be kept sanitary and secure, 51.05
Definitions, 51.01
Licensing for collection, 51.13
Manner of collection and transportation, 51.12
Meddling with trash receptacles prohibited, 51.04
Nonresidential customers; container types; collection schedules, 51.11
Prohibited acts, 51.10
Removal of building materials, 51.09
Reserved, 51.08
Sanitation collection service required, 51.02
Sanitation service: city options., 51.07
Unauthorized private collections prohibited, 51.06
28 East Grand Forks - Index
RENTAL DWELLING CODE, 150.09
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (See also ZONING CODE)
High density residential district
(R-3) High Density Residential District
District performance standards, 152.109
Permitted accessory uses, 152.107
Permitted uses, 152.106
Purpose, 152.105
Special uses, 152.108
Single-family residential district
(R-1) Single-Family Residential District
Purpose, 152.075
Permitted uses, 152.076
Permitted accessory uses, 152.077
Special uses, 152.078
District performance standards, 152.079
Two-family residential district
(R-2) Two-Family Residential District
District performance standards, 152.094
Permitted accessory uses, 152.092
Permitted uses, 152.091
Purpose, 152.090
Special uses, 152.093
ROBERT’S RULES (See also CITY GOVERNMENT)
Robert’s Rules of Order to govern meetings, 30.04
ROLLER SKATES
Roller blades, roller skates, and skateboards, 130.04
Penalty, 130.99
SALARIES
Salaries of Mayor and Council Members, 30.12
SANITATION (See also GARBAGE AND REFUSE; SEWER REGULATIONS)
Containers to be kept sanitary and secure, 51.05
Deposits of unsanitary manner prohibited, 53.015
Sanitation collection service required, 51.02
Sanitation service: city options, 51.07
SCAVENGING
Anti-scavenging, 130.07
Penalty, 130.99
2010 S-1
Index 29
SCREENING (See also ZONING CODE)
Screening, 152.298
SEAL
City seal, 32.04
SECOND HAND DEALERS (See also BUSINESS LICENSING)
Generally, 110.28
Second hand auto dealers, 110.29
SENIOR CITIZENS CENTER BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS (See also DEPARTMENTS,
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS)
Board of Commissioners, 31.61
By-laws, 31.63
Establishment, 31.60
Financial controls, 31.64
Officers and employees, 31.62
SEWER REGULATIONS (See also UTILITIES GENERALLY)
Building Sewers and Connections
Building sewer permits, 53.056
Conformance to State Building and Plumbing Code requirements, 53.060
Costs and expenses, 53.057
Elevation below basement floor, 53.061
Excavations, 53.063
Licenses, 53.064
Old building sewers; restrictions on use, 53.059
Restrictions on new connections, 53.055
Separate building sewers required, 53.058
Surface runoff or groundwater connections prohibited, 53.062
Building sewers; general requirements, 53.003
Control of sewers; administration of chapter, 53.002
Cost of repairing or restoring sewers, 53.005
Definitions, 53.001
Deposits of unsanitary manner prohibited, 53.015
Discharge of wastewater or other polluted waters, 53.016
Finance and taxation
Revenue from sanitary sewerage service, 33.01
Installation of service connection to public sewer, 53.018
Penalty, 53.999
30 East Grand Forks - Index
SEWER REGULATIONS (Cont’d)
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
Authorized employees obtaining information for industrial processes, 53.131
Authorized employees permitted to enter all properties, 53.130
Authorized employees permitted to enter all property with easements, 53.133
Authorized employees to observe safety rules, 53.132
Private Wastewater Disposal
Application of subchapter, 53.040
Direct connection required, 53.038
Operation and maintenance by owner, 53.039
Permits, 53.036
Public sewer not available, 53.035
Type, capacities, location and layout, 53.037
Restrictions on wastewater disposal facilities, 53.017
Tampering with wastewater facilities, 53.004
Use of Public Services
Catch basin or waste traps required for motor vehicle washing or servicing
facilities, 53.093
Discharges hazardous to life or constitute public nuisances, 53.083
Discharges of unpolluted water, 53.080
Discharges of waters or wastes, 53.081
Grease, oil and sand interceptors, 53.086
Increasing use of process water, 53.084
Industrial wastes; installations, 53.087
Industrial wastes; requirements, 53.088
Limited discharges, 53.082
Measurements, tests and analyses of waters and wastes, 53.089
Permitting substance or matter to flow or pass into public sewers, 53.091
Pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities, 53.085
Protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials, 53.090
Repairing service connection, 53.092
Special agreement and arrangement, 53.094
User Rate Schedule for Charges
Administration, 53.116
Charges generally, 53.110
Definitions, 53.112
Determination of sewer service charges, 53.114
Establishment of a sewer service charge system, 53.113
Purpose, 53.111
Sewer service fund, 53.115
Index 31
SHADE TREE DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION
Abatement of nuisance, 97.06
Additional duties of City Forester, 97.11
Definitions, 97.02
Diseased trees in streets, 97.12
Inspection and diagnosis, 97.05
Interference prohibited, 97.10
Policy and purpose, 97.01
Procedure for removal of infected trees and wood, 97.07
Scope and adoption by reference, 97.03
Spraying trees, 97.08
Subsidies, 97.13
Transporting wood prohibited, 97.09
Unlawful act, 97.04
SIDEWALKS
Application, 96.04
Bicycles
Right-of-way; sidewalks, 75.05
Construction and reconstruction of roadway surfaces, sidewalks and curbs and gutters, 96.06
Curb and gutter street and sidewalk painting or coloring, 96.16
Curb setback, 96.14
Definitions, 96.01
Ice and snow on public sidewalks, 96.05
Limiting time of railway-street crossing obstruction, 96.10
Motorized vehicles prohibited on sidewalks, 96.17
Obstructions in streets, 96.09
Parades, 96.15
Private use of public streets and parking lots, 96.13
Requirement of sewer and water main service lateral installation, 96.11
Scope and orders of peace officer, 96.03
Sidewalk maintenance and repair, 96.08
Street openings or excavations, 96.07
Traffic and parking control, 96.02
SIGNALS
Driving through private property to avoid traffic signal, 71.02
SIGNS (See also ZONING CODE)
Exempt signs, 152.395
General provisions, 152.390
Prohibited signs, 152.394
32 East Grand Forks - Index
SIGNS (Cont’d)
Safety, visibility, and nuisance provisions, 152.391
Sign performance standards; business and industrial districts, 152.392
Sign performance standards; residential area, 152.393
SIMPLE SUBDIVISION PLATS (See also SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS)
Procedure for Simple Subdivision Plats
Final plat application for simple subdivision plats, 151.047
Preliminary plat application for simple subdivision plats, 151.046
Procedure for simple subdivision plats, 151.045
Recording for simple subdivision plats, 151.048
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (See also ZONING CODE)
(R-1) Single-Family Residential District
Purpose, 152.075
Permitted uses, 152.076
Permitted accessory uses, 152.077
Special uses, 152.078
District performance standards, 152.079
SKATEBOARDS
Roller blades, roller skates, and skateboards, 130.04
Penalty, 130.99
SNOW (See also SIDEWALKS; STREETS)
Ice and snow on public sidewalks, 96.05
SNOWMOBILES
Application of traffic ordinances, 73.03
Definitions, 73.02
Emergency operation permitted, 73.09
Equipment, 73.07
Intent, 73.01
Persons under 18, 73.06
Restrictions, 73.04
Stopping and yielding, 73.05
Unattended snowmobiles, 73.08
SOLICITATION (See also MASSAGE PARLORS)
Massage parlors; solicitation, 114.09
Index 33
SOLICITORS
Definitions, 112.01
Exceptions to definitions, 112.02
Exclusion by placard, 112.09
License ineligibility, 112.04
License suspension and revocation, 112.05
License transferability, 112.06
Licensing; exemptions, 112.03
Prohibited activities, 112.08
Registration, 112.07
SPECIAL USE VEHICLES
Definitions, 77.01
Equipment, required, 77.15
Insurance required, 77.09
Mechanical condition, 77.10
Occupants, 77.11
Operation, 77.02, 77.12
Penalty, 77.99
Permits, 77.03
Application, 77.04
Conditions, 77.07
Display, 77.08
Fee, 77.05
Issuance, 77.08
Suspension and revocation, 77.16
Term, 77.06
Slow moving vehicle emblem, 77.14
Times of operation, 77.12
Traffic laws, application of, 77.13
Vehicle marking, 77.08
SPORTS
Alcoholic beverages
Sports or convention facilities license, 117.14
SPRINKLING (See also WATER SERVICE)
Restricted hours for sprinkling, 52.06
STORM DRAINAGE UTILITY FUND, 54,01
STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY, 54.01
2010 S-1
34 East Grand Forks - Index
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Definitions, 153.02
Enforcement, 153.08
Intent, statement of, 153.01
Penalty, 153.99
Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
Application, 153.04
Approval standards, 153.06
Permits, 153.07
Review, 153.05
STREETS (See also SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS; ZONING CODE)
Alcoholic beverages
Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages on streets, public property, and private
parking lots to which the public has access, 117.12
Application, 96.04
Construction and reconstruction of roadway surfaces, sidewalks and curbs and gutters, 96.06
Curb and gutter street and sidewalk painting or coloring, 96.16
Curb setback, 96.14
Definitions, 96.01
Ice and snow on public sidewalks, 96.05
Limiting time of railway-street crossing obstruction, 96.10
Local limits, 96.12
Motorized vehicles prohibited on sidewalks, 96.17
Naming streets, TSO II
Obstructions in streets, 96.09
Parades, 96.15
Private use of public streets and parking lots, 96.13
Requirement of sewer and water main service lateral installation, 96.11
Scope and orders of peace officer, 96.03
Shade tree disease control
Diseased trees in streets, 97.12
Sidewalk maintenance and repair, 96.08
Planning Commission
Official map of street extensions, 31.28
Street openings or excavations, 96.07
Streets without curb, 72.08
Subdivisions
Streets, 151.106
Traffic and parking control, 96.02
Trees overhanging, 96.18
2010 S-1
Index 34A
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS (See also SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS)
Blocks, 151.108
Design standards, 151.105
Easements, 151.107
Flood plain lands, 151.112
Lots, 151.109
Natural features, 151.110
Public land, 151.111
Sewer facilities, 151.114
Streets, 151.106
Water facilities, 151.113
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS (See also OFFICIAL MAP; ZONING CODE)
Access spacing standards, 151.145
Amendments, 151.007
Compliance with comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, and official map, 151.011
Definitions, 151.010
Design Standards
Blocks, 151.108
Design standards, 151.105
Easements, 151.107
Flood plain lands, 151.112
Lots, 151.109
Natural features, 151.110
Public land, 151.111
Sewer facilities, 151.114
Streets, 151.106
Water facilities, 151.113
Enactment, 151.005
Fees established, 151.009
General Subdivision Procedures
Concept plan meeting and classification, 151.026
Coordination of subdivision plat approval with Polk County Zoning Ordinance, 151.029
Coordination of zoning applications with subdivision approval, 151.028
General subdivision procedures, 151.025
Official submission date, 151.027
2010 S-1
34B East Grand Forks - Index
Index 35
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS (Cont’d)
Interpretation, conflict, and separability, 151.006
Jurisdiction, 151.003
Penalty, 151.999
Platting authority, 151.004
Premature Subdivisions
Burden of evidence, 151.132
Condition establishing premature subdivisions, 151.131
Premature subdivisions, 151.130
Presentation Requirements
Concept plan, 151.090
Final plat presentation requirements, 151.092
Preliminary plat presentation requirements, 151.091
Procedure for Major Subdivision Plats
Final plat application for major subdivision plats, 151.077
Preliminary plat application for major subdivision plats, 151.076
Procedure for major subdivision plats, 151.075
Recording for major subdivision plats, 151.078
Procedure for Minor Subdivision Plats
Final plat application for minor subdivision plats, 151.062
Preliminary plat application for minor subdivision plats, 151.061
Procedure for minor subdivision plats, 151.060
Recording for minor subdivision plats, 151.063
Procedure for Simple Subdivision Plats
Final plat application for simple subdivision plats, 151.047
Preliminary plat application for simple subdivision plats, 151.046
Procedure for simple subdivision plats, 151.045
Recording for simple subdivision plats, 151.048
Purpose, 151.002
Required improvements, 151.120
Title, 151.001
Variances, 151.008
SUNDAY SALES (See also ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; INTOXICATING LIQUOR)
Intoxicating liquor; Sunday sales, 117.49
SUPPORT TOWERS (See also BUILDING REGULATIONS)
Amateur radio support towers, 150.12
SURFACE RUNOFF
Surface runoff or groundwater connections prohibited, 53.062
36 East Grand Forks - Index
TAXICABS
Definitions, 113.01
Insurance required, 113.04
License issuance and display and vehicle marking, 113.03
License required, 113.02
Mechanical condition, 113.06
Rates and hours of operation, 113.05
TOBACCO (See also BUSINESS LICENSING)
Generally, 110.26
TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Basis for denial of license, 116.05
Compliance checks and inspections, 116.10
Definitions, 116.02
Fees, 116.04
License, 116.03
Penalty, 116.99
Prohibited sales, 116.06
Purpose, 116.01
Responsibility, 116.09
Self-service sales, 116.08
Vending machines, 116.07
Violations, 116.98
TRAFFIC, GENERAL PROVISIONS (See also SIDEWALKS; SPECIAL USE VEHICLES;
STREETS)
Bicycles
Traffic laws apply, 75.01
Definitions, 70.02
Penalty, 70.99
Snowmobiles
Application of traffic ordinances, 73.03
Statutes adopted by reference, 70.01
Traffic and parking control, 96.02
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS (See also SPECIAL USE VEHICLES)
Designated roadways for use by four-wheel all-terrain vehicles, Ch. 76, Sched. I
Driving through private property to avoid traffic signal, 71.02
Exhibition driving, 71.03
Left turns prohibited, 71.06
Recreational motor vehicle regulations, 71.04
Truck route, 71.01
U-turns, 71.05
2010 S-1
Index 37
TRAILERS
House trailer, camping trailer, other trailers and bus parking, 72.04
Zoning
Travel trailers and travel vehicles, 152.299
TRASH (See also GARBAGE AND REFUSE)
Meddling with trash receptacles prohibited, 51.04
TREASURER (See also CITY GOVERNMENT)
City Administrator/Clerk Treasurer position description, 30.10
Clerk and Treasurer offices combined, 30.09
TREES (See also GARBAGE AND REFUSE; SHADE TREE DISEASE CONTROL AND
PREVENTION)
Collection of leaves, trees or tree limbs, 51.14
Diseased trees in streets, 97.12
Overhanging streets, 96.18
Procedure for removal of infected trees and wood, 97.07
Spraying trees, 97.08
TRUCKS
Truck parking, 72.11
Truck route, 71.01
TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (See also ZONING CODE)
(R-2) Two-Family Residential District
District performance standards, 152.094
Permitted accessory uses, 152.092
Permitted uses, 152.091
Purpose, 152.090
Special uses, 152.093
U-TURNS
Generally, 71.05
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY (See also ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES, EXCESS PROPERTY
AND UNCLAIMED PROPERTY)
Disposal of unclaimed property, 94.01
2010 S-1
38 East Grand Forks - Index
URBAN BUSINESS RESERVE DISTRICT (See also ZONING CODE)
(UBR) Urban Business Reserve District
District performance standards, 152.179
Permitted accessory uses, 152.177
Permitted uses, 152.176
Purpose, 152.175
Special uses, 152.178
URBAN DISTRICTS (See also ZONING CODE)
Urban business reserve district
(UBR) Urban business reserve district
District performance standards, 152.179
Permitted accessory uses, 152.177
Permitted uses, 152.176
Purpose, 152.175
Special uses, 152.178
Urban expansion reserve cluster district
(UER-C) Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster District
District performance standards, 152.159
Permitted accessory uses, 152.157
Permitted uses, 152.156
Purpose, 152.155
Special uses, 152.158
Urban expansion reserve district
(UER) Urban Expansion Reserve District
District performance standards, 152.139
Permitted accessory uses, 152.137
Permitted uses, 152.136
Purpose, 152.135
Special uses, 152.138
URBAN EXPANSION RESERVE CLUSTER DISTRICT (See also ZONING CODE)
(UER-C) Urban Expansion Reserve Cluster District
District performance standards, 152.159
Permitted accessory uses, 152.157
Permitted uses, 152.156
Purpose, 152.155
Special uses, 152.158
Index 39
URBAN EXPANSION RESERVE DISTRICT (See also ZONING CODE)
(UER) Urban Expansion Reserve District
District performance standards, 152.139
Permitted accessory uses, 152.137
Permitted uses, 152.136
Purpose, 152.135
Special uses, 152.138
UTILITIES GENERALLY
Contractual contents, 50.03
Definitions, 50.01
Electric energy franchise, 50.04
Fixing rates and charges, 50.02
Rules and Regulations Relating to City Utilities
Application, connection and sale of service, 50.21
City utility service outside the city, 50.29
City utility services and charges a lien, 50.27
Damage to city utility plant, fixture, equipment or appurtenance, 50.28
Disconnection for late payment, 50.20
Discontinuance of service, 50.22
Limitation of liability for interruption of electric service, 50.30
Meter test, 50.25
Ownership of city utilities, 50.23
Right of entry, 50.24
Unlawful acts, 50.26
Toilet installation required, 50.05
VENDING WAGONS (See also BUSINESS LICENSING)
Generally, 110.31
WASTEWATER (See also SEWER REGULATIONS)
Discharge of wastewater or other polluted waters, 53.016
Penalty, 53.999
Private Wastewater Disposal
Application of subchapter, 53.040
Direct connection required, 53.038
Operation and maintenance by owner, 53.039
Permits, 53.036
Public sewer not available, 53.035
Type, capacities, location and layout, 53.037
WATER MAIN (See also SIDEWALKS; STREETS)
Requirement of sewer and water main service lateral installation, 96.11
40 East Grand Forks - Index
WATER SERVICE (See also UTILITIES GENERALLY)
Abandonment of service lines, 52.03
Deficiency of water and shutting off water, 52.01
Opening hydrants, 52.08
Private fire hose connections, 52.07
Private water supplies, 52.05
Repair of leaks, 52.02
Restricted hours for sprinkling, 52.06
Service pipes, 52.04
WEAPONS
Confiscation, 132.05
Definitions, 132.01
Discharging firearms, 132.04
Possession prohibited, 132.02
Transportation of an assault weapon or firearm, 132.03
Use of bow and arrow, 132.06
WEEDS (See also NUISANCES)
Abatement by city, 98.42
Appeals, 98.41
Definitions; exclusions, 98.37
Filing complaint, 98.39
Jurisdiction, 98.36
Liability, 98.43
Notice of violations, 98.40
Owners responsible for trimming, removal and the like, 98.38
Penalty, 98.99
Short title, 98.35
WILD ANIMALS (See also ANIMALS)
Generally, 95.17
WIND ENERGY CONSERVATION (See also ZONING CODE)
Wind energy conversion system, 152.370
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWERS (See also ZONING CODE)
Procedure; satellite dishes, 152.316
Procedure; wireless communication antennas and towers, 152.317
Purpose, 152.315
Index 41
WOOD (See also FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION; SHADE TREES DISEASE
PREVENTION)
Firewood Storage
Conditions of storage, 93.22
Exemptions, 93.23
Existing wood piles, 93.24
Penalty, 93.99
Scope, 93.21
Statement of policy, 93.20
Procedure for removal of infected trees and wood, 97.07
Transporting wood prohibited, 97.09
WORKER’S COMPENSATION (See also CITY POLICIES)
Generally, 32.01
ZONING CODE (See also OFFICIAL MAP; SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS; ZONING CODE;
ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS)
Administration
Administration, 152.020
Appeals, 152.021
Application information, 152.025
Fees, 152.026
Financial guarantee, 152.027
Special use permits, 152.022
Variances, 152.023
Zoning amendments, 152.024
Application, 152.003
Comprehensive revision, 152.005
Definitions, 152.006
General Performance Standards
Application, 152.291
Architectural requirements, 152.292
Building performance standards, 152.293
Flood control easements, 152.300
Landscaping standards, 152.294
Manufactured home courts and mobile homes, 152.295
Purpose, 152.290
Refuse, 152.296
Residential yard storage, 152.297
Screening, 152.298
Travel trailers and travel vehicles, 152.299
2010 S-1
42 East Grand Forks - Index
ZONING CODE (Cont’d)
General Zoning District Provisions
Annexation, 152.062
Establishing zoning districts, 152.055
Flooding, 152.061
Rights-of-way, 152.058
Road vacation, 152.057
Water areas, 152.059
Zoning district boundaries, 152.056
Zoning map, 152.060
Penalty, 152.999
Planning Commission
Zoning plan, 31.27
Purposes and intent, 152.002
Statute reference, 152.004
Title, 152.001
ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS, TSO IV
2010 S-1
1
ORDINANCE NO. 1 - 4th SERIES
CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS
POLK COUNTY
STATE OF
MINNESOTA
AN AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 150 OF THE CITY CODE OF
EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA.
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING CHAPTER 150 BY ADDING THE MINNESOTA
ELECTRICAL ACT TO CHAPTER 150 OF THE CITY CODE
The City of East Grand Forks ordains:
SECTION 1: AMENDMENT
Chapter 150 of the East Grand Forks City Code is hereby amended with Ordinance No. 1 - 4th
Series by adding The Minnesota Electrical Act to as Chapter 150, Section 150.15 of the City
Code which shall read as follows:
Section 1. Authority to inspect. The City of East Grand Forks hereby
provides for the inspection of all electrical installations, pursuant
to Minn. Stat. § 326B.36. subd. 6.
Section 2. Adopted by reference. The Minnesota Electrical Act, as
adopted by the Commissioner of Labor and Industry pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes Chapter 326B, Sections 326B.31 to
326B.399. The Minnesota Electrical Act is hereby incorporated
into this ordinance as if fully set out herein. The Minnesota State
Building Code incorporates by reference the National Electrical
Code pursuant to Minn. R. 1315.0020. All such codes
incorporated herein by reference constitute the electrical code of
the City of the City of East Grand Forks.
Section 3. Compliance. All electrical installations shall comply with the
requirements of the electrical code of the City of East Grand
Forks and this ordinance.
Section 4. Permits and fees. The issuance of permits and the collection
of fees shall be as authorized in Minnesota Statutes 326B.37.
Any inspection or handling fees will be payable to the City of
East Grand Forks.
2
Section 5. Notice and appeal. All notices of violations and orders issued
under this ordinance shall be in conformance with Minn. Stat. §
326B.36, subd. 4.
Section 6. Violations and penalties. A violation of the Minnesota
Electrical Act is a misdemeanor. (M.S. 326B.082, subd. 16).
Section 7. Term. Once the Department of Labor and Industry is funded for
the 2011 fiscal year by legislative enactment of a state budget the
City of East Grand Forks will have the State of Minnesota
Inspectors resume performing electrical inspections. However,
should the State of Minnesota fail to fund the Department of
Labor and Industry in the future the City of East Grand Forks
retains the option of providing for the inspection of electrical
installations, pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 326B.36. subd. 6.
SECTION 2. PURPOSE
The purpose of this amendment is to establish an electrical inspections program in the City of
East Grand Forks that is administered and enforced by the City.
SECTION 3: SUMMARY
The following official summary of Ordinance No. 1 – 4th Series has been approved by the City
Council of the City of East Grand Forks as clearly informing the public of the intent and effect
of the Ordinance.
It is the intent and effect of Ordinance No. 1 – 4th Series to establish an electrical inspections
program in the City of East Grand Forks that is administered and enforced by the City, as
permitted in Minn. Stat. § 326B.36, subd. 6.
SECTION 4: EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and
publication and be given the Number 1, 4th Series.
Voting Aye: Tweten, Gregoire, Leigh, Pokrzywinski, DeMers, and Vonasek.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: Buckalew.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
3
ATTEST: PASSED: August 2, 2011
______________________________ ______________________________
Scott Huizenga Wayne Gregoire
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer Vice-President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 2nd day of August, 2011.
______________________________
Lynn Stauss
Mayor
1
ORDINANCE NO. 2 - 4th SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA, AMENDING
CITY CODE SECTION, TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES, TABLE I. ENTITLED
“FRANCHISE” BY EXTENDING THE TERM OF THE FRANCHISE TO THE EAST
GRAND FORKS WATER AND LIGHT DEPARTMENT PURSUANT TO CITY CODE
TITLE V, CHAPTER 50, SECTION 50.04 ENTITLED “ELECTRIC ENERGY FRANCHISE”
TO DECEMBER 31, 2015; AND BY ADOPTING BY REFERENCE CITY CODE CHAPTER
I. AND SECTION 10.99 WHICH, AMONG OTHER THINGS, CONTAIN PENALTY
PROVISIONS.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. That the table of special ordinances of the City Code is hereby amended to
read as follows, to-wit:
Subd. 2. GRANT OF FRANCHISE. The City hereby grants to the Franchisee, for a
period extending to December 31, 2015, the right to transmit, furnish, deliver or receive
electric energy within the limits of the City as they now exist or as they may be extended
or revised in the future. For those purposes, Franchisee may establish the necessary
facilities and equipment in and along the streets and public places within the City. The
Franchisee may also do reasonable things necessary or customary to accomplish those
purposes, subject, however to the further provisions of this franchise.
Section 2. City Code Chapter i entitled "General Provisions Applicable to Entire City
Code Including Penalty for Violation" and Section 10.99 entitled "General Penalty" are hereby
adopted in their entirety, by reference, as though repeated verbatim herein.
Section 3. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and
publication and be given the Number 2 - 4th Series.
Voting Aye: Pokrzywinski, DeMers, Vonasek, Buckalew, Tweten, Gregoire, and Leigh.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: None.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
ATTEST: PASSED: September 6, 2011
______________________________ ______________________________
City Administrator President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 6th day of September, 2011.
______________________________
Mayor
ORDINANCE NO. 3 4TH SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA, AMENDING CITY
CODE TITLE XV ENTITLED "LAND USAGE" BY AMENDING CHAPTER 151
“SUBDIVISION REGULATION” WITH THE ADDITION OF SECTIONS 151.030
“DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT” AND 151.121 “IMPROVEMENT FINANCING”. SECTION
151.120 “REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS” IS ALSO AMENDED WITH THE ADDITION OF
THE UNDERLNED PORTIONS.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. That Chapter 151 entitled “Subdivision Regulations” shall have the following
additions:
Section 151.030 Development Agreement
Before a final plat may be approved by the city council, the owners of the development shall
execute and submit to the council an agreement, subject to review and approval by the City
Attorney, which shall be binding on the owners and their heirs, personal representatives and
assigns, that no private construction on said land will occur except with approval of the city
engineer, until all improvements required under this chapter have been petitioned for arranged
for, or have been constructed. The developers agreement embodies the modifications and
conditions of approval of the plat, and contains such other terms and conditions as the City may
require to impose, enforce and make effective such modifications and conditions. The
development agreement shall be recorded if requested by the City, at the expense of applicant.
Section 151.121 Improvement Financing
All utilities and streets shall be financed by one of the following methods. Regardless of the
method used, all utilities and streets shall be installed according to city construction
specifications and shall be approved by the city engineer prior to commencement of any
construction activity. All public improvements shall be subject to review and approval by the
city engineer. Improvement financing shall as follows:
1. Provided by the City of East Grand Forks through a special assessment at the developer’s
request;
2. Developer obtained financing; or
3. Under special circumstances the developer may request alternate payment arrangements.
Section 1. That Chapter 151 entitled “Subdivision Regulations” shall have the following
modification, adding the underlined portions:
Section 151.120 Required Improvements, Streets, Street Paving, and Sidewalks.
All the streets shall be provided in accordance with engineering specifications established by the
Council. Street paving shall be installed on a schedule as outlined in the development
agreement, with non-binding, good-faith cost estimates provided for each lot. Sidewalks shall be
installed per 151.106(12). Street paving and sidewalks shall be installed within three (3) years of
City Council approval of the Development Agreement.
Section 3. City Code Title I, Chapter 10 entitled "General Provisions” applicable to entire city
code including penalty for violation and Section 10.99 entitled "General Penalty" are hereby
adopted in their entirety, by reference, as though repeated verbatim herein.
Section 4. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and
publication and be given the Number 3, 4th Series.
Voting Aye: DeMers, Vonasek, Buckalew, Tweten, Gregoire, Leigh, and Pokrzywinski.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: None.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
ATTEST:
PASSED: January 3, 2012
______________________________ ______________________________
City Administrator President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 3rd day of January, 2012.
______________________________
Mayor
1
ORDINANCE NO. 4 - 4TH SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA, TO
AMEND TITLE XV LAND USAGE CHAPTER 10 TO ESTABLISH RULES AND
REGULATIONS RELATIVE TO GROUND/STREET LEVEL RESIDENTIAL OR
SENIOR HOUSING IN THE DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL (C-1) DISTRICT; AND BY
ADOPTING BY REFERENCE CITY CODE CHAPTER 10 AND SECTION 10.99
WHICH, AMONG OTHER THINGS, CONTAIN PENALTY PROVISIONS.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. That Chapter 152 entitled “Zoning Code shall have the following changes:
a. That in the (C-1) Downtown Commercial District Section §152.196 (U) shall be
removed and the following language shall be inserted:
U. Combination of residential or senior citizens housing with Commercial
uses (mixed use) provided that:
1. No less than 35% of the main/street level is a commercial use
permitted in the C-1 district.
2. The Commercial use located within the building is adjacent to the
front property line.
Section 2. City Code Chapter 10 entitled "General Provisions” applicable to entire city
code including penalty for violation and Section 10.99 entitled "General Penalty" are hereby
adopted in their entirety, by reference, as though repeated verbatim herein.
Section 3. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and
publication and be given the Number 4 - 4th Series.
Voting Aye: Tweten, Gregoire, Leigh, Pokrzywinski, DeMers, and Vonasek.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: Buckalew.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
ATTEST:
PASSED: July 3, 2012
______________________________ ______________________________
City Administrator Vice-President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 3rd day of July, 2012.
______________________________
Mayor
1
ORDINANCE NO. 5 4th SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA, ANNEXING
THAT PART OF THE SOUTHEAST QUARTER OF THE SOUTHWEST QUARTER OF
SECTION 31, TOWNSHIP 152 NORTH, RANGE 49 WEST OF THE 5th PRINCIPAL
MERIDIAN, LYING EASTERLY OF THE INDUSTRIAL PARK 1st RESUBDIVISION TO
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. This annexation is being passed and adopted pursuant to the provisions of
Minnesota Statute § 414.033 subd. 2 clause 3.
Section 2. The City of East Grand Forks, Minnesota (hereinafter referred to the
“City”) was petitioned by the land owners RJ Zavoral & Sons Inc (hereinafter “RJ Zavoral &
Sons Inc”).
Section 3. The land is unincorporated, abuts the City of East Grand Forks along its
Northeastern boundary and is urban or about to become urban or suburban in nature.
Section 4. None of the property is located in an area designated for orderly
annexation pursuant to Minn. State Section 414.0325.
Section 5. The area to be annexed is 120 acres or less; (5 acres), unplatted,
unpopulated property, not located within the City, and is not presently served by public sewer
facilities or public sewer facilities are not otherwise available.
Section 6. The land is not located within the floodplain or shoreland area.
Section 7. That the Notice requirement for the Public hearing of Minnesota Statute §
414.033 subd. 2b has been met as all interested parties; the town and all landowners within and
contiguious to the area to be annexed have been served by certified mail.
Section 8. The Public hearing required under Minnesota Statute § 414.033 subd. 2b
has been held.
Section 9. That Minnesota Statute § 414.033 subd. 3 does not apply because it is
appropriate for annexation under Minnesota Statute § 414.033 subd. 2, clause 3.
Section 10. The Petitioners were provided the 30 day notice required by Minnesota
Statute § 414.033 subd. 13, however the provisions are not applicable as the cost of electric
2
utility service to the Petitioners will not change as a result of the annexation of the territory into
the municipality.
Section 11. The Corporate limits of the City of East Grand Forks are hereby extended
to include the following described property situated in the County of Polk, State of Minnesota,
legally described as follows, to wit:
That part of the Southeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 31, Township 152
North, Range 49 West of the 5th Principal Meridian, lying easterly of the Industrial Park 1st
Resubdivision to the City of East Grand Forks, Minnesota , Polk County, Minnesota according
to the plat thereof on file and of record in the office of the County Recorder, Polk County,
Minnesota described as follows:
Commencing at the southwest corner of said Section 31; thence northerly along the west line of
said Section 31 having a grid bearing of North 03 degrees 00 minutes 45 seconds West a
distance of 50.00 feet to a line being 50.00 feet northery of and parallel with the south line of
said Section 31; thence easterly along said parallel line North 87 degrees 17 minutes 38 seconds
East a distance of 1864.00 feet to the point of beginning; thence North 03 degrees 00 minutes 45
seconds West along the east boundary line of said Industrial Park 1st Resubdivision a distance
of 442.52 feet to the northeast corner of Lot "D", Block 2, Industrial Park 1st Resubdivision;
thence North 87 degrees 00 minutes 06 seconds East along the easterly extension of the north
line of said Lot "D", Block 2, Industrial Park 1st Resubdivision a distance of 578.46 feet to a
line being 578.46 feet easterly of and parallel with the easterly line of said Lot "D", Block 2,
Industrial Park 1st Resubdivision; thence South 03 degrees 00 minutes 45 seconds East along
said parallel line a distance of 445.47 feet to a line being 50.00 feet northerly of and parallel
with the south line of said Section 31; thence South 87 degrees 17 minutes 38 seconds West
along said parallel line a distance of 578.47 feet to the point of beginning.
Containing 5.90 acres more or less.
Copies of the of the Corporate Boundary map showing the property to be annexed and its
relationship to the corporate boundaries are hereby attached.
Section 12. Reimbursement of the property taxes to the Town shall be based on the
property taxes collected by the Town in the last year it collected taxes on the annexed area. The
reimbursement shall be paid in substantially equal payments over two to eight years in
accordance with the 2006 amendments to Minn. Stat. §414.036.
3
Section 13. That pursuant to Minnesota Statutes § 414.036 with respect to any special
assessments assigned by the Town to the annexed property and any portion of debt incurred by
the Town prior to the annexation and attributable to the property to be annexed, but for which no
special assessments are outstanding, for the area legally described herein and there are no special
assessments or debt incurred by the Town on the subject are for which reimbursement is
required.
Section 14. The City Administrator/Clerk Treasurer is hereby directed to file certified
copies of this ordinance with the Minnesota Municipal Board of the Office of Administrative
Hearings, Sullivan Township Clerk, Polk County Auditor, and the Minnesota Secretary of State.
Section 15. City Code Chapter 10 entitled Definitions and General Provisions
Applicable to the Enitre City Code Including Penalty for violation is hereby adopted in its
entirety, by reference, as repeated verbatium herein.
Section 16. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage
and publication and final upon the date this Ordinance is approved by the Office of
Administrative Hearings. Further it shall be given number 5 4th series, and after its approval by
the Office of Administrative Hearings.
Voting Aye: Gregoire, Leigh, Pokrzywinski, DeMers, Vonasek, Buckalew, and Tweten.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: None.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
ATTEST: PASSED: December 18th, 2012
__________________________________ ___________________________________
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 18th day of December, 2012.
___________________________________
Mayor
1
ORDINANCE NO. 6 4TH SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA,
AMENDING CITY CODE TITLE XV LAND USAGE BY ADDING CHAPTER 154
ENTITLED "ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION ORDINANCE” AND BY
ADOPTING BY REFERENCE CITY CODE CHAPTER 10 AND SECTION 10.99
WHICH, AMONG OTHER THINGS, CONTAIN PENALTY PROVISIONS.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
SECTION: 1. That Title XV of the City Code is hereby amended to include Chapter 154
Storm Water Management to read as follows, to-wit:
TITLE XV Land Usage
Chapter 154. ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION ORDINANCE
SECTION 154.01. PURPOSE/INTENT.
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of
the citizens of City of East Grand Forks through the regulation of non-storm water discharges to
the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state
law. This ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of
this ordinance are:
(1) To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by storm water discharges
by any user.
(2) To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4.
(3) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring,
and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance.
SECTION 154.02. DEFINITION.
For purposes of this ordinance, the following shall mean:
Authorized Enforcement Agency. Employees or designees of the Director of the
municipal department designated to enforce this ordinance.
Best Management Practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices,
maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of
pollutants directly or indirectly to storm water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance
systems. BMP’s also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
2
Clean Water Act. The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.),
and any subsequent amendments thereto.
Construction Activity. Activities subject to NPDES Construction Permits. These include
construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include
but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
Hazardous Materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination
thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious
characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard
to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
Illegal Discharge. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the storm drain
system, except as exempted in Section 8 of this ordinance.
Illicit Connections. An illicit connection is defined as either of the following:
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that allows an illegal discharge to
enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances that allow any nonstorm
water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm
drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or
approved by an authorized enforcement agency or,
Any drain or conveyance from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system that
has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by Public Works
Department
Industrial Activity. Activity subject to NPDES Industrial Storm Water Permits as
defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14).
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4). The system of conveyances (including
sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
man-made channels, or storm drains) owned and operated by the City of East Grand Forks and
designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water, and that is not used for collecting or
conveying sewage.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge
Permit. Means a permit issued by EPA (or by a State under authority delegate pursuant to 33
USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,
whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
Non-Storm Water Discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not
composed entirely of storm water.
3
Person. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other
entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner’s agent.
Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but
are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous
liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded of abandoned
objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution;
floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal
coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues
that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or
unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
Storm Drainage System. Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is collected
and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumped facilities, retention and detention basins,
natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
Storm Water. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from
any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
Storm Water Management Plan. A document which describes the Best Management
Practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of
pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
Storm Water, Storm Water Conveyance System, and/or Receiving Waters to the Maximum
Extent Practicable.
Wastewater. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water, discharge
from a facility.
SECTION 154.03. APPLICABILITY.
This ordinance shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any
developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the Public Works Department.
SECTION 154.04. RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
The Public Works Department shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of
this ordinance. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the Public Works Department may
be delegated in writing by the Director of the Public Works Department to persons or entities
acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the department.
4
SECTION 154.05. COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
This ordinance is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation,
or other provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance are in addition to the requirements
of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of
this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule,
regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher
protective standards for human health or the environment shall control.
SECTION 154.06. SEVERABILITY.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision,
clause, sentence, or paragraph of this ordinance of the application thereof to any person,
establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other
provisions or application of this ordinance.
SECTION 154.07. ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this ordinance are minimum
standards; therefore this ordinance does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will
ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
SECTION 154.08. DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
8.1. Prohibition of Illegal Discharges.
No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow other under its
control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the MS4 any pollutants or waters containing
any pollutants, other than storm water.
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain
system is prohibited except as described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this
ordinance: water line flushing, landscape irrigation, diverted stream flows, rising ground
waters, uncontaminated ground water infiltration, uncontaminated pump ground water,
discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation,
irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering,
individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated
swimming pool discharges, and street wash water.
(2) Discharges or flow from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the
Public Works Department as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
(3) Discharge associated with dye testing, however this activity requires a verbal notification
to the Public Works Department prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge permitted under an
NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and
administered under the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the
5
permit, waiver, or other and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that
written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
8.2. Prohibition of Illicit Connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the
storm drain system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the
past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this ordinance if the person connects a line
conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
(4) Improper connection is a violation of this ordinance must be disconnected and redirected,
if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer
system upon approval of the Public Works Department.
(5) Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and
which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or
occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the Public
Works Department requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a
reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be
determined, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or
other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system,
sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these
investigations are to be documented and provided to the Public Works Department.
SECTION 154.09. WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person’s
lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash,
debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly
retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures
will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
SECTION 154.10. INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY
DISCHARGES.
10.1. Submission of NOI to City of East Grand Forks.
(1) Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge
permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit
may be required in a form acceptable to the Public Works Department prior to the allowing of
discharges to the MS4.
6
(2) The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required to have an NPDES permit
to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity shall submit a copy of the Notice of
Intent (NOI) to the Public Works Department at the same time the operator submits the original
Notice of Intent to the EPA/MPCA as applicable.
(3) The copy of the Notice of Intent may be delivered to the Public Works Department either
in person or by mailing it to:
City of East Grand Forks
ATTENTION: Public Works Department
600 Demers Ave.
East Grand Forks, MN 56721
(4) A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is discharging storm
water associated with industrial activity without having submitted a copy of the Notice of Intent
to do so to the Public Works Department.
SECTION 154.11. COMPLIANCE MONITORING.
11.1. Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling.
The Public Works Department shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to
regulation under this ordinance as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this
ordinance.
(1) If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to
allow access to representatives of the Public Works Department.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the Public Works Department ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that
must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the
performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
(3) The Public Works Department shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such
devices as are necessary in the opinion of the Public Works Department to conduct monitoring
and/ or sampling of the facility’s storm water discharge.
(4) The Public Works Department has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All
devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be
inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral
7
request of the Public Works Department and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such
access shall be borne by the operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Public Works Department access to a permitted
facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this ordinance. A person who is
the operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with
industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the Public Works Department
reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized
or required by this ordinance.
11.2. Search Warrants.
If the Public Works Department has been refused access to any part of the premises from
which storm water is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that
there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part
of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this ordinance
or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the
community, then the Public Works Department may seek issuance of a search warrant from any
court of competent jurisdiction.
SECTION 154.12. REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND
REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS BY THE USE
OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
Public Works Department will adopt requirements identifying Best Management Practice
for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or
contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States. The owner
or operator of such activity, operation, or facility shall provide, at their own expenses, reasonable
protection from accidental discharge or prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal
storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs.
Further, any person responsible for a property or premises that is, or may be, the source
of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person’s expense, additional
structural and non- structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4.
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of
storm water associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed in
compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a storm water
management plan (SWMP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES
permit.
SECTION 154.13. NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a
facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has
information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in
illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of
the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment,
8
and cleanup of such release. In the event of such release of hazardous materials said person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch
services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the Public
Works Department in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
Notification in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to
the Public Works Department within 2 business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of
prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or
operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the
actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least 7 years. Failure
to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this ordinance.
SECTION 154.14. VIOLATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES.
14.1. Violation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of
the requirements of this ordinance. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the
provisions of this ordinance, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or
may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public
safety, the Public Works Department is authorized to enter upon the subject private property,
without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or
restore the property. The Public Works Department is authorized to seek costs of the abatement
as outlined in Section 17.
14.2. Warning Notice.
When the Public Works Department finds that any person has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, or any order issued hereunder, the Public Works
Department may serve upon that person a written Warning Notice, specifying the particular
violation believed to have occurred and requesting the discharger to immediately investigate the
matter and to seek a resolution where by any offending discharge will cease. Investigation and/or
resolution of the matter in response to the Warning Notice in no way relieves the alleged violator
of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the Warning Notice. Nothing in
this subsection shall limit the authority of the Public Works Department to take any action,
including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a Warning
Notice.
14.3. Notice of Violation.
Whenever the Public Works Department finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this ordinance, the Public Works Department may order
compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person.
The Notice of Violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the alleged violator;
(2) The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which
the violation is occurring, or has occurred;
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
9
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this
ordinance and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to
whom the notice of violation is directed;
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Public Works
Department by filing a written notice of appeal within 10 days of service of notice of
violation; and
(7) A statement specifying that, should the violator fail to restore compliance within the
established time schedule, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or
a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. Such notice may
require without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(3) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
(4) The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards
and the restoration of any affected property
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
14.4. Compensatory Action.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this ordinance,
the Public Works Department may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions,
such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
14.5. Suspension of MS4 Access.
14.6.1. Emergency Cease and Desist Orders
When the Public Works Department finds that any person has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, or any order issued hereunder, or
that the person’s past violations are likely to recur, and that the person’s violation(s) has
(have) caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of
the United States which reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, the Public Works
Department may issue an order to the violator directing it immediately to cease and desist
all such violations and directing the violator to:
(1) Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and
(2) Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a
continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations
and/or terminating the discharge. Any person notified of an emergency order
directed to it under this Subsection shall immediately comply and stop or
eliminate its endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger’s failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the Public Works
Department may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize
harm to the MS4 or waters of the United States, and/or endangerment to persons
or to the environment, including immediate termination of a facility’s water
10
supply, sewer connection, or other municipal utility services. The Public Works
Department may allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Public Works Department that the period
of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated
against the discharger under this ordinance. A person that is responsible, in whole
or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a
detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Public Works
Department within 20 days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an
emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the violator.
14.6.2. Suspension due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations
The Public Works Department may, without prior notice, suspend MS4
discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to
the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the
United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an
emergency, the Public Works Department may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize
danger to persons.
14.6.3. Suspension due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge
Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this ordinance may have their
MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The
Public Works Department will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4
access. The violator may petition the Public Works Department for a reconsideration
and hearing.
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises
terminated pursuant to this Section, without the prior approval of the Public Works
Department.
14.7. Civil Penalties.
In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice
of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within 3 days, or such
greater period as the Public Works Department shall deem appropriate, after the Public Works
Department has taken one or more of the actions described above, the Public Works Department
may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for
each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation.
14.8. Criminal Prosecution.
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this ordinance shall be liable to
criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of
$1,000.00 per violation per day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 90 days
or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute
a separate offense.
11
SECTION 15. APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the determination of the Public
Works Department. The notice of appeal must be received within 3 days from the date of the
Notice of Violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee
shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of
the municipal authority or their designee shall be final.
SECTION 154.16. ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice
of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 7 days or longer if allowed by the Public Works
Department, of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the Public
Works Department, then representatives or the Public Works Department shall enter upon the
subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person
in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor
to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
SECTION 154.17. COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.
Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified
of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written
protest objection to the amount of the assessment within 7 days. If the amount due is not paid
within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the
expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment
against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the City
of East Grand Forks by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than six
(6) equal payments, unless a different term is agreed upon by the municipal authority. Interest at
the rate of 10 percent per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the 3rd day
following discovery of the violation.
SECTION 154.18. VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or
permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of the ordinance is a threat to public
health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily
abated or restored at the violator’s expense, and/or civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
SECTION 154.19. REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available
under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the Public Works
Department to seek cumulative remedies.
12
The Public Works Department may recover all attorney’s fees court costs and other
expenses associated with enforcement of this ordinance, including sampling and monitoring
expenses.
SECTION 154.20 PENALTIES
(1) Fines. Any person who is found to have violated an order of the Public Works
Department, Board of Appeals (City Administrator), or City Council, or the
control authority, or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with any
provision of this chapter, and the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued
hereunder, shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a
separate and distinct offense.
(2) Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false statement,
representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other
document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or who
falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or
method required under this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine
of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per incident.
SECTION 2.
City Code Chapter 10 entitled "General Provisions” Including Penalty for Violation and
Section 10.99 entitled "General Penalties" are hereby adopted in their entirety, by reference, as
though repeated verbatim herein.
SECTION 3.
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and
publication and be given the Number 6, 4th Series.
VOTING AYE: Grassel, Vetter, Vonasek, Buckalew, Tweten, and Leigh
VOTING NAY: None
ABSENT: Olstad
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
ATTEST: PASSED: February 19, 2013
______________________________ ______________________________
Clerk-Treasurer President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 19th day of February 2013.
______________________________
Mayor
ORDINANCE NO. 7 4th SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA, REVOKING IN
ITS ENTIRETY TITLE IX, CHAPTER 99: BACKGROUND CHECKS; MUNICPAL
EMPLOYEES AND APPOINTEES AND REPLACING IT WITH CHAPTER 99
ORDINANCE RELATING TO CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND FOR APPLICANTS
FOR CITY EMPLOYMENT AND CITY LICENSES;
AND BY ADOPTING BY REFERENCE CITY CODE CHAPTER 10 AND SECTION 10.99
WHICH, AMONGST OTHER THINGS CONTAINS PENALTY PROVISIONS.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1. That the East Grand Forks City Code shall be amended by replacing the current Title
IX, Chapter 99 and adding a new Chapter 99, as follows:
CHAPTER 99
CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND FOR APPLICANTS FOR CITY
EMPLOYMENT AND CITY LICENSES
SECTION 99.01:
APPLICANTS FOR CITY EMPLOYMENT
PURPOSE: The purpose and intent of this section is to establish regulations that
will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota’s Computerized Criminal
History information for specified non-criminal purposes of employment
background checks for the positions described in Section 99.02.
SECTION 99.02
CRIMINAL HISTORY EMPLOYMENT BACKGROUND
INVESTIGATIONS: The East Grand Forks Police Department is hereby
required, as the exclusive entity within the City, to do a criminal history
background investigation on the applicants for the following positions within the
city, unless the city’s hiring authority concludes that a background investigation
is not needed:
Employment positions “all regular part-time or full-time employees of the City of
East Grand Forks and other positions that work with children or vulnerable
adults”
In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen
employment applicants, the Police Department is authorized to access data
maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions Computerized
Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data
that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police Department under
the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official (Chief of Police) or his
or her designee. A summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal History
data may be released by the Police Department to the hiring authority, including
the City Council, the City Administrator, or other city staff involved in the hiring
process.
Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Police
Department by written consent to undertake the investigation. The written
consent must fully comply with the provisions of Minn. Stat. Chap. 13 regarding
the collection, maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions
set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 364.09, the city will not reject an
applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction unless
the crime is directly related to the position of employment sought and the
conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail
sentence. If the City rejects the applicant's request on this basis, the City shall
notify the applicant in writing of the following:
A. The grounds and reasons for the denial.
B. The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota
Statutes Section 364.06.
C. The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment.
D. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
SECTION: 99.03
APPLICANTS FOR CITY LICENSES
PURPOSE: The purpose and intent of this section is to establish regulations that
will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota’s Computerized Criminal
History information for specified non-criminal purposes of licensing background
checks.
SECTION 99.04
CRIMINAL HISTORY LICENSE BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS:
The East Grand Forks Police Department is hereby required, as the exclusive
entity within the City, to do a criminal history background investigation on the
applicants for the licenses required in the within the city as set forth in Tile XI
BUSINESS REGULATIONS.
In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen
license applicants, the Police Department is authorized to access data maintained
in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions Computerized Criminal
History information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any data that is
accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police Department under the
care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or his or her designee. A
summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal History data may be
released by the Police Department to the licensing authority, including the City
Council, the City Administrator, or other city staff involved the license approval
process.
Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Police
Department by written consent to undertake the investigation. The written
consent must fully comply with the provisions of Minn. Stat. Chap. 13 regarding
the collection, maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions
set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 364.09, the city will not reject an
applicant for a license on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction unless the
crime is directly related to the license sought and the conviction is for a felony,
gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the City rejects the
applicant's request on this basis, the City shall notify the applicant in writing of
the following:
A. The grounds and reasons for the denial.
B. The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota
Statutes Section 364.06.
C. The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the license.
D. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
Section 2. City Code Title 1 General Provisions, Chapter 10 entitled General Provisions are
hereby adopted in their entirety, by reference, as though repeated verbatim herein.
Section 3. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force after its passage, publication and then
beginning on March 5, 2013. It shall be given the Number 7, 4th
Series.
Voting Aye: Vonasek, Buckalew, Olstad, Leigh, Grassel, and Vetter.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: Tweten
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
ATTEST:
PASSED: March 5 , 2013
______________________________ ______________________________
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 5th day March, 2013.
______________________________
Mayor
Adopted by the City Council this 5th day of March, 2013.
1
ORDINANCE NO. 8 4TH SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA,
AMENDING CITY CODE PROVISION IN TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE, CHAPTER 72
ENTITLED “PARKING REGULATIONS” BY AMENDING SECTION 72.10
PARAGRAPH (D) SNOW EMERGENCY AND BY ADOPTING BY REFERENCE CITY
CODE CHAPTER 10 AND SECTION 10.99 WHICH, AMONG OTHER THINGS,
CONTAIN PENALTY PROVISIONS.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. Purpose and Intent. To clarify the city policy regarding parking and snow removal
during a city declared snow emergency.
Section 2. Amendments Chapter 72.10 (D) removing the following:
(D) Snow emergency. A snow emergency automatically goes into effect when 2
inches or more of snow has fallen until the streets are cleaned. Under a snow
emergency, no parking on any city street is allowed until that street has been
cleared to its full width. Violators will be ticketed and towed
Section 3. Chapter 72.10 (D) as it will read when amended:
(D) Snow Emergency.
(1). Definition. For purposes of this section, the term "emergency" means a condition
created on city streets because of the presence of snow, freezing rain, sleet or ice thereon or other
natural phenomenon which create or are likely to create hazardous road conditions or impede or
are likely to impede the free movement of fire, health, police, emergency or other vehicular
traffic, when the same has been duly declared.
(2). Declaration of Emergency. Whenever in the opinion of the Public Works Director, or
in his or her absence the Chief of Police or City Administrator, an emergency exists, he or she
may declare the same and cause an announcement thereof to be made to local news media and by
any other means available to the city.
(3). Beginning and Duration of Emergency.
a. The emergency shall begin one hour after announcement to news media.
b. Once declared, the emergency shall remain in effect until all streets are
completely plowed; provided that, the emergency may, in the same manner, be redeclared for
subsequent like periods of time.
2
(4). Unlawful Acts.
a. During an emergency, it is unlawful to park or leave standing any vehicle
upon any city designated emergency route.
b. During an emergency, it is unlawful to park or leave standing any vehicle
upon a street on which parking has been restricted by the declaration of an emergency.
c. A person who violates Subds. 4 (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of a petty
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $300.00 or that amount which may be lawfully
prescribed by a municipality for an ordinance violation that is defined as a misdemeanor.
(5). Exceptions. This section shall not apply to:
a. Persons in charge of wreckers or authorized emergency vehicles while
actually servicing mechanical, fire, police or medical emergencies; or
b. Any street when it has been fully and completely (curb-to-curb) cleared,
sanded, salted or cleaned.
(6). Towing. Any police officer may order the removal of a vehicle from a street to a
garage or other place of safety when the vehicle is left unattended and constitutes an obstruction
to traffic or hinders snow removal, street improvements or maintenance operations. The vehicle
shall not be released until the fees for towing and storage are paid in addition to any fine imposed
for violation of this chapter.
(7). Rules and Regulations. Rules and regulations relating to snow removal shall be in
accordance with the uniform policy promulgated by the City Council. The regulations shall be
posted in the office of the City Administrator and Public Works Department and further notice
may otherwise be given as the Council may direct.
Section 4. City Code Title 1 General Provisions, Chapter 10 entitled General Provisions
are hereby adopted in their entirety, by reference, as though repeated verbatim herein.
Section 5. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force after its passage, publication
and then beginning on April 2, 2013. It shall be given the Number 8, 4th Series.
VOTING AYE: Leigh, Grassel, Vetter, Vonasek, Tweten, and Olstad
VOTING NAY: None
ABSENT: Buckalew
3
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
ATTEST: PASSED: April 2, 2013
______________________________ ______________________________
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer Vice-President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 2nd day of April, 2013.
Mayor
Adopted by the City Council this 2nd day of April, 2013.
ORDINANCE NO. 9, 4th Series
AN ORDINANCE REPEALING AND AMENDING CERTAIN
SECTIONS OF THE CITY CODE DEALING WITH SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESSES AND ADULT USES
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. Section 150.13 of the East Grand Forks City Code is repealed.
Section 2. Section 152.006 of the East Grand Forks City Code is amended by deleting
the definition of “ADULT USES” as follows:
ADULT USES. Uses which include a sexually oriented arcade; sexually oriented
bookstore; sexually oriented video store; sexually oriented store; sexually oriented
cabaret; sexually oriented conversation/rap parlor; sexually oriented massage parlor;
sexually oriented motel; sexually oriented theater; sexually oriented steam room, bath
house or sauna; or a nude model studio. Activities classified as obscene as defined by
M.S.,§ 617.241, as it may be amended from time to time, are not included.
Section 3. Section 152.247 of the East Grand Forks City Code is amended to read as
follows:
§ 152.247 SPECIAL USES
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this subchapter, the
following are special uses in an I-2, General Industrial District, and require a special use
permit based upon procedures and criteria set forth in and regulated by § 152.022.
(A) Adult uses provided that:
(1) The adult use is located 1,000 feet from any other sensitive receptor.
(2) The adult use has frontage on an arterial roadway.
(B) Billboards as regulated by §§ 152.390 et seq.
(C) Bulk fuel storage.
(D) Concrete mixing plant.
(E) Essential services- public utility uses, transmission services, buildings and storage.
(F) Fairs and fairgrounds.
2
(G) Freight transportation terminal.
(H) Grain terminal.
(I) Railroad yard.
(J) Recycling center.
(K) Salvage yard.
(L) Sanitary or demolition landfill.
(M) Solid and hazardous waste transfer station.
(N) Solid waste processing facility.
(0) Wireless communications tower and antennas, as regulated by §§ 152.315 et seq.
(P) Yard and tree waste composting site.
Section 4. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect the day after its passage
and publication and be given the Number 9, 4th Series.
Voting Aye: Buckalew, Tweten, Olstad, Leigh, Grassel, Vetter, and Vonasek.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: None.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
ATTEST: PASSED: May 7, 2013
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 7th day of May, 2013.
Mayor
BE295-271
419932v3 MDT BE295-271
ORDINANCE NO. 10, 4th Series
AN INTERIM ORDINANCE PLACING TEMPORARY
LOCATION REQUIREMENTS ON SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESSES IN THE CITY AND DIRECTING A STUDY
TO BE CONDUCTED
WHEREAS, the City of East Grand Forks has previously determined that sexually oriented
businesses cause secondary effects that are detrimental to the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the City of East Grand Forks; and
WHEREAS, the City’s comprehensive plan, zoning, licensing and development regulations may
not adequately address various impacts to the public health, safety, morals and general welfare that
adult uses and sexually oriented businesses present; and
WHEREAS, to provide for adequate time for study, analysis, and the finalization of a city code
amendments regarding sexually oriented businesses and to preserve the status quo within the City,
the City desires to enact temporary location requirements and a temporary prohibition on the
applications for and the issuance of permits and licenses of sexually oriented businesses.
The City of East Grand Forks Ordains as follows:
SECTION 1. THE FOLLOWING MORATORIUM ORDINANCE IS ADOPTED:
PURPOSE.
1.1. The purpose of this interim ordinance is to protect the planning process and the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of East Grand Forks by placing temporary location
requirements on adult uses within the City. The ordinance will allow adult uses as defined in this
ordinance, but subject to certain location requirements until the City can complete a comprehensive
study and enact permanent zoning regulations relating to adult uses. This ordinance does not have
the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment.
FINDINGS.
2.1. Studies conducted by the Minnesota Attorney General and the Texas City
Attorneys’ Association, as well as the cities of St. Paul, Alexandria, and Rochester, Minnesota;
Indianapolis, Indiana; Phoenix, Arizona; Los Angeles, California; Seattle, Washington; St.
Croix County, Wisconsin; Adams County and the City of Denver, Colorado, have examined the
impact that adult establishments have on their respective communities. These studies concluded
that adult establishments have an adverse impact on surrounding neighborhoods. Those impacts
include increased crime rates, lower property values, increased transiency, neighborhood blight
and potential health risks. The City Council of the City of East Grand Forks recognizes that the
same or similar adverse impacts could occur in a smaller city. Therefore, the City Council makes
the following findings regarding the need to regulate adult establishments:
BE295-271
419932v3 MDT BE295-271
2
a) Adult uses have an impact on the neighborhoods surrounding them, which is distinct
from the impact caused by other commercial uses;
b) Residential neighborhoods located within close proximity to adult theaters,
bookstores and other adult uses experience increased crime rates (sex-related crimes in
particular), lower property values, increased transiency and decreased stability of ownership;
c) The adverse impacts that adult uses have on surrounding areas diminish as the
distance from the adult uses increases;
d) Studies of other cities have shown that among the crimes which tend to increase
either within or in the near vicinity of adult uses are rapes, prostitution, child molestation,
indecent exposure and other lewd and lascivious behavior;
e) Many members of the public perceive areas within which adult uses are located as
less safe than other areas which do not have such uses;
f) Studies of other cities have shown that the values of both commercial and residential
properties either are diminished or fail to appreciate at the rate of other comparable
properties when located in proximity to adult uses; and
2.2 The East Grand Forks City Council finds that adult uses will have secondary effects
upon certain pre-existing land uses within the City.
2.3 The City Council is also concerned that the City’s zoning regulations may be
inadequate to accomplish the purpose for which they were intended.
2.4 In addition to the proper zoning classification of such uses there are a number of
significant planning and land use issues pertaining to the regulation of such uses, including
the following:
a) The particular districts in which such uses shall be allowed as permitted uses;
b) The concentration and density of such uses in the City and its neighborhoods; and
c) The effect of such uses on other uses in the surrounding area.
2.5 There is a need for a study to be conducted so that the City, as part of its planning
process, can adopt comprehensive land use and zoning regulations pertaining to adult uses.
2.6 Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.355, sub. 4, permit the adoption of interim zoning
ordinances during the planning process.
DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings given below:
BE295-271
419932v3 MDT BE295-271
3
3.1. Adult Establishments.
a) any business that devotes a substantial or significant portion of its inventory, stock in
trade, or publicly displayed merchandise, or devotes a substantial or significant portion of its
floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any portion of
the business not open to the public) to, or derives a substantial or significant portion of its
gross revenues from, items, merchandise, devices or other materials distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, exposing, simulating, describing, or
relating to Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas as described herein; or
b) any business that engages in any Adult Use as defined in Section 3.2 of this
ordinance.
3.2. Adult Use. An adult use is any of the activities and businesses described below:
a) Adult Uses. Adult uses include adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult
mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult steam room/bathhouse/sauna
facilities, adult companionship establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult
health/sport clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades,
adult modeling studios, adult hotels/motels, adult body painting studios, and other premises,
enterprises, establishments, businesses or places open to some or all members of the public,
at or in which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description of
Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas which are capable of being seen
by members of the public. Activities classified as obscene as defined by Minnesota Statutes
617.241 are not included.
b) Adult Use- Body Painting Studio: An establishment or business that provides the
service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or non-transparent, to the
body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of Specified
Anatomical Areas.
c) Adult Use- Bookstore: A building or portion of a building used for the barter, rental
or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tape, videotape
or motion picture film if such building or portion of a building is not open to the public
generally and if a substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of Specified Sexual Activities
or Specified Anatomical Areas.
d) Adult Use- Cabaret. A building or portion of a building used for dancing or other
live entertainment that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the presentation,
display, depiction or description of Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical
Areas.
e) Adult Use- Companionship Establishment: A companionship establishment that
provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between
an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
BE295-271
419932v3 MDT BE295-271
4
f) Adult Use- Conversation/Rap Parlor: A conversation/rap parlor that provides the
services of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion, if such service is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified
Anatomical Areas.
g) Adult Use- Health/Sport Club: A health/sport club that is distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
h) Adult Use- Hotel or Motel: Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel from that
minors are specifically excluded from patronage and where material is presented that is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
i) Adult Use- Massage Parlor, Health Club: A massage parlor or health club that
provides the services of massage, if such service is distinguished and characterized by an
emphasis on Specific Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
j) Adult Use- Mini-Motion Picture Theatre: A building or portion of a building with a
capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material if such material is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
a Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
k) Adult Use- Modeling Studio: An establishment whose major business is the
provision, to customers, of figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing
sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engaged in Specified
Sexual Activities or display Specified Anatomical Areas while being observed, painted,
painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such
customers.
l) Adult Use- Motion Picture Arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically
controlled or operated still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished and characterized by an emphasis
on depicting or describing Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
m) Adult Use- Motion Picture Theatre: A building or portion of a building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material if such business as a prevailing
practice presents material distinguished or characterized by a emphasis on Specified Sexual
Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas for observation by patrons therein.
n) Adult Use- Novelty Business: A business that has as a principal activity the sale of
devices that stimulate human genitals or devices that are designed for sexual stimulation.
o) Adult Use- Sauna: A sauna that provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for
the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning,
relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
BE295-271
419932v3 MDT BE295-271
5
p) Adult Use- Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility: A building or portion of a building
used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure,
bathing relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing
agent if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
3.3. Specified Sexual Activities:
Any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other
covering: (1) the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks,
anus, or female breast; (2) sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral
copulation, or sodomy; (3) masturbation, actual or simulated; and (4) excretory functions as
part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in (1) through (3) of this
paragraph.
3.4. Specified Anatomical Areas:
a) The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or anus
with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a
fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; the exposure of any device, costume, or
covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft,
perineum anal region or pubic hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a cover
over the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and gives the
realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola; or
b) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
3.5. Substantial or significant portion means 25% or more.
PLANNING AND ZONING STUDY; MORATORIUM.
4.1 A study is authorized to be conducted by City staff to determine how adult uses
should be regulated within the City. The scope of the study should include, but is not limited to, the
following:
a) The particular zoning districts in which adult establishments should be allowed as
permitted uses;
b) The density and concentration of such uses; and
c) The effect of such uses on other uses in the surrounding area.
4.2 Upon completion of the study, the matter is to be considered by the planning
commission for its review and recommendation to the city council.
4.3 Temporary Location Requirements. Pursuant to Minn. Stat § 462.355, subd. 4, the
following temporary location requirements are imposed on adult uses within the City:
BE295-271
419932v3 MDT BE295-271
6
a) Adult uses are permitted uses in the General Industrial District (I-2) of the City;
b) Adult uses must be located at least 250 feet from the following uses:
1) Property used or zoned for residential uses;
2) A daycare facility, school, library, park, playground, state or federal wildlife
area or preserve; religious institution, or other public recreational facility;
3) Premises licensed under Chapter 117, Alcoholic Beverages; and,
4) Another adult use.
c) Distances must be measured by following a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, between the closest points on the boundary lines of the
parcels where the two uses are located.
4.4 Pending completion of the study and adoption of any amendments to the City's
official controls, a moratorium is established on the issuance of any development approvals,
including but not limited to preliminary plats, re-zonings, variances, conditional use permits, site
plans, or building permits for adult uses, except those proposed to be located in the temporary
area established by Section 4.3 of this ordinance.
4.5 Except in the temporary area established by Section 4.3 of this Ordinance,
applications for any adult uses shall not be accepted by the City nor shall the planning commission
or city council consider or grant approval of any such application during the period of the
moratorium. The moratorium applies to applications that are pending with the City as of the date of
the adoption of this ordinance.
4.6 This ordinance will be effective for a period of 6 months after its effective date.
ENFORCEMENT.
5.1. Violation of any portion of this ordinance shall be a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for up to 90 days and a fine of $1000 or both, plus the costs of prosecution. Each day
that a violation occurs shall be considered a separate offense.
5.2. The City may enforce any provision of this ordinance by mandamus, injunction or
any other appropriate civil remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction.
SEPARABILITY.
6.1 Every section, provision or part of this ordinance is declared separable from every
section, provision or part of this ordinance. If any section, provision, or part of this ordinance is
adjudged to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not invalidate any
other section, provision, or part of this ordinance.
BE295-271
419932v3 MDT BE295-271
7
SECTION 2. EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance shall take effect the day after its adoption and
publication.
Voting Aye: Buckalew, Tweten, Olstad, Leigh, Grassel, Vetter, and Vonasek.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: None.
ATTEST: PASSED: May 7, 2013
_____________________________ ___________________________________
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 7th day of May, 2013.
___________________________________
Mayor
ORDINANCE NO. 11, 4th SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA,
ANNEXING THAT PART OF GOVERNMENT LOT ONE (1), SECTION EIGHTEEN
(18), TOWNSHIP ONE FIFTY-ONE (151) NORTH, RANGE FORTY-NINE (49), WEST
OF THE FIFTH PRINCIPAL MERIDIAN, POLK COUNTY, MINNESOTA.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. This annexation is being passed and adopted pursuant to the provisions of
Minnesota Statute § 414.033 subd. 2 clause 1.
Section 2. The City of East Grand Forks, Minnesota (hereinafter referred to the “City”)
acquired real property from Polk County via warranty deed which was recorded in the office of
the Polk County Recorder as Document number A000596185 on September 16, 2002. Hereby
attached and incorporated by reference.
Section 3. The land abuts the City of East Grand Forks, is urban or suburban in
character and is owned by the City.
Section 4. That the City Council has determined that it is the best interest of the City
that said parcel is to be annexed into the City so that it can have access to all City utilities and
services.
Section 5. That the notice and public hearing requirements of Minnesota Statute
§ 414.033 subd. 2b are not required because the parcel is owned by the City.
Section 6. That Minnesota Statute § 414.033 subd. 3, does not control because it is
appropriate for annexation under Minnesota Statute § 414.033 subd. 2, clause 1.
Section 7. That the area to be annexed is unplatted and unpopulated property.
Section 8. The City hereby annexes the real property situated in the County of Polk,
State of Minnesota, legally described as follows, to wit:
That part of Government Lot One (1), Section Eighteen (18), Township One Hundred Fifty-one
(151) North, Range Forty-nine (49), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk
County, Minnesota described as follows: Commencing at the Northwest corner of
said Section 18; thence easterly along the North line of said Section 18 a distance of 217.5 feet
to the centerline of State Highway No. 220; thence south 42 degrees 51minutes east,
along said center line, a distance of 531.9 feet; thence south 1 degree 11 minutes
east a distance of 120.34 feet to the point of beginning of the tract herein conveyed on the
southwesterly boundary of the right of way of said Highway No. 220; thence south 1 degree 11
minutes east a distance of 455.0 feet; thence at right angles easterly a distance of 296 feet, more
or less, to the center of the coulee; thence northerly along the center of said coulee to
its intersection with the Southwesterly boundary of right of way of said Highway No. 220;
thence northwesterly along said boundary line a distance of 437 feet, more or less, to the point of
beginning; containing 2.0 acres.
Section 9. That said land is not in the floodplain or shoreland area.
Section 10. The City Administrator/Clerk Treasurer is hereby directed to file certified
copies of this ordinance with the Chief Administrative law Judge, Municipal Boundary
Adjustments Division of the state Office of Administrative Hearings (Minnesota Municipal
Board), Huntsville Township, Polk County Auditor, and the Minnesota Secretary of State. A
copy of the annexation ordinance must be delivered immediately to the Polk County Auditor
upon approval of the chief administrative law judge.
Section 11. City Code Chapter 10 entitled Definitions and General Provisions Applicable
to the Entire City Code Including Penalty for violation” is hereby adopted in its entirety, by
reference, as repeated verbatim herein.
Section 12. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage
and publication and be given number 11, 4th series, and after its approval by the Chief
Administrative law Judge, Municipal Boundary Adjustments Division of the state Office of
Administrative Hearings (Minnesota Municipal Board).
Voting Aye: Tweten, Olstad, Leigh, Grassel, Vetter, and Buckalew.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: None.
The Vice-President declared the Ordinance passed.
ATTEST: PASSED: January 21, 2014
______________________________ ______________________________
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer Vice-President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 21st day of January, 2014.
______________________________
Mayor
1
CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS
ORDINANCE NO. 12, 4th Series
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE XI OF
THE CITY CODE BY ADDING A NEW CHAPTER
TO DEFINE AND REGULATE ADULT USES AND
AMENDING CHAPTER 152 OF THE CITY CODE REGARDING
LOCATION OF ADULT USES
The City Council of the City of East Grand Forks hereby ordains:
Section 1. Title XI of the City Code for the City of East Grand Forks is amended by adding a
new Chapter 118 as follows:
CHAPTER 118: ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 118.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
Studies conducted by the Minnesota Attorney General and the Texas City Attorneys’ Association, as
well as the cities of St. Paul, Alexandria, and Rochester, Minnesota; Indianapolis, Indiana; Phoenix,
Arizona; Los Angeles, California; Seattle, Washington; St. Croix County, Wisconsin; Adams County
and the City of Denver, Colorado, have examined the impact that adult establishments have on their
respective communities. These studies concluded that adult establishments have an adverse impact on
surrounding neighborhoods. Those impacts include increased crime rates, lower property values,
increased transiency, neighborhood blight and potential health risks. The City Council of the City of
East Grand Forks recognizes that the same or similar adverse impacts could occur in a smaller city.
Therefore, the City Council makes the following findings regarding the need to regulate adult
establishments:
(A) The public health, safety, morals and general welfare will be promoted by the city adopting
regulations governing adult establishments;
(B) Adult establishments have adverse secondary impacts of the types set forth above, which
are distinct from the impacts caused by other commercial uses;
(C) Residential neighborhoods located within close proximity to adult theaters, bookstores and
other adult uses experience increased crime rates (sex-related crimes in particular), lower
property values, increased transiency and decreased stability of ownership;
(D) The adverse impacts that adult uses have on surrounding areas diminish as the distance
from the adult uses increases;
(E) Studies of other cities have shown that among the crimes which tend to increase either
within or in the near vicinity of adult uses are rapes, prostitution, child molestation, indecent
exposure and other lewd and lascivious behavior;
(F) Many members of the public perceive areas within which adult uses are located as less safe
than other areas which do not have such uses;
2
(G) Studies of other cities have shown that the values of both commercial and residential
properties either are diminished or fail to appreciate at the rate of other comparable properties
when located in proximity to adult uses;
(H) It is not the intent to prohibit adult establishments from having a reasonable opportunity to
locate in the city;
(I) Small cities experience many of the same adverse impacts of adult establishments present
in larger communities; and
(J) The East Grand Forks City Council finds that adult uses will have adverse secondary
effects upon certain pre-existing land uses within the City.
§ 118.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings given below:
(A) Adult Establishments.
(1) Any business that devotes a substantial or significant portion of its inventory, stock in
trade, or publicly displayed merchandise, or devotes a substantial or significant portion
of its floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any
portion of the business not open to the public) to, or derives a substantial or significant
portion of its gross revenues from, items, merchandise, devices or other materials
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, exposing,
simulating, describing, or relating to Specified Sexual Activities or Specified
Anatomical Areas as described herein; or
(2) Any business that engages in any Adult Use as defined in paragraph (B) below.
(B) Adult Use. An adult use is any of the activities and businesses described below. Activities
classified as obscene as defined by Minnesota Statutes 617.241 are not included.
(1) Adult Use- Body Painting Studio: An establishment or business that provides the
service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or non-transparent, to the
body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of Specified Anatomical
Areas.
(2) Adult Use- Bookstore or Videostore: A building or portion of a building used for the
barter, rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tape,
videotape or motion picture film if a substantial or significant portion of such items are
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of Specified
Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(3) Adult Use- Cabaret. A building or portion of a building used for dancing or other live
entertainment that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display,
depiction or description of Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(4) Adult Use- Companionship Establishment: A companionship establishment that
provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an
3
employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(5) Adult Use- Conversation/Rap Parlor: A conversation/rap parlor that provides the
services of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion, if such service is
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified
Anatomical Areas.
(6) Adult Use- Health/Sport Club: A health/sport club that is distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(7) Adult Use- Hotel or Motel: Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel from which
minors are specifically excluded and where material is presented that is distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to Specified Sexual
Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(8) Adult Use- Massage Parlor, Health Club: A massage parlor or health club that provides
the services of massage, if such service is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on
Specific Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(9) Adult Use- Modeling Studio: An establishment that provides figure models to
customers with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such
customers and where the models engage in Specified Sexual Activities or display Specified
Anatomical Areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured,
photographed, or otherwise depicted by customers.
(10) Adult Use- Motion Picture Arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled
or operated still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are
maintained and where the images so displayed are distinguished and characterized by an
emphasis on depicting or describing Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(11) Adult Use- Motion Picture Theatre: A building or portion of a building used for
presenting material if such business as a prevailing practice presents material distinguished or
characterized by a emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas for
observation by patrons therein.
(12) Adult Use- Novelty Business: A business in which a substantial or significant portion
of its sales are of devices that stimulate human genitals or devices that are designed for sexual
stimulation.
(13) Adult Use- Sauna: A sauna that provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for
the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing
or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(14) Adult Use- Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility: A building or portion of a building used
for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing
relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if the
4
service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished and characterized by an
emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(C) Specified Sexual Activities.
Any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other
covering: (1) the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks,
anus, or female breast; (2) sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation,
or sodomy; (3) masturbation, actual or simulated; and (4) excretory functions as part of or in
connection with any of the other activities described in (1) through (3) of this paragraph.
(D) Specified Anatomical Areas.
The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or anus with less than a fully
opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any
part of the nipple; the exposure of any device, costume, or covering which gives the
appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum anal region or pubic
hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areola of the
female breast, which device simulates and gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or
areola; or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
(E) Substantial or significant portion. Twenty-five percent (25%) or more.
§ 118.03 LOCATION.
Adult establishments may be located as permitted in Subchapters 152.231 and 152.246 of the City
Code.
§ 118.04 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Violation of any portion of this Chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment
for up to 90 days and a fine of $1000 or both, plus the costs of prosecution. Each day that a violation
occurs shall be considered a separate offense.
(B) The City may enforce any provision of this Chapter by mandamus, injunction or any other
appropriate civil remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 118.05 STATE LAW.
Minnesota Statutes, section 617.242 shall not apply in the City.
§ 118.06 SEPARABILITY.
Every provision of this Chapter is declared separable from every other provision of this Chapter. If
any provision of this Chapter is adjudged to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
judgment shall not invalidate any other provision of this Chapter.
5
Section 2. Subchapter 152.231 of the City Code for the City of East Grand Forks is amended as
follows:
§ 152.231 PERMITTED USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this subchapter, the following are
permitted uses in the I-1, Light Industrial District:
. . .
(W) “Adult Establishments”, subject to the requirements of Chapter 118 and the location
requirements in subchapter 152.234.
Section 3. Chapter 152 of the City Code for the City of East Grand Forks is amended by adding
the following new subchapter 152.234:
§ 152.234 LOCATION OF ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS.
(A) Adult establishments as defined in Chapter 118 of the City Code must be located at
least 250 feet from:
(1) Property used or zoned for residential uses;
(2) A daycare facility, school, library, park, playground, state or federal wildlife
area or preserve, religious institution, or other public recreational facility;
(3) Premises licensed under Chapter 117, Alcoholic Beverages; and,
(4) Another adult use.
(B) Distances must be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, between the closest points on the boundary lines of the parcels where the two
uses are located.
Section 4. Subchapter 152.246 of the City Code for the City of East Grand Forks is amended as
follows:
§ 152.246 PERMITTED USES.
In addition to other uses specifically identified elsewhere in this subchapter, the following are
permitted uses in the I-2, General Industrial District:
(A) All permitted uses allowed in the Light Industrial (I-1) district. Adult establishments are
subject to the requirements of Chapter 118 and the location requirements in subchapter 152.234.
Section 5. EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance shall take effect the day after its adoption and
publication.
6
Voting Aye: Helms, Buckalew, Tweten, Olstad, Leigh, Grassel, and Vetter.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: None.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
ATTEST: PASSED: April 15, 2014
_____________________________ ___________________________________
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 15th day of April, 2014.
___________________________________
Mayor
1
ORDINANCE NO. 13 4th SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA, AMENDING
CITY CODE CHAPTER 130 ENTITLED "GENERAL OFFENSES" BY ADDING SECTION
130.08 AND BY ADOPTING BY REFERENCE CITY CODE CHAPTER 1 AND SECTION
10.99 WHICH, AMONG OTHER THINGS, CONTAIN PENALTY PROVISIONS.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. That Section 130.08 of the City Code is adopted and added to the City code to read as
follows, to-wit:
130.08 Social Host Liability
130.08.A Purpose and Findings:
The East Grand Forks City Council intends to discourage underage possession and consumption
of alcohol, even if done within the confines of a private residence, and intends to hold persons
criminally responsible who host events or gatherings where persons under 21 years of age
possess or consume alcohol regardless of whether the person hosting the event or gathering
supplied the alcohol. The East Grand Forks City Council finds that:
1) Events and gatherings held on private or public property where alcohol is possessed or
consumed by persons under the age of twenty-one are harmful to those persons and constitute a
potential threat to public health and public safety requiring prevention or abatement.
2) Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage persons, as well as the general
public, from injuries related to alcohol consumption, such as alcohol overdose or alcohol-related
traffic collisions.
3) Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used irresponsibly, could have drastic effects on those
who use it as well as those who are affected by the actions of an irresponsible user.
4) Often, events or gatherings involving underage possession and consumption occur outside the
presence of parents. However, there are times when the parent(s) is/are present and, condone
the activity, and in some circumstances provide the alcohol.
5) A deterrent affect will be created by holding a person criminally responsible for hosting an
event or gathering where underage possession or consumption occurs.
130.08.B Authority
This section is enacted pursuant to Minn. Stat. §145A.05 subdivision 1.
2
130.08.C Definitions
For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings:
ALCOHOL. Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey,
rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions and mixtures thereof from
whatever source or by whatever process produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcoholic beverage means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and
every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains one-half of one
percent (.05) or more of alcohol by volume and which is used for beverage purposes either alone
or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.
EVENT or GATHERING. Event or gathering means any group of three or more persons who
have assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or activity at a residence or premises.
HOST. Host means to permit an event or gathering where one or more minors consume or
possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage on property owned or controlled by the person.
PARENT. Parent means any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
a) As natural, adoptive parent, or step-parent;
b) As a legal guardian; or
c) As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
PERSON. Person means any individual(s) responsible for an event or gathering including, but
not limited to, the individual(s) who owns, rents, leases, or otherwise has controlled the premises
where the event or gathering takes place, the individual(s) in charge of the premises, and/or the
individual(s) who organized the event or gathering. If the residence or premises is rented, the
landlord is not covered by this ordinance unless landlord otherwise meets this definition.
POSSESS. Possess means care, custody, dominion and control of liquor.
RESIDENCE or PREMISES. Residence or premises" means any home, yard, farm, field, land,
apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room,
park, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or
specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with
or without permission or compensation.
UNDERAGE PERSON. Underage person is any individual under twenty one (21) years of age.
3
130.08.D Prohibited Acts
130.10.D.1
It is unlawful for any person(s) to:
a) host or allow an event or gathering at any residence or premises where alcohol or alcoholic
beverages are present when the person knows that an underage person will or does
i) consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage; or
ii) possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage; and
b) the person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent possession or consumption by the underage
person(s). Reasonable steps shall including the following:
i) controlling access to alcohol and/or alcoholic beverages at the event or gathering; and
ii) verifying the age of persons attending the event or gathering by inspecting drivers
license or other government issued identification cards to ensure that minors do not
consume or possess alcohol and/or alcoholic beverages while at the event or gathering;
and,
iii) supervising the activities of minors at the event or gathering.
130.08.D.2
A person is criminally responsible for violating Subsection (D)(1) above if the person
intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, or conspires with or otherwise procures another to
commit the prohibited act.
130.08.D.3
A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present at the event or gathering to
be criminally responsible.
130.08.E Exceptions
130.08.E.1
This section does not apply to conduct solely between an underage person and his or her parents
while present in the parents household.
130.08.E.2
This section does not apply to legally protected religious Observances.
4
130.08.E.3
This section does not apply to retail intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor licensees,
municipal liquor stores, or bottle club permit holders who are regulated by Minn. Stat. §
340A.503 Subd. 1(a)(1).
130.08.E.4
This section does not apply to situations where underage persons are lawfully in possession of
alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and scope of employment.
130.99 Penalty
Every person violates a section, division or provision of this chapter when he or she performs an
act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, or performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when the
failure is prohibited or declared unlawful by a code adopted by reference by this chapter, and
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in
specific provisions hereof.
The penalty which may be imposed for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code,
including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both. The costs of prosecution may be added.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or
continues
Section 2. City Code Chapter 1 entitled "Definitions and General Provisions Applicable to
Entire City Code Including Penalty for Violation" and Section 10.99 entitled "Violation a
Misdemeanor" are hereby adopted in their entirety, by reference, as though repeated verbatim
herein.
Section 3. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and
publication and be given the Number 13, 4th Series.
Voting Aye: Grassel, DeMers, Pokrzywinski, Buckalew, Tweten, and Olstad.
Voting Nay: Vetter.
Absent: None.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
5
ATTEST: PASSED: June 2, 2015
______________________________ ______________________________
City Administrator President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 2nd day of June, 2015.
______________________________
Mayor



ORDINANCE NO. 15 4th SERIES - AMENDED
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA,
ANNEXING SOUTHEAST QUARTER OF THE SOUTHEAST QUARTER
(SE1/4SE1/4), SECTION TWENTY-SIX (26), TOWNSHIP ONE HUNDRED
FIFTY-TWO (152) NORTH, RANGE FIFTY (50) WEST OF THE FIFTH
PRINCIPAL MERIDIAN, POLK COUNTY, MINNESOTA.
.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. This annexation is being passed and adopted pursuant to the provisions of
Minnesota Statute § 414.033 subd. 2 clause 3.
Section 2. Johnson Farms a North Dakota partnership petitioned the City requesting
the City join in the request to annex the above described property into the City of East Grand
Forks. Johnson Farms made said request as it has been approached by a developer that wants to
build Multi-family housing units to accommadate the Northland Community and Technical
College student population.
Section 3. The land abuts the City of East Grand Forks, is urban or suburban in
character and is owned by the City and Johnson Farms.
Section 4. That the City Council has determined that it is the best interest of the City
that said parcel is to be annexed into the City so that it can have access to all City utilities and
services to the area for the multi-family housing development
Section 5. That the notice and public hearing requirements of Minnesota Statute §
414.033 subd. 2b have been provided and a public hearing was held on August 18, 2015.
Section 6. That Minnesota Statute § 414.033 subd. 3, does not control because it is
appropriate for annexation under Minnesota Statute § 414.033 subd. 2, clause 3.
Section 7. That the area to be annexed is unplatted and unpopulated property.
Section 8. That electric ulitity service notice of Minnesota Statute § 414.033 subd.
13, is not applicable as there are no electrical services presently provided in the proposed area.
Section 9. The City hereby annexes the real property situated in the County of Polk,
State of Minnesota, legally described as follows, to wit:
Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4SE1/4), Section Twenty-six (26),
Township One Hundred Fifty-two (152) North, Range Fifty (50) West of the Fifth
Principal Meridian, Polk County, Minnesota containing approximately 40 acres.
Section 10. That said land is not in the floodplain or shoreland area.
Section 11. The City Administrator/Clerk Treasurer is hereby directed to file certified
copies of this ordinance with the Chief Administrative law Judge, Municipal Boundary
Adjustments Division of the state Office of Administrative Hearings (Minnesota Municipal
Board), Huntsville Township, Polk County Auditor, and the Minnesota Secretary of State. A
copy of the annexation ordinance must be delivered immediately to the Polk County auditor
upon approval of the chief administrative law judge.
Section 12. City Code Chapter 10 entitled Definitions and General Provisions
Applicable to the Entire City Code Including Penalty for violation” is hereby adopted in its
entirety, by reference, as repeated verbatim herein.
Section 13. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage
and publication and be given number 15 4th Series, and after its approval by the Minnesota
Municipal Board.
Voting Aye: Tweten, Olstad, Grassel, DeMers, Vetter, Pokrzywinski, and Buckalew.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: None.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
ATTEST: PASSED: September 1, 2015
______________________________ ______________________________
Clerk-Administrator President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 1st day of September, 2015.
______________________________
Mayor


ORDINANCE NO. 16, 4th Series
CABLE SERVICES REGULATORY ORDINANCE
FOR
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
SECTION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS ..................................................................... 2
1.1 Title ......................................................................................................... 2
1.2 Applicability ............................................................................................ 2
1.3 Preservation of Police Power Authority ................................................ 2
1.4 Public Inspection of Records ................................................................. 2
1.5 No Cause of Action for Damages Against the City............................... 3
1.6 Enforcement ........................................................................................... 3
1.7 Relationship of the Parties ..................................................................... 3
SECTION 2: DEFINITIONS ...................................................................................... 3
2.1 Access Channels ..................................................................................... 3
2.2 Affiliate ................................................................................................... 3
2.3 Basic Cable Service ................................................................................ 4
2.4 Cable Act ................................................................................................ 4
2.5 Cable Service .......................................................................................... 4
2.6 Cable Television System, Cable System, or System .............................. 4
2.7 Capital Costs ........................................................................................... 4
2.8 City or Grantor ....................................................................................... 4
2.9 Channel or Cable Channel .................................................................... 4
2.10 Complaint ............................................................................................... 4
2.11 Converter ................................................................................................ 5
2.12 Drop ........................................................................................................ 5
2.13 Facilities ................................................................................................. 5
2.14 FCC......................................................................................................... 5
2.15 Franchise ................................................................................................ 5
2.16 Franchise Agreement ............................................................................. 5
2.17 Franchise Area ....................................................................................... 5
2.18 Franchise Fee ........................................................................................ 5
2.19 Franchisee .............................................................................................. 5
2.20 Gross Revenue ........................................................................................ 5
2.21 Installation ............................................................................................. 6
2.22 Normal Business Hours ......................................................................... 6
2.23 Normal Operating Conditions ............................................................... 6
2.24 Open Video Services or OVS ................................................................. 6
2.25 Pay TV .................................................................................................... 6
2.26 Person ..................................................................................................... 6
2.27 Public Building ...................................................................................... 6
2.28 Renewal .................................................................................................. 6
2.29 Rights-of-Way......................................................................................... 6
2.30 Service Interruption ............................................................................... 7
2.31 Standard Installation ............................................................................. 7
2.32 Subscriber ............................................................................................... 7
SECTION 3: FRANCHISE REQUIREMENTS
3.1 Franchise Required................................................................................ 7
3.2 Nature of Rights Granted by Franchise ................................................ 7
3.3 Franchise Not Exclusive ........................................................................ 7
3.4 Franchise Territory ................................................................................ 8
3.5 Selection of Initial Franchise ................................................................ 8
3.5.1 Installation Plan ......................................................................... 8
3.5.2 Rate Schedule ............................................................................. 8
3.5.3 Financial Soundness and Capability ........................................ 8
3.5.4 Experience in Operating a Cable or OVS System .................... 8
3.5.5 Technical Capability .................................................................. 8
3.5.6 Future Needs .............................................................................. 8
3.5.7 Additional Considerations ......................................................... 9
3.6 Application for Franchise Renewal ...................................................... 9
SECTION 4: TERMS ................................................................................................... 9
4.1 Term of Franchise ................................................................................. 9
SECTION 5: REQUIRED PROVISIONS ................................................................... 9
5.1 Franchise Provisions ............................................................................. 9
5.2 Franchise Agreement ........................................................................... 10
5.3 Design, Services, and Capabilities ....................................................... 11
5.3.1 Cable System Design ................................................................ 11
5.3.2 The Cable System ..................................................................... 11
5.3.3 Drops to Public Buildings ........................................................ 11
5.3.4 School and Library Cable Modems ......................................... 12
5.3.5 Use of Franchise Facilities ...................................................... 12
5.3.6 Upgrade of the System and New Development ....................... 12
5.3.7 Emergency Alert Capability ..................................................... 13
5.3.8 Periodic Review and Evaluation.............................................. 13
5.3.9 Close Captioning and Descriptive Audio Service ................... 13
5.3.10 Standby Power .......................................................................... 13
5.3.11 HDTV/ATV Conversion ........................................................... 13
5.4 Public, Educational, and Governmental Access or Peg Access ......... 13
5.4.1 Access Channels ....................................................................... 13
5.4.2 Proof of Performance Testing ................................................. 14
5.5 Construction Standards and Requirements ........................................ 14
5.5.1 Permit Required ................................................................................. 14
5.5.2 Construction Standards ..................................................................... 14
5.5.3 Compliance with City Ordinances for Work in Rights-of-Way ....... 14
5.5.4 Compliance with City Ordinances for Construction & Building .... 14
5.5.5 Removal and Relocation of Facilities ............................................... 15
5.5.6 Movement of Lines ............................................................................ 15
5.5.7 Tree Trimming ................................................................................... 15
5.5.8 Responsible for Restoration and Costs ............................................. 15
5.5.9 Failure to Complete Work ................................................................. 15
5.6 Technical Standards ....................................................................................... 16
5.6.1 Compliance with OSHA .................................................................... 16
5.6.2 Compliance with National Electrical Codes ..................................... 16
5.6.3 Compliance with FAA Regulations .................................................. 16
5.6.4 Test and Compliance Procedure ....................................................... 16
5.6.5 Additional Tests ................................................................................. 16
5.7 Repair ............................................................................................................ 16
5.8 Removal of Facilities From Subscriber's Premises Upon Request .............. 16
5.9 Transfer of Ownership ................................................................................... 17
5.10 Purchase by City ............................................................................................. 18
5.11 Requests for Cable Services ........................................................................... 18
5.12 Multiple Franchise ......................................................................................... 18
5.12.1 Grant of Additional Franchise .......................................................... 18
5.12.2 Permits for Non-Franchised Entities ............................................... 19
5.13 Discriminatory or Preferential Practice ........................................................ 19
5.13.1 Rates and Charges ............................................................................. 19
5.13.2 Access and Employment .................................................................... 19
5.13.3 Build-Out ........................................................................................... 20
5.14 Subscriber Privacy .......................................................................................... 20
5.15 Permits and Authorizations ............................................................................ 20
5.16 Annual Reports ............................................................................................... 20
5.16.1 Contents ............................................................................................. 20
5.16.2 Service Contract and Subscriber Information ................................. 21
5.17 Indemnification, Security Funds, Insurance ................................................ 22
5.17.1 Liability and Indemnification ........................................................... 22
5.17.2 Security Funds ................................................................................... 22
5.17.3 General Provisions Relating to Insurance ....................................... 23
5.17.4 Liability Insurance ............................................................................ 23
5.17.5 Non-Waiver ........................................................................................ 25
5.18 Continuity of Service ...................................................................................... 25
5.19 Safety Requirements ....................................................................................... 25
SECTION 6: FRANCHISE FEES ....................................................................................................... 26
6.1 Five Percent Franchise Fee ........................................................................... 26
6.2 Payment and Audits ........................................................................................ 26
6.3 Acceptance of Payment .................................................................................. 26
6.4 Failure to Pay ................................................................................................. 26
6.5 Penalty for Late Payment ............................................................................... 27
6.6 Monthly Report of Gross Revenues ............................................................... 27
SECTION 7: CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS ........................................................................ 27
SECTION 8: GENERAL 30
8.1 Subscriber Rates ............................................................................................. 30
8.2 Records Required and City's Right to Inspect ............................................... 30
8.3 Abandonment or Removal of Franchise Property ........................................ 31
8.3.1 Abandonment..................................................................................... 31
8.3.2 Removal ............................................................................................. 31
8.3.3 Transfer of Abandoned Property ...................................................... 31
8.3.4 Above Ground Portion of System...................................................... 31
8.3.5 No Material Interference .................................................................. 32
8.4 Right Reserved to City .................................................................................... 32
8.5 Force Majeure ................................................................................................ 32
8.6 Non-Enforcement Not Estoppel ..................................................................... 32
8.7 Procedure for Remedying Franchise Violation ............................................ 32
8.8 Penalty 33
8.9 Revocation or Termination of Franchise ...................................................... 34
SECTION 9: SEVERABILITY ........................................................................................................... 35
SECTION 10: FORECLOSURE ......................................................................................................... 36
SECTION 11: ADMINISTRATION OF FRANCHISE ..................................................................... 36
SECTION 12: EFFECTIVE DATE, PUBLICATION, ACCEPTANCE &GOVERNING LAW ..... 36
12.1 Publication: Effective Date .......................................................................... 36
12.2 Acceptance and Governing Law .................................................................... 36
EXHIBIT A: FRANCHISE FEE WORKSHEET ............................................................................... 38
EXHIBIT B: PUBLIC & SCHOOL BUILDINGS .............................................................................. 38
1
AN ORDINANCE FOR THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS,
MINNESOTA ESTABLISHING REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
RELATING TO THE GRANTING OF CABLE SERVICES FRANCHISES
FOR USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY WITHIN THE CITY OF EAST
GRAND FORKS, INCLUDING THE DEFINITION OF TERMS,
REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMUNITY SERVICE CHANNELS,
REQUIREMENTS REGARDING THE CHARGING OF FEES FOR USE
OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY, CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS,
TECHNICAL STANDARDS, AND OTHER PROVISIONS RELATING TO
CABLE SERVICES FRANCHISES.
WHEREAS, Minnesota law requires a provider of cable service to operate pursuant to
franchise granted by a municipality; and
WHEREAS, the City of East Grand Forks, pursuant to applicable federal and state law, is
authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive Franchises to construct, operate, maintain, and
reconstruct Cable Television Systems within the City limits. Unless otherwise permitted by
applicable law, this Franchise will not extend to services beyond Cable Service, as defined
herein, such as telephone service or other telecommunications services. A Franchisee does not
waive its rights to offer telephone service or other telecommunications services subject to
applicable local, state, or federal law; and
WHEREAS, the City finds that the development of Cable Television Systems has the
potential of having great benefit and impact upon the Residents and businesses of the City.
Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the
City further finds that the public convenience, safety, and general welfare can best be served by
establishing regulatory powers regarding Cable Service that are vested in the City or such
Persons the City designates. It is the intent of this Ordinance and subsequent amendments to
provide for and specify the means to obtain the best possible Cable Service for the public, and
any Franchises issued pursuant to this Ordinance will be deemed to include this finding as an
integral part thereof; and
WHEREAS, the City will not discriminate in awarding Franchises pursuant to this
Ordinance. Entities which request a Franchise shall comply with the terms of this Ordinance;
and
WHEREAS, in order to ensure that the City and its residents receive state of the art Cable
Services and capabilities as this technology further evolves, all Cable Franchises to the extent set
forth herein shall be subject to this Ordinance and should, be subject to periodic review and
modifications to keep current with changing law, technology, and Services.
East Grand Forks, Minnesota Municipal Code Chapter _____ is hereby added to read as follows:
2
SECTION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.1 Title.
This Ordinance shall be referred to and cited as the “Cable Services Code” or herein as
the “Ordinance” of the City of East Grand Forks, Minnesota.
1.2 Applicability.
The requirements of this Ordinance shall apply to the full extent of the terms herein and
shall be limited in scope or application only to the extent as may be required by
applicable federal or state law, including such changes in applicable law as may be
hereinafter enacted. No provisions of this Ordinance shall be disregarded pursuant to
this subsection except on express application to and determination by the City to such
effect based on the specific factual circumstances demonstrated. The provisions of this
Ordinance shall be deemed incorporated in each Cable Franchise granted. Nothing in this
Ordinance or amendments thereto shall be interpreted to unilaterally deprive any Person
of any rights or obligations imposed by any binding and existing valid Cable Franchise or
contract during the term thereof, whether entered into before or after enactment of this
Ordinance, and shall impose obligations on any such Person additional to those included
in such Franchise or contract only to the extent permitted by law and to the extent not
inconsistent with such Franchise or contract; provided that the failure of the City to
enforce any provision herein or the failure of any Person to comply with any provision
herein shall not be a waiver of the City’s right to enforce such provisions nor shall it in
any way constitute evidence or agreement by the City that such Person has a valid
existing Cable Franchise. The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply irrespective of
whether a Franchisee is determined to be operating pursuant to a valid Cable Franchise.
1.3 Preservation of Police Power Authority
To the extent not inconsistent with Section 5.1.2, any rights granted pursuant to this
Ordinance and pursuant to any Franchise authorized hereunder are subject to the
authority of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety, and
welfare of the public. Franchisees shall be subject to and comply with all applicable
Laws enacted by the City, to the extent not in conflict with Minnesota or federal law.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to waive a right, if any, that any party may
have to seek judicial or regulatory review as to any provisions of the Ordinance or as to
actions of the parties under applicable federal law, including 47 U.S.C. 555A, as well as
applicable state or local law currently in effect or as may hereinafter be amended.
1.4 Public Inspection of Records.
Certain information required to be filed with the City pursuant to this Ordinance is
subject to inspection and copying by the public pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota
law applicable to public and non-public information. The City shall provide a Franchisee
with notice of any request by a third party for information designated as proprietary.
Nothing in this Ordinance or Franchise shall be construed as a waiver of the provisions of
Minnesota law applicable to public and non-public information.
3
1.5 No Cause of Action for Damages Against the City.
The Franchisee shall have no cause of action whatsoever against the City for damages of
any kind arising from any of the provisions or requirements of a Franchise, or because of
the enforcement thereof by said City, or for the failure of said City to have the authority
to grant, all, or any part, of the Franchise therein granted; provided that said Franchisee
expressly acknowledges that it accepted the rights therein granted in reliance upon its
independent and personal investigation and understanding of the power of authority of
said City to enter into the Franchise authorized therein with Franchisee; provided further
that the Franchisee acknowledges by its acceptance of said Franchise that it has not been
induced to enter into a Franchise upon any understanding, or promise, whether given
verbally or in writing by or on behalf of said City, or by any other person concerning any
term or condition of a Franchise not expressed therein; provided further that the
Franchisee acknowledges by the acceptance of any Franchise that it has carefully read the
provisions, terms, and conditions hereof and of its Franchise and is willing to, and does
accept, all of the risk attendant to said provisions, terms, and conditions. This section
shall be interpreted to provide the same limitation of liability as that contained in 47 USC
555(a), as amended.
1.5 Enforcement.
The City shall be entitled to enforce this Ordinance and any Franchise through all
remedies lawfully available.
1.6 Relationship of the Parties.
Under no circumstances shall any Franchise authorized by this Ordinance be construed to
create any relationship of agency, partnership, joint venture, or employment between the
parties.
SECTION 2: DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations
will have the meaning given herein. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the
plural number, and all words in the plural number include the singular. All capitalized terms
used in the definition of any other term will have their meaning as otherwise defined in this
Section 2. The words "will" and "shall" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not
defined will be given their common and ordinary meaning.
2.1 Access Channels means Channel capacity designated for public, educational or
governmental access use, as well as the facilities and equipment required for the use of
such Channel capacity.
2.2 Affiliate means each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under
common control with the Franchisee; provided that Affiliate shall in no event mean any
limited partner or shareholder holding an interest of less than fifteen percent (15%) of
4
such Franchisee, or any creditor of such Franchisee solely by virtue of its status as a
creditor and which is not otherwise an Affiliate by reason of owning a controlling interest
in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management, or
common control with, such Franchisee.
2.3 Basic Cable Service means any service tier, which includes the lawful retransmission of
local television broadcast signals and Access Channels required by this Ordinance to be
carried on the basic tier. This definition will be consistent with and deemed to change
pursuant to any changes in applicable federal law or FCC rules.
2.4 Cable Act means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-549, 98
Stat. 2779 (1984) (codified at 47 U.S.C. §§ 521-611 (1982 & Supp. V. 1987)) as
amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992,
Pub. L. No. 102-385, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104, as
may, from time to time, be amended.
2.5 Cable Service means (a) the one-way transmission to Subscribers of (i) Video
Programming or (ii) Other Programming Service; (b) Subscriber interaction, if any,
which is required for the selection or use of such Video Programming or other
programming service.
2.6 Cable Television System, Cable System, or System means a facility, consisting of a set of
closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide Cable Service which includes Video Programming
and which is provided to multiple Subscribers within the Franchise Area. Such term does
not include (a) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more television broadcast stations; (b) a facility that serves Subscribers without using any
public right-of-way; (c) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. §§ 201 et seq., except that such facility will be
considered a Cable System (other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 541(C)) to the extent
such facility is used in the transmission of Video Programming directly to Subscribers,
unless the extent of such use is solely to provide on-demand services; or (d) any facilities
of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system.
2.7 Capital Costs means costs associated with the purchase of assets, products or other
resources that will provide service for more than one year, but shall not have any
meaning inconsistent with generally accepted accounting principles.
2.8 City or Grantor means the City of East Grand Forks, Minnesota, and all territory within
its existing and future territorial corporate limits, or jurisdiction for purposes of this
Ordinance.
2.9 Channel or Cable Channel means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum
which is used in a Cable or OVS System and which is capable of delivering a television
Channel as defined by the FCC.
5
2.10 Complaint means any verbal or written or electronic allegation, or assertion made by a
Person regarding Cable Service and which is subject to City regulation, requiring subsequent
corrective action to the System or any portion thereof.
2.11 Converter means an electronic device that converts signals to a frequency not susceptible
to interference within the television receiver of a Subscriber and, through the use of an
appropriate Channel selector, permits a Cable Subscriber to view all authorized Cable
Subscriber signals delivered at designated converter dial locations.
2.12 Drop means the cable or cables that connect the ground block on the Cable Subscriber's
property to the nearest feasible point on the Cable or OVS System in order to receive
Cable Service.
2.13 Facilities means any portion of a Cable or OVS System located in, along, over, upon,
under, or through the Rights-of-Way.
2.14 FCC means the Federal Communications Commission, its designee, or any successor
thereof.
2.15 Franchise means an initial authorization or renewal thereof issued by the City, whether
such authorization is designated as a Franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract,
certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of the
Cable or OVS System or the provision of OVS Service.
2.16 Franchise Agreement means the separate agreement or granting Ordinance by which the
Franchise is granted to the Franchisee, as required by this Ordinance.
2.17 Franchise Area means the entire geographic area within the City as it is now constituted
or may in the future be constituted.
2.18 Franchise Fee means any tax, fee, or assessment of any kind imposed by the City or
other governmental entity on a Franchisee or its Cable Subscribers, or both, solely
because of their status as such, pursuant to this Ordinance. The term "Franchise Fee" does
not include: (i) any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including any such
tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and Cable Operators or their Cable
Services but not including a tax, fee, or assessment that is unduly discriminatory against
Franchisees or Cable Subscribers); (ii) Capital Costs that are required by a Franchise to
be incurred by a Franchisee for public, educational or governmental ("PEG") Access
facilities; (iii) requirements or charges incidental to the award or enforcement of a
Franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance,
indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or (iv) any fee imposed under Title 17
of the United States Code.
2.19 Franchisee means and includes all Persons having any rights, powers, privileges, duties,
liabilities, or obligations under this Ordinance and the Franchise Agreement and any
lawful agent, employee, successor, transferee, or assignee of the original Franchisee.
6
2.20 Gross Revenues means all revenues received by the Franchisee from Cable Services in
the City and consistent with local, state, and federal law, including, but not limited to,
Subscriber revenues (including Pay TV), home shopping programs, rentals of equipment,
advertising revenue and any and all other revenues received by the Franchisee from the
provision of Cable Service in the City. Gross Revenues do not include revenues recorded
as received but which are "bad debt," but includes any recoveries of bad debt. Gross
Revenues also do not include any sales, excise, or other taxes collected by Franchisee on
behalf of federal, state, county, city, or other governmental unit. Subject to a
determination by applicable law, internet modem and related services may be a Cable
Service and revenues derived from such service part of Gross Revenue.
2.21 Installation means the act of connecting the System from the feeder cable to the
Subscriber terminal so that Cable Service may be received by the Subscriber.
2.22 Normal Business Hours means those hours during which most similar businesses in the
community are open to serve customers. In all cases, Normal Business Hours will
include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours.
2.23 Normal Operating Conditions means those service conditions which are within the
control of the Franchisee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the
Franchisee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power
outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those
conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the Franchisee include, but are not
limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or
seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the System.
2.24 Open Video Services or OVS means any video programming Services provided to any
person by a Franchisee certified by the FCC to operate an Open Video System pursuant
to Section 47 U.S.C. 573, as may be amended, regardless of the Facilities used.
2.25 Pay TV means the delivery over the System of per-Channel or per-program programming
to Subscribers for a separate fee or charge from Basic Cable Service.
2.26 Person means any natural person or any association, firm, individual, partnership, joint
stock company, joint venture, corporation, or other legally recognized entity, public or
private, whether for profit or not for profit.
2.27 Public Building means any building identified in the Franchise, which is owned or for the
greater part occupied by the City or on behalf of the City by other governmental units
performing traditional municipal governmental functions.
2.28 Renewal means a new Cable Franchise granted to an existing Franchisee.
2.29 Rights-of-Way means the surface and space on, above and below every municipal street,
alley, road, highway, lane or City right-of-way dedicated or commonly used now or
hereafter for utility purposes and facilities thereon, including, but not limited to, overhead
lighting facilities. This term shall not include any county, state, or federal rights-of-way
except where controlled or maintained by the City, or as other provided by applicable
Laws or pursuant to an agreement between the City and any such Person or Agency.
7
"Rights-of-Way" shall not include public property owned or leased by the City and not
intended for right-of-way use, including, but not limited to, municipal office building
property or public works facilities.
2.30 Service Interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one or more Cable Channels
for single or multiple Subscribers.
2.31 Standard Installation means any Service installation that can be completed using a Drop
of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet or less.
2.32 Subscriber means any Person who lawfully receives Cable Service provided by a
Franchisee.
SECTION 3: FRANCHISE REQUIREMENTS
3.1 Franchise Required.
It shall be unlawful for any Person to construct, operate, or maintain a Cable or OVS
System or to provide Cable Service or other competing multichannel video services,
including OVS, in the City without a Franchise in the form of a Franchise Agreement
authorizing the same, unless applicable federal or State law prohibits the City’s
enforcement of such a requirement. Such Franchise Agreement shall comply with all of
the specifications of this Ordinance.
3.2 Nature of Rights Granted by Franchise.
Cable Franchises shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in the Rights-of-Way, and shall
give only the right to occupy Rights-of-Way, for the purposes of providing Cable
Services and as may be further limited by the Franchise. No Franchise shall grant the
right to use Facilities owned or controlled by the City or a third-party, without the
consent of such party, nor shall a Franchise excuse Franchisee from obtaining appropriate
access or attachment agreements before locating its Facilities on the Facilities owned or
controlled by the City or a third-party. All Franchises shall be deemed to incorporate and
be limited by the provisions of this Ordinance and shall create rights for the sole and
exclusive use of Franchisee. Any Franchise or other authorization for Cable Services, in
whatever form granted, shall not grant or include: (i) any other permit or authorization
required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City
required by the ordinances and laws of the City, including the provision of
communications services; (ii) any permit, agreement, or authorization required in
connection with operations in the Rights-of-Way including, without limitation, permits
and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits, or other structures, whether
owned by the City or a private entity, or for excavating or performing other work in or
along the Rights-of-Way.
3.3 Franchise Not Exclusive.
Any Cable Franchise granted by the City shall be nonexclusive. The Grantor specifically
reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional Franchises for a Cable or OVS
8
System or any component thereof, to any other Person including itself, as it deems
appropriate, subject to this Ordinance and applicable State and federal law.
3.4 Franchise Territory.
Every Cable Franchise shall apply to the entire territorial area of the City, as it exists now
or may later be configured.
3.5 Selection of Franchisee.
In selecting a Franchisee pursuant to this Ordinance, the City will prepare a request for
proposals to seek bids for a Cable or OVS System to be established under a Franchise by
the City. This request for proposals will contain information and instructions relating to
the preparation and filing of proposals; conditions regarding the Installation, operation,
and maintenance of a Cable or OVS System; and the criteria to be used in evaluating
applicant proposals. Any Person desiring an initial Franchise for a Cable or OVS System
shall file an application with the City. A nonrefundable Application Fee as may be
hereinafter be established by the City shall accompany the application, which shall not be
considered or credited against the collection of applicable Franchise Fees. The
provisions of this Section will not be applicable to the renewal of any Franchise.
Applicants may be evaluated according to the following criteria:
3.5.1 Installation Plan. Consideration may be given to an Installation plan that
would provide the flexibility needed to adjust to new developments, maintenance
practices, and services that would be available to the Subscriber and the community
immediately and in the future.
3.5.2 Rate Schedule. Consideration may be given to applicants with the most
reasonable Installation and Subscriber rate schedule.
3.5.3 Financial Soundness and Capability. The evidence of financial ability
required in the applicant's proposal will be such as to assure the ability to complete the
entire System within a maximum of three years from the date the Franchise is granted.
The City will also consider the applicant's ability to operate the System and provide the
necessary services.
3.5.4 Demonstrated Experience in Operating a Cable or OVS System.
Consideration may be given to evidence of the applicant's experience in operating a
Cable or OVS System, where such evidence would show or tend to show or confirm the
ability of the applicant to furnish sufficient and dependable service to the potential public
and private users.
3.5.5 Technical Capability. The City may consider the quality of service
offered, including signal quality, response to Subscriber complaints, and billing practices.
9
3.5.6 Future Needs. Consideration may be given to the Franchisee's ability to
meet the future cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account the cost
of meeting such needs and interests.
3.5.7 Additional Considerations. The City may consider any additional
information that it deems applicable.
3.6 Application for Franchise Renewal.
Franchise renewals will be according to applicable law including, but not necessarily
limited to, the Cable Act, as amended. The City and Franchisee, by mutual consent, may
enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the Franchise Agreement.
SECTION 4: TERM
4.1 Term of Franchise.
The term of the Franchise will be stated in the Franchise Agreement.
SECTION 5: REQUIRED PROVISIONS
5.1 Franchise Provisions.
5.1.1 All Franchises granted pursuant to this Ordinance will be subject to the
following provisions:
5.1.1(1) The continuing authority of City to impose such other regulations
of general applicability through lawful exercises of its police powers as may be
determined by the City Council to be conducive to the health, safety, and welfare
of the public.
5.1.1(2) The continuing authority of City to control and regulate the use
of its streets.
5.1.1(3) The authority of City to inspect all construction or installation
work performed subject to the provisions of the Franchise and this Ordinance, and
make such inspections as it will find necessary to insure compliance with the
terms of the Franchise, this Ordinance, and other pertinent provisions of law.
5.1.1(4) The authority of City to inspect the books, records, maps, plans,
income tax returns, and other like materials of the Franchisee upon reasonable
notice to insure compliance with the terms of the Franchise, this Ordinance, and
other pertinent provisions of law, including Franchisee’s need for confidentiality
of certain information.
5.1.1(5) At the expiration of the term for which this Franchise is granted
or upon the termination and cancellation as provided herein, the authority of the
City to require the Franchisee to remove at its own expense any and all portions
of the Cable or OVS System from the Rights-of-Way within the City; provided,
10
however, that this paragraph shall not be applicable if Franchisee is authorized to
provide telecommunications service in City.
5.1.2 Federal, State, and City Jurisdiction.
5.1.2(1) This Ordinance and any Franchise Agreement will be construed
in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws.
5.1.2(2) In the event that the state or federal government will discontinue
preemption in any area of cable television over which it currently exercises
jurisdiction in such a manner as to expand rather than limit municipal regulatory
authority, the City may, if it so elects, adopt rules and regulations in these areas to
the extent permitted by law.
5.1.2(3) This Ordinance will apply to all Franchises granted or renewed
from and after the effective date of this Ordinance.
5.1.2(4) Franchisee will not be relieved of its obligation to comply with
any of the provisions of this Ordinance or any Franchise Agreement granted
pursuant to this Ordinance by reason of any failure of the City to enforce prompt
compliance.
5.1.2(5) In the event of a change in state or federal law which by its terms
would require the City to amend this Ordinance, the parties shall modify the
existing Cable Franchise in a mutually agreed upon manner.
5.2 Franchise Agreement.
5.2.1 The applicant awarded a Franchise by the City will execute a Franchise
Agreement, agreeing to the terms and provisions of the Franchise and specifications of
the Franchise as may be incorporated into the Franchise Agreement in writing. All
Franchises granted by the City shall contain substantially similar terms and conditions
and shall specifically require that the Franchisee serve the entire Franchise Area
5.2.2 In addition to those matters required elsewhere in this Ordinance to be
included in the Franchise Agreement, it must contain the following express
representations by the Franchisee that:
5.2.2(1) It accepts and agrees to all of the provisions of this Ordinance,
and any supplementary specification, as to construction, operation, or
maintenance of the System, which the City may include in the Franchise
Agreement subject to applicable state and federal law.
5.2.2(2) It has examined all of the provisions of this Ordinance and agrees
that the provisions thereof are valid, binding at this time, and enforceable as of the
effective date of the Franchise.
11
5.2.2(3) It recognizes the right of the City to adopt such additional
regulations of general applicability as it will find necessary in the exercise of its
police power.
5.2.3 No Franchise will be exclusive.
5.2.4 Every Franchise will specifically require that the Franchisee serve the
entire Franchise Area when residences number seven (7) per 1320 feet. Each connection
within one hundred fifty feet (150) of the existing system shall be connected at no cost to
the customer.
5.2.5 The Franchise Agreement will contain such further conditions or
provisions as may be included in the request for proposal and negotiated between the City
and the Franchisee, except that no such conditions or provisions will be such as to
conflict with any provisions of this Ordinance or other law. In case of such conflict or
ambiguity between any terms or provisions of the Franchise Agreement and this
Ordinance, the Franchise Agreement will control.
5.3 Design, Services, and Capabilities.
5.3.1 Cable or OVS System Design. Every Franchisee shall offer Cable Service
that meets the cable-related needs of the City. Such Cable Service shall, at a minimum,
be comparable to Cable Services offered by that Franchisee or its Affiliates operating any
headend serving the City and surrounding municipalities. The Cable Franchise shall
incorporate a description of the Franchisee’s Cable or OVS System including the general
design and capabilities of the Cable or OVS System to identify how the Cable or OVS
System will meet the current and future Cable needs of the City.
5.3.2 The Cable or OVS System. Every Cable or OVS System shall pass by
every single-family dwelling unit within the Franchise Area in accordance with line
extension policies set forth in this Ordinance. Service shall be provided to Subscribers in
accordance with the schedules and line extension policies specified in this Ordinance.
5.3.3 Drops to Public Buildings.
5.3.3(1) Every Franchisee shall provide installation of at least one (1)
Cable Drop and one (1) outlet, provide monthly Basic Cable Service, and
maintenance of the same, without charge, to public buildings specified by the City
in Exhibit B herein. All accredited K-12 schools, secondary private schools with
students receiving funding under Title I of the Education and Secondary School
Act of 1965, public libraries, and each police and fire station shall receive one (1)
Cable Drop, one (1) drop, Basic Cable Service, and maintenance of the same at no
charge, subject to the 150 foot limit. The location of such Cable drops and outlets
shall be determined in cooperation with the management of the public building to
which the connection is to be made. Following the City’s designation of
additional public buildings to receive Cable Service, a Franchisee shall complete
construction of the Drop and the outlet within 180 days of the request, weather
permitting and subject to payment of the commercially reasonable cost of
12
installation in excess of 150 feet. Drops and outlets that are in addition to the one
free Drop and outlet required by this section shall be provided by a Franchisee at
commercially reasonable cost Alternatively, at an institution’s request, the
institution may add outlets at its own expense, as long as such installation meets
the Franchisee’s standards, which shall be made readily available to any public
entity upon request. Additional outlets and Services to Public Buildings are
subject to the applicable commercial rate.
5.3.3(2) All Cable Outlets provided for in this subsection shall not be
utilized for commercial purposes. The City shall take reasonable precautions to
prevent any use of a Franchisee’s Cable or OVS System in any inappropriate
manner or that may result in loss or damage to the Cable or OVS System. Users
of such outlets shall hold the Franchisee harmless from any and all liability or
claims arising out of their use of such outlets, other than those claims arising out
of improper installation or faulty equipment.
5.3.3(3) In instances where the Drop line from the feeder cable to the
public building, school, or library exceeds 150 feet, the Franchisee may charge for
its commercially reasonable costs that are incurred in exceeding this length. A
Franchisee may require advance payment of this cost.
5.3.4 Use of Franchisee’s Facilities. Subject to any applicable state or
federal regulations, the City shall have the right to install and maintain, upon the poles
and within the underground pipes and conduits of a Franchisee, any wires and fixtures
desired by the City for public purposes. . Provided, however, that (a) such use by
Grantor shall not interfere with the current or future use by Franchisee or any pre-existing
user or lessor of Franchisee’s facilities; (b) such use by Grantor is restricted to noncommercial
public purposes; (c) Grantor takes reasonable precautions to prevent and use
of Franchisee’s facilities in any manner that results in an inappropriate use thereof, or any
loss or damage to the Cable or OVS System. For the purposes this subsection, “public
purposes” includes, but is not limited to, the use of the structures and installations for
City fire, police, traffic, utility, and/or signal systems, but not for commercial Cable or
OVS System purposes in competition with the Franchisee; (d) to the extent provided by
state law, the City holds Franchisee harmless against and from all claims, demands, costs,
or liabilities of every kind and nature whatsoever arising out of such use of said poles or
conduits; and (e) at the Franchisee’s sole discretion, the City may be required either to
pay a reasonable rental fee or otherwise reasonably compensate the Franchisee for the use
of such conduit or other equipment.
5.3.5 Upgrade of the System and New Developments. Every Franchisee shall
upgrade its Cable or OVS System (herein referred to as “System Upgrade”), if required,
as set forth in its respective Franchise. Furthermore, the City may amend this Ordinance
whenever necessary to enable the Franchisee to take advantage of any developments in
the field of transmission of communication signals and upgrade the System which will
afford it an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently, or economically serve its
customers; provided that this Section will not be construed to require the City to make
any such amendment and further provided that the City may not impose any capital or
13
operating expenditures on any Franchisee pursuant to this Section without the
Franchisee’s consent.
5.3.6 Emergency Alert Capability. Every Franchisee shall at all times provide
the System capabilities to comply with the FCC’s Emergency Alert System rules and
regulations. Provided, that if the FCC at some future date eliminates the current
regulations, the City and Franchisee shall mutually agree upon the applicable standard on
a going forward basis.
5.3.7 Periodic Review and Evaluation. The City has determined that cable
television technology, programs, and services are subject to continuing change. This
includes change in law and regulations, as well as technological and service
advancements. For this reason, it is essential that any Franchise which is granted
pursuant to this Ordinance must include provisions for periodic review evaluation and
modification and procedures and requirements relating to evaluation of the State of the
Art technology and services permitting the City and Franchisee to agree to changes based
upon review and in accordance with the procedures outlined in the Franchise Agreement.
5.3.8 Close Captioning and Descriptive Audio Service. Every Franchisee will
make audio descriptive services and closed captioning capabilities available to the extent
required by state and federal law.
5.3.9 HDTV/ATV Conversion. Conversion to High Definition
Television/Advances Television (HDTV/ATV) formats shall occur in accordance with
applicable law.
5.4 Public, Educational, and Governmental Access or PEG Access.
5.4.1 Access Channels.
5.4.1(1) Every Franchisee shall, to the extent required in its Franchise and
subject to applicable law, provide or fund PEG Access Facilities in an amount
equal to that provided by other Franchisee(s). Such requirements shall, at a
minimum, satisfy the community need for such facilities and/or service as
determined by the City or governing body for the period of the applicable
Franchise and shall be established in the Franchise Agreement.
5.4.1(2) Every Franchisee shall also provide channel capacity, and support
for Public, Educational, and Government Access Channels, as specified in their
Franchise. All such PEG Access Channels shall be available to all Subscribers as
part of their Basic Cable Service. Given the on-going changes in the state of
technology as of the Effective Date of this Ordinance, absent express written
consent of the City, Franchisee shall transmit PEG Access Channels in the format
or technology utilized to transmit all of the Channels on the Basic Cable Service
tier. Oversight and administration of the PEG Access Channels shall be set forth
in the Franchise Agreement.
14
5.4.1(3) The City may require the Grantee to pay up to one percent (1%)
per Subscriber, per month as a grant for the community's telecommunicationsrelated
capital needs. Such charge may be itemized as a "PEG Fee" and passedthrough
on Subscriber's bills.
5.4.1(4) The City may adopt or modify the "PEG Fee," up to the
amount provided in paragraph 5.2a above, by adopting a Resolution identifying
the amount thereof. The City shall provide written notice of any modification or
adoption of the PEG fee to Grantee within 90 days of the proposed effective
change. An equivalent fee shall be required of all other franchised video service
providers.
5.4.1(5) The City, or its designee, may implement rules for use of any
access channel(s).
5.4.2 Proof of Performance Testing. To ensure high quality of service on the
Access Channels, results of proof of performance testing as required by applicable
federal law throughout the System and on all required Channels will be made available to
the City upon request to the extent required by the Franchise. Every Franchisee will
monitor the Cable or OVS System to determine and ensure that the level of technical
quality of the System’s transmission of Access Channels is in conformance with the FCC
Rules and is the same as on other Channels transmitted on the Cable or OVS System.
5.5 Construction Standards and Requirements.
5.5.1 Permit Required. Franchisee will not construct any Cable or OVS System
facilities until Franchisee has secured the necessary permits from the City or other
cognizant public agencies.
5.5.2 Construction Standards. All of the Franchisee's plant and equipment
including, but not limited to, the antenna site, headend, and distribution System, towers,
house connections, structures, poles, wire, cable, coaxial cable, fixtures, and
appurtenances will be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced,
removed, repaired, maintained, and operated in accordance with good engineering
practices, performed by experienced pole line construction crews and so as not to
endanger or interfere with the safety of any Person or property, or to interfere with
improvements the City may deem proper to make, or to interfere in any manner with the
right of any property owner, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular
traffic on City properties.
5.5.3 Compliance with City Ordinances for Work in Rights-of-Way. Any
opening or obstruction in or disturbance of the Rights-of-Way or other municipal
properties made by the Franchisee in the exercise of its rights under a Franchise
Agreement will be done in compliance with City ordinances which regulate work in the
public ways of the City, except that any bond requirements therein shall be waived in
cognizance of the bond requirements of this Ordinance.
15
5.5.4 Compliance with City Ordinances for Construction and Building
Standards. The Franchisee will comply with the minimum standards provided for by the
applicable ordinances of the City adopted from time to time containing construction or
building standards of general applicability; provided, however, that Franchisee shall not
be required to modify or alter its Cable or OVS System unless such modification or
alteration is necessary for the protection of public health, safety and welfare.
5.5.5 Removal and Relocation of Facilities. The Franchisee will, at its expense,
protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same Rights-of-Way, or other
Right-of-Way, or remove from the Right-of-Way, any property of Franchisee when
required by the City or its designee by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street
excavation, freeway, and street construction, change or establishment of street grade,
installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, and tracks, or any
other type of structures or improvements by public agencies. If the City compensates any
utility for such work, the City must similarly compensate the Franchisee for such work.
5.5.6 Movement of Lines. The Franchisee will, on the request of any private
party holding an appropriate permit issued by the City and upon five (5) days prior
written notice, temporarily raise or lower its lines to permit the moving of any building or
other structure, and the actual expense of the same will be paid in advance by the party
requesting the same.
5.5.7 Tree Trimming. The Franchisee will have the right, with the prior
approval of the City, except in emergency circumstances, to remove, trim, cut, and keep
clear of its poles, wires, or cables, the trees in and along the streets of the City, but in the
exercise of such right, the Franchisee will not cut or otherwise injure said trees to any
greater extent than is reasonably necessary for the continued integrity of its poles, wires,
or cables.
5.5.8 Responsible for Restoration and Costs. The Franchisee, in exercise of any
right granted to it by the Franchise, will reconstruct, replace, restore, or repair any street,
and any sewer, gas, or water main, pipe, electric, fire alarm, or police communications,
off or on City property, or Right-of-Way or traffic control facility of the City which may
be damaged or destroyed by the exercise of any such right, to a condition as good as that
prevailing before said work to the reasonable satisfaction of the City. The City reserves
the right to determine whether the Franchisee has properly complied with the provisions
of this paragraph and in the event it is determined that the Franchisee has failed to do so,
the City will have the right to, following notice to the Franchisee and reasonable
opportunity for the Franchisee to cure, enforce such provisions, and the Franchisee will
reimburse the City in full for all expenses incurred by the City in carrying out all or part
of such provisions.
5.5.9 Failure to Complete Work. Upon failure of the Franchisee to commence, pursue,
or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this Ordinance to be done
in any Rights-of-Way, within the time prescribed, and to the reasonable satisfaction of
the City or its designee, the City or its designee may, following notice to the Franchisee
and reasonable opportunity for the Franchisee to cure, at its option, cause such work to be
done. The Franchisee will pay to the City the cost thereof in the itemized amounts
16
reported by the City or its designee to Franchisee within 30 days after receipt of such
itemized report.
5.6 Technical Standards.
5.6.1 Compliance with OSHA. All construction practices will be in accordance
with all applicable sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, as
amended, as well as all other applicable local, state, and federal laws and regulations.
5.6.2 Compliance with National Electrical Codes. All Installation of electronic
equipment will be installed in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical
and Safety Code and National Electrical Code as amended.
5.6.3 Compliance with FAA Regulations. Antennae and their supporting
structures (towers) will be painted, lighted, erected, and maintained in accordance with
all applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and all other
local, state, and federal laws and regulations.
5.6.4 Test and Compliance Procedure. Tests for the Cable or OVS System shall
be performed periodically in a manner so as to conform with FCC specifications. The
tests may be witnessed by representatives of the City and written test results shall be
made available to the City within 30 days of a request.
5.6.5 Additional Tests. At any time after commencement of Service to
Subscribers, the City may require the Franchisee to perform additional tests, full or
partial repeat tests, or tests involving a specific Subscriber's Drop. Such additional tests
may be made on the basis of Complaints received or other evidence indicating an
unresolved controversy or significant noncompliance, and such tests will be limited to the
particular matter in controversy. The City will be able to designate a representative to be
present during the testing. If a test indicates that the Franchisee is in compliance with
FCC standards and requirements, the City will bear the expense of such test. If a test
indicates that the Franchisee is not in compliance with FCC standards and requirements,
the Franchisee will bear the expense of such test. The City will endeavor to so arrange its
requests for such special tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to Franchisee
or to the Subscriber.
5.7 Repair.
Any damage caused to the property of building owners or users or any other Person by
the Franchisee's negligence will be repaired fully to a condition as good as that prevailing
before said work by the Franchisee.
5.8 Removal of Facilities From Subscriber’s Premises Upon Request.
Upon termination of service to any Subscriber, the Franchisee will promptly remove all
its facilities and equipment from the premises of such Subscriber upon his or her request.
17
5.9 Transfer of Ownership.
5.9.1 Franchisee will not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet, or dispose of any
Franchise awarded under this Ordinance or any of the rights or privileges granted by the
Franchise to any Person other than an Affiliate of Franchisee, without the prior consent of
the City, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld and may be denied only upon
a good faith finding by the City that the proposed transferee lacks the legal, technical, or
financial qualifications to consummate the transaction and operate the Cable or OVS
System so as to perform its obligations under the Cable Franchise. This section shall not
apply to sales or property or equipment in the normal course of business.
Further, any sale or transfer and the consent thereto, will comply with applicable
legal requirements. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign, or otherwise dispose of
the Franchise and/or the Cable or OVS System without the consent of the City except as
otherwise provided herein will be null and void. The granting of a security interest in any
of Franchisee's assets, or any mortgages or other hypothecation, will not be considered a
transfer for the purposes of this Section.
5.9.2 Any change of control of Franchisee will be deemed to be a "sale" or
"transfer" of the Franchise. A "change of control" will include any stock sale by
Franchisee to, or any merger or consolidation with, any Person (or group of Persons
acting in concert) that is not an Affiliate of Franchisee before such transaction but shall
not include the transfer of ownership or control of a Franchisee’s limited or nonmanaging
general partner. The sale, assignment, or other transfer of all or a majority of a
Franchisee’s assets in the City shall also constitute a sale or transfer.
5.9.3 The Franchisee must comply with provisions of the Cable Act regarding
transfers of ownership and any other state, federal, or local laws which are applicable.
5.9.4 The Franchisee will notify the City in writing of any foreclosure or any
other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the property of the Franchisee or upon the
termination of any lease or interest covering all or a substantial part of said franchised
property. Such notification will be considered by the City as notice that a change in
control or ownership of the Franchise has taken place and the provisions under this
Section governing the consent of the City to such change in control or ownership will
apply.
5.9.5 For the purpose of determining whether it will consent to such a change,
transfer, or acquisition of control, the City may inquire into the qualifications of the
prospective transferee or controlling party, and the Franchisee will assist the City in any
such inquiry. The transferee will be required to establish that it possesses the legal,
technical, and financial qualifications to operate and maintain the System and comply
with all Franchise requirements for the remainder of the term of the Franchise. After
considering the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the transferee and
determining that they are satisfactory, the City may approve the transfer of rights and
obligations of said Franchise.
18
5.9.6 As a condition of transfer of ownership or control any proposed transferee
shall execute an agreement, in such form as acceptable to the City Attorney, that it will
assume and be bound by all of the provisions, terms and conditions of this Ordinance and
any Franchise granted pursuant to it.
5.9.7 Any financial institution having a pledge of the Franchisee or its assets for
the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the Franchise will
have the right to notify the City that it or its designee satisfactory to the City will take
control of and operate the Cable Television System, in the event of a Franchisee default
in its financial obligations. Said financial institution will also submit a plan for such
operation within 30 days of assuming such control that will assure continued service and
compliance with all Franchise requirements during the term the financial institution
exercises control over the System. The financial institution will not exercise control over
the System for a period exceeding one year unless extended by the City in its discretion
and during said period of time it will have the right to petition the to transfer the
Franchise to another Franchisee.
5.9.8 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, no such prior
consent will be required for any transfer or assignment to any Person controlling,
controlled by, or under the same common control as the Franchisee.
5.9.9 The City reserves any legal right it has under applicable law to require a
Franchisee to pay all costs and expenses incurred by the City in connection with the sale,
assignment, or transfer of a Cable Franchise, including, but not limited to, the City’s costs
of reviewing the qualifications of any proposed transferees.
5.10 Purchase by City.
Subject to the Cable Act, if a Franchise is revoked for cause, the City may, to the extent
permitted by federal law, acquire that portion of the Cable or OVS System serving the
City upon payment of an equitable price or affect a transfer of ownership of the same to
another Person.
5.11 Requests for Cable Service.
A Franchisee will provide Cable Service to any requesting Subscriber within the City
within 30 days from the date of request, weather permitting.
5.12 Multiple Franchises.
5.12.1 Grant of Additional Franchise. The City may grant one or more Franchises for
the City. Each Franchise Agreement granted shall contain substantially similar terms and
conditions including the service area. The City may, in its sole discretion, limit the
number of Franchises granted based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements
of applicable laws and specific local considerations, such as:
5.12.1(1) The capacity of the public Rights-of-Way to accommodate multiple
coaxial cables in addition to the cables, conduits, and pipes of the utility systems, such as
19
electrical, power, telephone, gas, and sewerage and the potential disruption of those
Rights-of-Way and private property that may occur if one or more additional Franchises
are granted.
5.12.1(2) The impact on the community of having multiple Franchises.
5.12.1(3) The amount of time it will take the applicant to complete construction
of the proposed Cable or OVS System and activate Cable Service in the entire Franchise
Area; and, whether the applicant can complete construction and activation of its Cable or
OVS System in a timely manner.
5.12.1(4) The disruption on the availability of Cable Service within the City.
5.12.1(5) Such other information as the City may deem appropriate to be
considered prior to granting any competing or overlapping Franchise.
5.12.2 Permits for Non-Franchised Entities. The City may issue a license to a Person
other than the Franchisee to permit that Person to traverse any portion of a Franchisee’s
Franchise Area within the City in order to provide Cable Service outside, but not within
the City. Such a license or easement, absent a grant of a Franchise in accordance with
this Ordinance, shall not authorize nor permit said Person to provide Cable Service of any
type to any home or place of business within the City.
5.13 Discriminatory or Preferential Practice.
5.13.1 Rates and Charges. The Franchisee will not, in its rates or charges, or in making
available the services or facilities of its System, or in its rules or regulations, or in any
other respect, make or grant preferences or advantages to any Subscriber or potential
Subscriber to the System, or to any user or potential user of the System; and will not
subject any such Persons to any prejudice or disadvantage. The foregoing will not be
deemed to prohibit or preclude promotional rates or charges.
5.13.2 Access and Employment. The Franchisee will not deny service, deny access, or
otherwise discriminate against Subscribers on the basis of race, creed, color, religion,
national origin, or sex. The Franchisee will comply at all times with applicable equal
employment opportunity requirements and all other applicable federal, state, and local
laws and regulations, and all executive and administrative orders relating to
nondiscrimination which are hereby incorporated and made part of this Ordinance by
reference.
5.13.3 Build-Out. A Franchisee may not discriminate in the build-out of its Cable or
OVS System to a particular area of the City or provision of Cable Service to individual
groups of residents on the basis of race, creed, color, religion, national origin, sex, or
economic condition.
5.14 Subscriber Privacy.
20
The Franchise will comply with the Subscriber privacy standards located in 47 U.S.C.
§ 551. If the standards in 47 U.S.C. § 551 cease to exist, the City will have the right to
implement the following:
No signal will be transmitted from a Subscriber terminal for purposes of
monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices without the express
written permission of the Subscriber. The request for such permission will
be contained in a separate document with a prominent statement that the
Subscriber is authorizing the monitoring and acknowledging the
provisions. The authorization will be revocable at any time by the
Subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever; provided, however,
that the Franchisee will be entitled, without permission, to conduct
System-wide or individually addressed "sweeps" for the purpose of
verifying System integrity, controlling return transmission, or billing for
services.
5.15 Permits and Authorizations.
The Franchisee or applicant for Franchise will diligently apply for all necessary permits
and authorizations required in the conduct of its business, and will diligently pursue the
acquisition thereof, including necessary pole attachment contracts, and necessary
authorizations from the Federal Aviation Administration to construct such receiving
antenna towers as may be required, and any necessary authorizations or waivers from the
FCC. After the Franchisee has diligently pursued the acquisition of necessary pole
attachment contracts, or other necessary easements, and where such necessary contracts
have not been entered or easements obtained after a reasonable period of time, the
Franchisee may submit the matter to the City and the City may thereupon provide
assistance that may be necessary to arrive at a solution so that scheduled construction of
the System will not be impaired.
5.16 Annual Reports.
5.16.1 Contents. Upon request of the City, each Franchisee will file an Annual
Report. Such Report will include:
5.16.1(1) An ownership report, identifying all Persons who at any time
during the preceding year controlled or benefited from an interest in the
Franchisee of five percent or more.
5.16.1(2) Copies of all rules, regulations, terms, and conditions the
Franchisee has adopted for the conduct of its business.
5.16.1(3) A summary of any customer surveys conducted that year.
5.16.1(4) A summary of the previous year's (or in the case of the initial
reporting year, the initial year's) activities in development of the Cable or OVS
21
System, including but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the
reporting year.
5.16.1(5) A list of Franchisee's officers, board members, and other
principals and a current list of the addresses of each officer and director and other
management personnel of the Franchisee.
5.16.1(6) A revenue statement certified by a representative of the
Franchisee showing the Gross Revenues of the Franchisee for the proceeding
fiscal year.
5.16.1(7) A statement of the Franchisee’s current billing practices and
charges.
5.16.1(8) As part of the Annual Report, Franchisee will provide to the
City the following statistical information:
(i) Statistics compiled on a quarterly basis recording service calls
in which a technician or repairman is dispatched to a residence to correct a
reception problem. Such records should be kept pursuant to Section 7.6.
(ii) Franchisee's leakage log.
(iii) Records of Complaints called or written into the System and
kept in the ordinary course of business. Such records should be kept
pursuant to the requirements of Section 7.6.
Upon request, Franchisee will allow the City Administrator or his or her designee
to review a detailed plan (map) of the System at its offices.
5.16.2 Service Contract and Subscriber Information.
5.16.2(1) A Franchisee shall have authority to promulgate such rules,
regulations, terms, and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall
be reasonably necessary to enable the Franchisee to exercise its rights and
perform its obligations under this Ordinance and a Franchise Agreement and to
assure uninterrupted Cable Service to all of its Subscribers; provided such rules,
regulations, terms, and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions of
this Ordinance, federal, state, and or local law, or any applicable rules and
regulations.
5.16.2(2) Upon request, a Franchisee shall submit to City any standard
residential Subscriber contract form that it utilizes. If no written form exists,
upon request, a Franchisee shall file with the City a document completely and
concisely stating the terms of the standard residential Subscriber contract offered.
5.17 Indemnification, Security Funds, Insurance.
22
5.17.1 Liability and Indemnification. The Franchisee will indemnify, hold harmless,
release, and defend the City, its officers, agents, and employees from and against any and
all lawsuits, claims, causes of action, actions, liability, demands, damages, disability
losses, expenses including reasonable attorneys' fees, and costs or liabilities of any nature
that may be asserted by any Person or entity from any cause whatsoever including
another's concurring negligence arising from injury to Persons or damages to property to
the extent caused by any conduct undertaken by the Franchisee, its officers, agents, or
employees, by reason of its construction, operation, or maintenance of its System. Such
damages and penalties will include, but not be limited to, damages arising out of
copyright infringements, and all other damages arising out of the installation, operation,
or maintenance of the Cable or OVS System authorized herein, whether or not any act or
omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by the Franchise, except
that a Franchisee will not be liable for payment of damages and penalties arising from
any acts or omissions by the City, its agents, or employees. If a lawsuit is filed against the
City, either independently or jointly with the Franchisee to recover for any claim or
damages, the Franchisee, upon notice to it by the City, will, at its sole cost and expense,
defend and fully control the defense of the City against the action and, in the event of a
final judgment being obtained against the City, either independently or jointly with the
Franchisee solely by reason of the acts of the Franchisee, the Franchisee will pay said
judgment and all costs and hold the City harmless therefrom. However, the Franchisee
may not enter into any compromise, settlement, resolution, or disposition of a claim or
proceeding that may create or impose liability for the City without obtaining the City’s
written consent thereto which shall not be unreasonably withheld. In order for the City to
assert its rights to be indemnified and held harmless, the City must:
5.17.1(1) Notify Franchisee of any claim or legal proceeding which gives rise to
such right;
5.17.1(2) Afford Franchisee the opportunity to participate in and fully control any
compromise, settlement, resolution, or disposition of such claim or proceeding; and
5.17.1(3) Fully cooperate in the defense of such claim and make available to
Franchisee all such information which it may lawfully furnish to Franchisee and relating
to the claim.
5.17.2 Security Funds. The City may require the Franchisee to file with the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer, concurrently with its acceptance of the Franchise and at
Franchisee's sole expense a corporate surety bond, construction bond, performance bond,
and/or security fund. Such bond and/or security fund will be in an amount specified in
the Franchise Agreement, issued by a responsible company licensed to do business in
Minnesota and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the Franchisee to meet its
obligations under this Ordinance and the Franchise. The Franchisee shall be required to
replenish any such bond within thirty (30) days after the City draws down upon it.
5.17.3 General Provisions Relating to Insurance.
23
5.17.3(1) During the course of a Franchise Agreement, the Franchisee
will be required to maintain liability insurance, to protect the City and the
Franchisee from and against any and all claims, injury, or damage to Persons or
property, both real and personal, caused by the construction, erection, operation,
or maintenance of any aspect of the System. The amount of insurance will be
specified in the Franchise Agreement.
5.17.3(2) The Franchisee will provide workers' compensation insurance
as required by state law.
5.17.3(3) All such insurance coverage will provide a thirty (30) day notice
to the City Administrator in the event of material alteration or cancellation of any
coverage afforded in said policies prior to the date said material alteration or
cancellation will become effective.
5.17.3(4) Copies of all certificates evidencing insurance will be furnished
to and filed with the City Administrator prior to the commencement of operations
or the expiration of prior policies, as the case may be.
5.17.3(5) It will be the obligation of Franchisee to promptly notify the
City of any pending or threatened litigation that would be likely to affect the
Franchisee's insurance coverage.
5.17.4 Liability Insurance.
A. As of the effective date of this Franchise Agreement, the Franchisee will,
at its sole expense, maintain during the entire term of this Franchise public
liability insurance with a company licensed to do business in the State of
Minnesota with a rating by Best of not less than “B” that will protect the
Franchisee, the City, and the City’s officials, officers, employees, and agents from
claims which may arise from operations under this Franchise except claims
brought by City employees which are covered by Worker’s Compensation,
whether such operations are by the Franchisee, its officials, officers, directors,
employees, or agents, or any subcontractors of Franchisee. This liability
insurance will include, but will not be limited to, protection against claims arising
from bodily and personal injury, and damage to property resulting from the
Franchisee’s automobiles, products, and completed operations. The amount of
such insurance will be not less than the following:
1. General liability insurance:
Bodily injury per Person $1,000,000
Bodily injury per occurrence $1,000,000
Property damage per occurrence $1,000,000
Property damage and bodily
injury, aggregate $5,000,000
2. Automobile insurance:
Bodily injury per Person $1,000,000
24
Bodily injury per occurrence $1,000,000
Property damage per occurrence $1,000,000
3. Umbrella coverage: $1,000,000
B. The liability policy will provide for the following, by endorsement or
otherwise:
1. The policy will cover personal injury as well as bodily injury.
2. The policy will cover blanket contractual liability subject to the standard
universal exclusions of contractual liability included in the carrier’s standard
endorsement as to bodily injuries, personal injuries, and property damage.
3. Broad form property damage liability will be afforded.
4. The City will be included as an additional insured on the policy.
5. The coverage is primary insurance and no other insurance or fund of the
City will be called upon to contribute to a loss under this coverage.
6. Standard form of cross-liability will be afforded.
7. The policy will not be canceled without thirty (30) days prior written
notice of such cancellation to the City.
C. The automobile insurance policy will provide for the following, by
endorsement or otherwise:
1. The City will be included as an additional insured on the policy.
2. The policy will not be canceled without thirty (30) days prior written
notice of such cancellation to the City.
D. Upon ninety (90) days prior written notice to Franchisee, the City reserves the
right to adjust the limit coverage requirements no more than every five (5) years. Any
such adjustment by the City will be no greater than the increase in the State of Minnesota
Consumer Price Index for such five-year period.
E. Franchisee will submit to the City documentation of the required insurance
including a certificate of insurance signed by the insurance agent and companies named,
as well as all properly executed endorsements required by this Section 2.2. The
certificate of insurance should confirm that the required endorsements are in effect.
F. Any deductible or self-insured retention must be declared to the City.
25
G. Franchisee will have insurance coverage sufficient to cover any claim in the event
that Franchisee sells or transfers the system, or in the event of termination or revocation
of this Franchise.
H. It will be the obligation of the Franchisee to notify the City promptly of any
pending or threatened litigation likely to negatively impact its ability to provide the
insurance coverage required herein.
5.17.5 Non-Waiver. Neither the provisions of this Section, nor any bonds accepted by
the City pursuant thereto, nor any damages recovered by the City thereunder will be
construed to excuse unfaithful performance by the Franchisee or limit the liability of the
Franchisee under this Ordinance or the Franchise for damages, either to the full amount
of the bond or otherwise.
5.18 Continuity of Service.
5.18.1 It will be the right of all Subscribers to continue receiving Cable Services insofar
as their financial and other obligations to the Franchisee are honored. In the event that
the Franchisee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the System, or the City gives notice of
intent to terminate or fails to renew the Franchise, the Franchisee will act so as to insure
that all Subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service, subject to compliance with
federal and state laws.
5.18.2 In the event of a change of the Franchisee, or in the event a new operator acquires
the System, the Franchisee will cooperate with the City's new Franchisee or operator in
maintaining continuity of Cable Service to all Subscribers. During such period,
Franchisee will be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the
System and will be entitled to reasonable cost for its services when it no longer operates
the System.
5.19 Safety Requirements.
5.19.1 The Franchisee will at all times employ ordinary care and will install,
maintain, and use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and
accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public.
5.19.2 The Franchisee will install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures, and
other equipment in accordance with the requirements of the National Electrical Safety
Code of the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers; the National Electrical Code
of the National Fire Protection Association; the Bell System Code of Pole Line
Construction; and applicable federal, state, and local regulations.
5.19.3 All structures and all lines, equipment, and connections in, over, under,
and upon the Rights-of-Way of the City, wherever situated or located, will at all times be
kept and maintained in a safe, suitable, substantial condition and in good order and repair.
SECTION 6: FRANCHISE FEES
26
6.1 Five Percent Franchise Fee.
During the term of any Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance, the Franchisee will
pay to the City for the use of its Rights-of-Way an annual franchise fee in an amount of
five percent of the annual Gross Revenues as compensation for the grant of a Franchise
and in consideration of permission to use the Rights-of-Way of the City for the
construction, operation, maintenance, and reconstruction of a Cable or OVS System, and
to defray the costs of Franchise obligations. This payment will be in addition to any
other tax or payment owed to the City by the Franchisee and does not include rental of
poles or underground conduits. Further, every Franchisee that offers any “bundled”
services shall fairly reflect as part of its calculation of applicable Franchise Fees an
appropriate and reasonable division of services among the various services offered. The
specific cost accounting for such revenue attribution shall be set out in the individual
Franchise or other agreement.
6.2 Payment and Audits.
Sales tax or other taxes levied directly on a per subscription basis and collected by
Franchisee will be deducted from Gross Revenues before computation of sums due the
City is made. Payments due the City under the terms of this Ordinance will be computed
and paid monthly.. The City will be furnished a statement with each payment, certified
as correct by the Franchisee, reflecting the total amount of Gross Revenues and the above
charges, deductions, and computations for the one-month payment period covered by the
payment. Upon 10 days prior written notice, the City will have the right to conduct an
independent audit of Franchisee's records, in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles and if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of five
percent or more, the Franchisee will assume all reasonable costs of the audit. Any
additional amount due the City as a result of such audit will be paid within 30 days
following written notice by the City to the Franchisee, which notice will include a copy
of the audit report.
6.3 Acceptance of Payment.
No acceptance of any payment will be construed as a release or accord and satisfaction of
any claim the City may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee
under this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement or for the performance of any other
obligation hereunder.
6.4 Failure to Pay.
Failure to pay any fees required by this Section within 10 days of receipt of written notice
of such failure from the City will be grounds for termination of the Franchise and
reinstatement thereof may be had only upon resolution by the City Council.
6.5 Penalty for Late Payment.
27
In the event that any franchise fee payment or recomputed amount is not made on or
before the dates specified above, Franchisee will pay as additional compensation an
interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to the prime
lending rate plus one and one-half percent during the period for which payment was due
and unpaid.
6.6 Monthly Report of Gross Revenues.
Each Franchisee will file with the City monthly reports in the form provided as Exhibit A
hereto, of Gross Revenues certified as correct by the Franchisee.
SECTION 7: CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS
7.1 Compliance.
Franchisee shall comply with the customer service standards of the FCC, as outlined in
this Section.
7.2 Cable or OVS System Office Hours and Telephone Availability.
7.2.1 Franchisee will maintain a local, toll-free, or collect call telephone access
line which will be available to its Subscribers twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven days
per week.
7.2.1(1) Trained Franchisee representatives will be available to respond to
customer telephone inquiries during Normal Business Hours.
7.2.1(2) After Normal Business Hours, the access line may be answered
by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine.
Inquiries received after Normal Business Hours must be responded to by a trained
Franchisee representative on the next business day.
7.2.2 Under Normal Operating Conditions, telephone answer time by a
customer representative, including wait time, will not exceed thirty (30) seconds when
the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time will not exceed
thirty (30) seconds. These standards will be met no less than ninety percent (90%) of the
time under Normal Operating Conditions, measured on a quarterly basis.
7.2.3 The Franchisee will not be required to acquire equipment or perform
surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above unless a
historical record of Complaints indicates a clear failure to comply.
7.2.4 Under Normal Operating Conditions, the customer will receive a busy
signal less than three percent (3%) of the time.
7.2.5 Customer service center and bill payment locations shall be open at least
during Normal Business Hours and will be conveniently located.
28
7.3 Installations, Outages, and Service Calls.
Under Normal Operating Conditions, each of the following four standards will be met no
less than ninety percent (90%) of the time measured on a quarterly basis:
7.3.1 Standard Installations will be performed within seven business days after
an order has been placed. "Standard" Installations are those that are located up to one
hundred fifty (150) feet from the existing distribution System.
7.3.2 Excluding conditions beyond the control of Franchisee, Franchisee's
representatives will be available to begin working on Service Interruptions within
twenty-four (24) hours after the interruption becomes known Franchisee must begin
actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the
service problem.
7.3.3 The "appointment window" for Installations, service calls, and other
Installation activities will be either at a specific time or, at a maximum, within a four (4)
hour time block during Normal Business Hours. (The Franchisee may schedule service
calls and other Installation activities outside of Normal Business Hours for the express
convenience of the customer.)
7.3.4 Franchisee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close
of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment.
7.3.5 If Franchisee's representative is running late for an appointment with a
customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be
contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is
convenient for the customer.
7.4 Communications Between Franchisee and Subscribers.
7.4.1 Notifications to Subscribers.
7.4.1(1) The Franchisee will provide written information on each of the
following areas at the time of Installation of service, at least annually to all
Subscribers, and at any time upon request:
(i) Products and services offered;
(ii) Prices and options for programming services and
conditions of subscription to programming and other
services;
(iii) Installation and service maintenance policies;
(iv) Instructions on how to use the Cable Service;
29
(v) Channel positions programming carried on the System; and
(vi) Billing and Complaint procedures, including the address
and telephone number of the City official who handles
cable issues.
7.4.1(2) Subscribers will be notified of any changes in rates,
programming services, or Channel positions as soon as possible in writing.
Notice must be given to Subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of
such changes if the change is within the control of the Franchisee. In addition, the
Franchisee will notify Subscribers 30 days in advance of any significant changes
in the other information required by the preceding subparagraph.
Notwithstanding any other provision, Franchisee shall not be required to provide
prior notice of any rate change that is the result of a regulatory fee, franchise fee
or any other fee, tax, assessment or charge of any kind imposed by any federal
agency, state or franchise authority on the transaction between Franchisee and the
Subscriber.
7.4.2. Billing.
7.4.2(1) Bills will be clear, concise, and understandable. Bills must be
fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium
service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all
activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates, and credits.
7.4.2(2) In case of a billing dispute, the Franchisee must respond to a
written Complaint from a Subscriber within thirty (30) days.
7.4.3 Refunds. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than either:
7.4.3(1) The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the
request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier, or
7.4.3(2) The return of the equipment supplied by the Franchisee if service
is terminated.
7.4.4 Credits. Credits for service will be issued no later than the customer's next
billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted.
7.5 Parental Control.
Every Franchisee shall make available to any Subscriber upon request a “lockout” device, which
may be included within the converter, for blocking both video and audio portions of any
channel(s) of programming entering the Subscriber’s premises. Such device shall be provided at
a reasonable charge, except to the extent that federal law specifically provides otherwise. A
Franchisee may, however, require a reasonable security deposit for the use of such device.
7.6 Complaint Log.
30
Subject to the privacy provisions of 47 U.S.C. § 521 et. seq., every Franchisee shall prepare as
necessary and maintain written records of Complaints made to them and the resolution of such
Complaints, including the d*ate of such resolution. Such Complaint logs shall be on file for
three (3) years, and available for inspection by the City with reasonable prior notice.
SECTION 8: GENERAL
8.1 Subscriber Rates.
8.1.1 City may regulate rates as permitted by applicable law.
8.2 Records Required and City’s Right to Inspect.
8.2.1 Franchisee will at all times maintain:
8.2.1(1) A full and complete set of plans, records, and "as-built" maps showing
the location of the Cable Television System installed or in use in the City, exclusive of
Subscriber Service Drops and equipment provided in Subscribers' homes.
8.2.1(2) If requested by City, a summary of service calls, identifying the number,
general nature, and disposition of such calls, on a monthly basis to the extent kept in the
regular course of business.
8.2.2 The Franchisee agrees that the Franchisor, upon thirty (30) days written notice to
the Franchisee, may review such of its books and records at the Franchisee’s business
office, during normal business hours and on a nondisruptive basis, as is reasonably
necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this Franchise. Such notice shall
specifically reference the Section of the Franchise which is under review, so that the
Franchisee may organize the necessary books and records for easy access by the
Franchisor. The Franchisee shall not be required to maintain any books and records for
Franchise compliance purposes longer than three (3) years. Notwithstanding anything to
the contrary set forth herein, the Franchisee shall not be required to disclose information
which it reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature, nor disclose books
and records of any affiliate which is not providing Cable Service in the Service Area.
8.2.3 The Franchisor agrees to treat any information disclosed by the Franchisee as
confidential and only to disclose it to employees, representatives, and agents thereof that
have a need to know, or in order to enforce the provisions hereof. Information required
to be filed with the City pursuant to this Ordinance is subject to public inspection and
copying pursuant to Minnesota law concerning public and nonpublic information, The
City shall provide the Franchisee with notice of any request for information designated
by the Franchisee as proprietary. Nothing in this Ordinance or Franchise shall be
construed as a waiver of the provisions of Minnesota law applicable to public and
nonpublic information. The City shall not make information designated as proprietary
open for public inspection or copying except as may be required by law. The Franchisee
shall not be required to provide Subscriber information in violation of Section 631 of the
Cable Act.
31
8.2.4 The City will have the right to request copies of any petitions, applications,
communications, and reports submitted by Franchisee or on its behalf to the FCC,
Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other federal or state regulatory
commission or agency having jurisdiction with respect to any matters affecting the Cable
or OVS System authorized pursuant to this Ordinance and any Franchise, as such
documents relate to Franchisee's operation of its System under the Franchise. Copies of
responses from the regulatory agencies to Franchisee will likewise be furnished to the
City upon request. If the City is specifically named in any such pleading or response, the
City shall automatically be furnished a copy.
8.3 Abandonment or Removal of Franchise Property.
8.3.1 Abandonment. In the event that the use of any property of Franchisee within the
Franchise Area or a portion thereof is discontinued for a continuous period of 12 months,
Franchisee will be deemed to have abandoned that Franchise property.
8.3.2 Removal. The City, upon such terms as City may impose, may give Franchisee
permission to abandon, without removing, any System facility or equipment laid, directly
constructed, operated, or maintained under the Franchise. Unless such permission is
granted or unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance, the Franchisee will remove all
abandoned above-ground facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice from
City and will restore any affected street, alley, or public property to its former state at the
time such facilities and equipment were installed, so as not to impair its usefulness. In
removing its plant, structures, and equipment, Franchisee will refill, at its own expense,
any excavation that will be made by it and will leave all Rights-of-Way in as good
condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any
electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles, or attachments. The City will
have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the Rights-of-Way, cables, wires,
attachments, and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity, and insurance
provisions of this Ordinance and the security fund as provided herein will continue in full
force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by Franchisee
with the terms and conditions of this Section.
8.3.3 Transfer of Abandoned Property. Upon abandonment of any Franchise property
in place, the Franchisee, if required by the City, will submit to the City an instrument,
satisfactory in form to the City, transferring to the City the ownership of the Franchise
property abandoned.
8.3.4 Above Ground Portion of System. At the expiration of the term for which the
Franchise is granted and a denial of any renewal, or upon its revocation or earlier
expiration, as provided for herein, in any such case without renewal, extension, or
transfer, the City will have the right to require Franchisee to remove, at its own expense,
all above-ground portions of the Cable Television System from all Rights-of-Way within
the City within a reasonable period of time, but will not be less than 180 days.
8.3.5 No Material Interference. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in
this Ordinance, the Franchisee may abandon any underground Franchise property in place
32
so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the Rights-of-Way in which
such property is located or with the use thereof by any public utility or other cable
Franchisee.
8.4 Rights Reserved to City.
8.4.1 In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the City by this Ordinance, the
City reserves to itself every right and power which is required to be reserved by a
provision of any ordinance or under the Franchise Agreement.
8.5 Force Majeure.
Franchisee’s Inability to Perform. In the event Franchisee's performance of any of the
terms, conditions, or obligations required by this Ordinance or a Franchise granted
hereunder is prevented by a cause or event not within Normal Operating Conditions or
otherwise not within the Franchisee's control, such inability to perform will be deemed
excused and no penalties or sanctions will be imposed as a result thereof.
For the purpose of this Section, causes or events not within the control of
Franchisee include but are not limited to: acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil
disturbances, restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court, failure or
loss of utilities, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods,
earthquakes, landslides, weather, inability to obtain equipment, and fires.
8.6 Non-Enforcement Not Estoppel.
The Franchisee will not be relieved of its obligation to comply promptly with any of the
provisions of the Franchise by any failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance.
8.7 Procedure for Remedying Franchise Violations.
If Franchisee fails to perform in a timely manner any material obligation required by
Ordinance or a Franchise Agreement, following notice from the City and an opportunity
to cure such non-performance, the City may remedy such violation in accordance with
the following procedures:
8.7.1 The City will first notify a Franchisee of the violation in writing by
delivery of registered or certified mail, and demand correction within a reasonable time,
which will not be less than twenty-five (25) days in the case of the failure of a Franchisee
to pay any sum or other amount due the City under this Ordinance or a franchise, and not
less than forty-five (45) days in all other cases. If a Franchisee fails to correct the
violation within the time prescribed or if Franchisee fails to commence corrective action
within the time prescribed and diligently remedy such violation thereafter, a Franchisee
will then be given a written notice of not less than thirty (30) days of a public hearing to
be held before the City Council. Said notice will specify the violations alleged to have
occurred.
33
8.7.2 At the public hearing, the City Council will hear and consider all relevant
evidence, and thereafter render findings at its decision.
8.7.3 In the event the City Council finds that a Franchisee has corrected the
violation or has diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof
from the City and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation, or that no
material violation has occurred, the proceedings will terminate and no penalty or other
sanction will be imposed.
8.7.4 In the event the City Council finds that a material violation exits and that
Franchisee has not corrected the same in a satisfactory manner or has not diligently
commenced correction of such violation, the City Council may establish a date of not less
than thirty (30) days, by which a Franchisee must comply with the obligation or the City
may thereafter impose liquidated damages, payable from the security fund, in the
amounts stated in this Ordinance. The City Council may also commence the Franchise
termination procedures outlined in this Ordinance.
8.7.5 In determining whether a violation is material, the City will take into
consideration the reliability of the evidence of the violation, the nature of the violation,
and the damage, if any, caused to the City or the City’s residents thereby, whether the
violation was chronic, and any justifying or mitigating circumstances, and such other
matters the City may deem appropriate.
8.7.6 If the violation as proposed depends on a finding of fact, such finding of
fact will be made by the City only after an administrative hearing providing a Franchisee
with a full and fair opportunity to be heard. A Franchisee will have the right to appeal
any such decision to a state court or a federal district court or a federal court as a
Franchisee may choose and the revocation or penalty will not become effective until any
such appeal has become final or the time for taking such appeal will have expired.
8.8 Penalty.
In the event, after complying with the due process procedures provided herein, the City
finds that a material violation exists and that Franchisee has not corrected the same in a
satisfactory manner or has not diligently commenced correction of such violation, the
City may establish a date, no earlier than thirty (30) days, by which Franchisee must
comply with the obligation or the City may thereafter impose liquidated damages,
payable from the security fund, in the following amounts:
8.8.1 For failure to complete any upgrade, modifications, or construction in
accordance with a Franchise Agreement unless the City approves the delay, the penalty
will be one hundred dollars ($100) per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure
occurs or continues.
8.8.2 For failure to provide data, documents, reports, or information, or to
cooperate or participate with the City during a renewal process or the System review, the
penalty will be fifty dollars ($50) per day.
34
8.8.3 For failure to comply with any provision of the Customer Service
standards in Section 7 of this Ordinance, the penalty will be fifty dollars ($50) per day.
8.8.4 For failure to test, analyze, and report on the performance of the System
following a request by the City, the penalty will be fifty dollars ($50) per day.
8.8.5 For failure to comply with operation or maintenance standards, the penalty
will be fifty dollars ($50) per day.
8.8.6 For failure to provide the services described in a Franchise Agreement, the
penalty will be fifty dollars ($50) per day.
8.8.7 For failure to comply with all conditions of the City permits to disturb
Rights-of-Way, fix Rights-of-Way, or other terms or conditions of the City, the penalty
will be fifty dollars ($50) per day.
8.8.8 For failure to give notices required by this Ordinance or a Franchise
Agreement to City or departments of the City, the penalty will be fifty dollars ($50) per
day.
8.8.9 For failure to comply with any provision of this Ordinance or a Franchise
Agreement, for which a penalty is not otherwise specifically provided, the penalty will be
fifty dollars ($50) on occurrence and per day thereafter such failure continues.
8.9 Revocation or Termination of a Franchise and the Franchise Agreement.
8.9.1 Upon completion of the term of a Franchise Agreement, if a new,
extended, or renewed Franchise is not granted to a Franchisee by the City, a Franchisee’s
right to occupy the Public Rights-of-way shall terminate, subject to applicable federal
law.
8.9.2 The City shall have the right to revoke a Franchise and the Franchise
Agreement for a Franchisee’s failure to construct, operate or maintain a Cable or OVS
System as required by a Franchise Agreement or this Ordinance; for defrauding or
attempting to defraud the City or Subscribers; or for any other material breach or
violation of a Franchise or of this Ordinance.
8.9.3 To invoke the provisions of this Section, the City shall give a Franchisee
written notice of the default in its performance. If within ninety (90) calendar days
following such written notice from the City to a Franchisee, or such other period as a
Franchisee and the City shall agree, a Franchisee has not taken corrective action to the
satisfaction of the City, the City may give written notice to a Franchisee of its intent to
revoke a Franchise and the Franchise Agreement, stating its reasons.
8.9.4 Prior to revoking a Franchise, the City shall hold a public hearing, upon
thirty (30) calendar days advance notice to the public and by certified mail to a
Franchisee, at which time a Franchisee and the public shall be given an opportunity to be
heard. Following the public hearing, the City may determine whether to revoke a
35
Franchise and a Franchise Agreement based on the information presented at the hearing,
and other information of record, or, where applicable, grant additional time to a
Franchisee to affect any cure. If the City determines to revoke a Franchise and the
Franchise Agreement, it shall issue a written decision setting forth the reasons for its
decision. A copy of such decision shall be transmitted to a Franchisee.
8.9.5 If the City revokes a Franchise and the Franchise Agreement, or if for any
reason a Franchisee abandons, terminates, or fails to operate or maintain service to its
Subscribers, the following procedures and rights are effective.
8.9.5(1) The City may require the former Franchisee to remove its
above-ground facilities and equipment at the former Franchisee’s expense and
restore affected sites or permit the former Franchisee to abandon such facilities in
place. If the former Franchisee fails to do so within a reasonable period of time,
the City may have the removal done at the former Franchisee’s and/or surety’s
expense.
8.9.5(2) The City may require the former Franchisee to continue operating
the Cable or OVS System.
8.9.5(3) If a Cable or OVS System is abandoned by a Franchisee, the
ownership of all portions of the Cable or OVS System in Public Rights-of-Way
shall revert to the City and the City may sell, assign, or transfer all or part of the
assets of the System.
8.9.6 Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Franchisee may appeal a revocation
decision by the City to a court of competent jurisdiction and such appeal shall stay the
implementation of such revocation if a stay or injunction is obtained from the court.
SECTION 9: SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Ordinance is held by any court or by any federal or state agency of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or state law, rule, or
regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such court or agency to be modified in any
way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law, rule, or regulation, such provision
will be considered a separate, distinct, and independent part of this Ordinance, and such holding
will not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that
such law, rule, or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended, or otherwise changed,
so that the provision hereof which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with
such law, rule, or regulation, said provision will thereupon return to full force and effect and will
thereafter be binding on City and Franchisee, provided that City will give Franchisee 30 days
written notice of such change before requiring compliance with said provision or such longer
period of time as may be reasonably required for Franchisee to comply with such provision.
SECTION 10: BANKRUPTCY, RECEIVERSHIP AND FORECLOSURE
36
10.1 Consistent with federal law, the filing of a bankruptcy petition alone shall not constitute a
material default of this Ordinance or a Franchise Agreement provided, however, and subject to
applicable federal law, in the event of a bankruptcy or other insolvency proceeding, and the City
retains all existing rights and enforcement authority under this Ordinance or a Franchise
Agreement and its general police powers.
10.2 Subject to applicable federal law, any trustee or receiver of a Franchisee shall be required
to assume responsibility for, and remedy all existing defaults and provide adequate assurance of
future performance under this Ordinance and a Franchise Agreement during the pendency of
such bankruptcy or insolvency proceeding.
10.3 Subject to applicable federal law, in the event a foreclosure or other judicial sale of a
Franchisee’s plant, equipment, or other property comprising the System, or any material part
thereof, such event shall, at the option of the City, constitute a material breach of this Ordinance
and a Franchise Agreement, unless the entity acquiring the property gives adequate assurance of
future performance and that it will remedy all past defaults of a Franchise Agreement.
SECTION 11: ADMINISTRATION OF FRANCHISE
The City shall be responsible for the continued administration of this Code and any Franchises
granted hereunder. The City may delegate this authority from time to time in any manner
consistent with applicable law, provided, however, that the City shall not delegate enforcement
authority.
SECTION 12: EFFECTIVE DATE, PUBLICATION, ACCEPTANCE AND GOVERNING
LAW
12.1 Publication: Effective Date.
12.1.1 A Franchise shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the City
Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer. A Franchise Agreement shall be published in accordance
with the requirements of City and state law and shall take effect upon acceptance by a
Franchisee, and in accordance with the requirements as provided for in Section 12.2 of
this Ordinance, the Effective Date.
12.2 Acceptance and Governing Law.
12.2.1 A Franchisee shall have thirty (30) days from the date of adoption of a Franchise
to accept a Franchise in a written form approved by the City Attorney which shall include
Franchisee acceptance of this Ordinance and the Franchise, its authority to do business in
Minnesota, a representation of its legal, technical, and financial qualifications to fully
perform the obligations of this Ordinance and a Franchise, and the representations
required in Section 5.2.2 of this Ordinance. Such acceptance by Franchisee shall be
deemed the grant of a Franchise for all purposes. Franchisee shall also deliver a
37
Guarantee, if required by the City, when granting the Franchise, within the same time as
delivery of the acceptance, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney. In the event
acceptance does not take place within thirty (30) days or such other time as the City
might allow, a Franchise shall be null and void.
12.2.2 Upon acceptance of a Franchise, Franchisee shall be bound by all the terms and
conditions contained in this Ordinance and in a Franchise. Franchisee shall provide all
services and offerings specifically set forth in this Ordinance and in a Franchise, to
provide cable services within the City.
12.2.3 With its acceptance, Franchisee shall also deliver to the City a certified resolution
evidencing a Franchisee’s power and authority to accept a Franchise. Such documents
shall also describe the officers authorized to accept on behalf of Franchisee.
12.2.4 With its acceptance, Franchisee shall also deliver any security deposit, insurance
certificate, and performance bonds required by this Ordinance and a Franchise.
12.2.5 This Ordinance and a Franchise granted pursuant to it and every question arising
thereunder shall be construed or determined according to the laws of the State of
Minnesota and applicable federal law.
Adopted this 1st day of December, 2015 and effective December 1, 2015.
Voting Aye: Tweten, Olstad, Grassel, DeMers, Vetter, and Pokrzywinski.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: Buckalew.
Attest:
By
Council President Mayor Lynn Stauss
Approved as to Form: Approved as to Form:
______________________________
City Attorney Ronald I. Galstad City Administrator David Murphy
EXHIBIT A
38
39
Exhibit B
PUBLIC AND SCHOOL BUILDINGS
NOTE: The City may add other City buildings in the future that are within two hundred
(200) feet of the System, without cost provided that no commercial user or uses of said
City buildings shall be entitled to free service or installation of any kind.
Schools Public Buildings
Senior High School C East Grand Forks Fire Station #1 C
Central Middle School C East Grand Forks Fire Station #2 C
New Heights Elementary C Parks Maintenance C
South Point Elementary C East Grand Forks City Hall C
RR Valley High School Coop C East Grand Forks Police Department C
Sacred Heart Grade School C Civic Center C
Sacred Heart High School C VFW Arena C
Riverside Christian School C Library C
C = Classic Cable Only
1
ORDINANCE NO. 17, 4th SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA, AMENDING
CITY CODE CHAPTER 152 ENTITLED "(ZONING CODE)" BY AMENDING SECTION
152.317 TO CHANGE SECTION (D) 1 (e), ADDING SUBSECTION f, CHANGING 2 (a) (iv),
AND CHANGING 2 (c), (d) and (g), REGARDING THE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
ANTENNAS AND TOWERS; AND BY ADOPTING BY REFERENCE CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1 AND SECTION 10.99 WHICH, AMONG OTHER THINGS, CONTAIN
PENALTY PROVISIONS.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. That Section 152.317 (D) of the City Code is hereby amended to read as follows, towit
D. General Requirements:
1. The planning department and planning commission shall consider, and the applicant
shall demonstrate compliance with the following standards in determining whether to
approve an application for a wireless communication antenna and/or tower:
a. Co-location of wireless communication facilities. As a condition of issuing a
permit to construct and operate a wireless communication tower utilized for
commercial purposes within the City’s zoning jurisdiction, the applicant is
required to demonstrate that a suitable location is not available for the
placement of an antenna on any of the existing structures within the
geographic area to be served. The City may request any feasibility studies
associated with the said application which demonstrates that locations on
existing structures have been explored as the preferred siting alternative. If
another communication tower has been determined to be technically feasible
by either the applicant or the City, the applicant must show that it has
requested to co-locate on the existing tower and provide a letter from the
communications carrier owning or operating the facility stating reasons for not
permitting the co-location of transmitting facilities.
b. Wireless Communication Facilities. In all circumstances, owners of existing
towers being utilized for commercial purposes shall respond to a request for
co-location of transmitting facilities within thirty (30) days from the date of
receipt of a written request. In the event that a wireless communications
tower owner and/or operator has not responded to the said request, city
council may defer the said application until the co-location issue is resolved.
In all cases, it shall be the intent of the City to encourage the co-location of
transmitting facilities.
2
c. As a condition of issuing a permit to construct and operate a tower to be
utilized for commercial purposes in the City, the owner/operator of the tower
is required to allow co-location of wireless communication facilities until said
tower has reached full antenna capacity. Thus the applicant is required to
submit an affidavit stating that space on the proposed tower will be made
available to future users when technically possible. Applicants cannot be
denied space on a tower unless mechanical, structural, or regulatory factors
prevent sharing. Agreement to this provision must be included in the lease by
the landowner, if different from the owner/operator of the tower. Written
documentation must be presented to the planning commission evidencing that
the landowner of the property on which the tower is to be located has agreed
to the terms of this section as well as the requirements, regulations, and
standards established in this Chapter. As an additional condition of issuing
the permit to construct and operate the tower within the City’s zoning
jurisdiction, the owner/operator of the tower is required to sign a statement
that all disputes with future providers concerning the terms and conditions of
co-location of wireless communication facilities shall be submitted to
commercial arbitration under a system selected by the parties; but if the
parties age unable to agree, then under the auspices of the Commercial
Arbitration Provisions of the American Arbitration Association.
d. Efforts shall be made to utilize a location for the proposed wireless
communication tower, which results in the least conspicuous or most
aesthetically pleasing installation possible, while still providing reasonable
signal access.
e. As a condition of issuing a permit to place a commercially utilized antenna in
a Residential Zoning District, the applicant is required to install the antennas
on either (i) an existing structure or (ii) a new structure that is of monopole or
stealth design only. If a new monopole or stealth structure must be
constructed, the applicant shall provide proof that no suitable locations exist
for a tower or antenna facility within any other “permitted use” or “special
use” areas in the local code.
f. Wireless Communications Towers of monopole or stealth design only may be
allowed as a Special Use in a Residential Zoning District, but only when the
property is primarily used for non-residential purposes, such as water tower
sites and other City owned property, public and private educational
institutions, religious institutions and outdoor recreation, including golf
courses, tennis courts and swimming pools.
2. All wireless communication towers, antennas and associated equipment facilities
shall meet the following applicable requirements:
3
a. Height and setback requirements:
i. Wireless communication antennas shall not exceed thirty (30) feet
above the maximum building height as per zoning district
regulations.
ii. Wireless communication antennas located outside a Residential
Zoning District shall be set back a minimum of two hundred (200)
feet from any Residential Zoning Districts.
iii. Wireless communication towers being utilized for commercial
purposes shall only be constructed to the least height that is
technically feasible to service the geographical service area of the
applicant.
iv. Wireless communication towers being utilized for commercial
purposes shall be set back a minimum of a distance equaling at
least one hundred and fifteen percent (115%) of a height of the
proposed structure.
v. Wireless communication towers being utilized in a Residential
Zoning District for non-commercial purposes shall not exceed
thirty (30) feet above the maximum building height as per zoning
district regulations.
vi. Wireless communication towers located in non-residential zoning
districts, with the exception of guyed towers, shall be setback from
the lot line and any type of development (i.e. buildings, parking
lots, etc.) a distance equaling at least one hundred and fifteen
percent (115%) of the tower height to ensure the safety of
surrounding uses.
vii. Guyed wireless communication towers shall setback from the lot
line and any type of development (i.e. buildings, parking lots, etc.)
according to the following ratios of distances:
Number of Levels of Ratio of Height of
Guy Along Height Tower to Distance
Of Tower From Base to Property Line
2 or less 1:1
3 3:2
4 2:1
5 5:2
6 3:1
4
b. When guyed wireless communication towers are used, all anchor points
from the guys are required to be on the same property as the tower.
c. In Commercial Zoning Districts wireless communication towers shall only
be permitted as monopoles and lattice towers. Guyed towers shall be
prohibited.
d. In Residential Zoning Districts, communication antennas being utilized for
commercial purposes shall only be situated within existing high-tension
lattice towers, installed using architectural components on non-residential
buildings, monopoles or other stealth designs, and only upon property that
is used for non-residential purposes.
e. Wireless communication towers being utilized for non-commercial
purposes shall be prohibited from locating in a front-yard or in the front
half of a side-yard within a residential zoning district.
f. Wireless communication antenna and/or tower design shall utilize colors
and materials that effectively reduces their visual impact.
g. Wireless communication towers being utilized for commercial purposes
may be required by the City to be designed to have sufficient structural
capacity to allow for three (3) providers to be located on the structure.
The wireless communication facility may be required by the City to also
be designed to show that the applicant has sufficient space on its site plan
for an equipment building large enough to accommodate three (3) users.
If an equipment building is initially constructed to accommodate only one
(1) user, space may be required by the City to be reserved on site for
equipment building expansions to accommodate three (3) users.
Section 2. City Code Chapter 10 entitled "Definitions and General Provisions Applicable
to Entire City Code Including Penalty for Violation" and Section 10.99 entitled "GENERAL
PENALTY" are hereby adopted in their entirety, by reference, as though repeated verbatim
herein.
Section 3. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and
publication and be given the Number 17, 4th Series.
5
Voting Aye: Olstad, Grassel, DeMers, Vetter, Pokrzywinski, Buckalew, and Tweten.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: None.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
ATTEST: PASSED: October 20, 2015
______________________________ ______________________________
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 20th day of October, 2015.
______________________________
Mayor




























ORDINANCE NO. 19, 4th SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA, AMENDING CITY
CODE CHAPTER 95: ANIMALS BY ADDING SECTION 95.18 PROHIBITING DEER FEEDING
WITHIN THE EAST GRAND FORKS CITY LIMITS AND BY ADOPTING BY REFERENCE
CITY CODE CHAPTER 1 AND SECTION 10.99 WHICH, AMONG OTHER THINGS, CONTAIN
PENALTY PROVISIONS.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS DOES ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS:
(A) Prohibition. No person may place or permit to be placed on the ground, or within
five feet (5’) of the ground surface any grain, fodder, salt licks, fruit, vegetables,
nuts, hay or other edible materials (including feed for birds), which may reasonably
be expected to intentionally result in deer feeding, unless such items are screened
or protected in a manner that prevents deer from feeding on them. Living fruit trees
and other live vegetation shall not be considered as deer feeding.
(B). Exceptions. This prohibition shall not apply to:
1. Veterinarians, city animal control officers or county, state or federal game officials
who are in the course of their duties, have deer in custody or under their
management;
2. Persons authorized by the City of East Grand Forks to implement the deer
management program approved by the city council; or
3. Any food placed upon the property for purposes of trapping or otherwise taking
deer where such trapping or taking deer where such trapping or taking is pursuant
to a permit issued by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
Penalty, see §10.99
Voting Aye: Riopelle, Tweten, Olstad, DeMers, Vetter, and Pokrzywinski.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: Grassel.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
ATTEST: PASSED: July 5, 2017
______________________________ ______________________________
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 5th day of July, 2017.
______________________________
Mayor
1
ORDINANCE NO. 20, 4th SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA, AMENDING
CITY CODE CHAPTER 33 ENTITLED "FINANCE AND TAXATION" BY ADDING
SECTION 33.03 to 33.14 AND BY ADOPTING BY REFERENCE CITY CODE CHAPTER
1 AND SECTION 10.99 WHICH, AMONG OTHER THINGS, CONTAIN PENALTY
PROVISIONS.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. That Chapter 33 entitled Finance and Taxation shall have the following additions:
SALES AND USE TAX
§ 33.03 AUTHORITY.
(A) The Minnesota Legislature has, by Laws of Minnesota 2017 First Special Session,
Chapter 1, Section 18. City of East Grand Forks; Taxers Authorized (the “ACT”) the city to impose
a 1.0% sales and use tax to finance the capital and administrative costs of improvement to the city
swimming pool. The city approved the Act in accordance with applicable law.
(B) At the special election held March 7, 2016, the voters approved the imposition of a
1.0% sales and use tax for the exclusive purpose of paying costs of collecting and administering
the tax and to finance the capital and administrative costs of improvement to the city public
swimming pool. Authorized expenses include, but are not limited to, paying construction expenses
related to the renovation and the development of these facilities and improvements, and securing
and paying debt service on bonds issued or other obligations issued to finance improvement of the
public swimming pool in the city of East Grand Forks.
(C) The city of East Grand Forks may issue bonds under Minnesota Statutes, chapter
475, to finance all or a portion of the costs of the facilities authorized. The aggregate principal
amount of bonds issued under this subdivision may not exceed $2,820,000, plus an amount to be
applied to the payment of the costs of issuing the bonds. The bonds may be paid from or secured
by any funds available to the city of East Grand Forks, including the tax.
(D) The tax imposed expires at the later of: (1) five years after the tax is first imposed;
or (2) when the city council determines that $2,820,000 has been received from the tax to pay for
the cost of the projects authorized, plus an amount sufficient to pay the costs related to issuance of
the bonds authorized, including interest on the bonds. Any funds remaining after payment of all
2
such costs and retirement or redemption of the bonds shall be placed in the general fund of the
city. The tax imposed may expire at an earlier time if the city so determines by ordinance.
§ 33.04 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ACT. The Minnesota Legislature has, by Laws of Minnesota 2017 First Special Session,
Chapter 1, Section 18. City of East Grand Forks; Taxers Authorized
CITY. The City of East Grand Forks.
COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of Revenue for the state acting under the authority of
an agreement entered into between the city and the state pursuant to the Act, or such other person
or entity designated to administer and collect the East Grand Forks Tax.
ORDINANCE. The ordinance codified in this subchapter in its present form and as subsequently
codified in the East Grand Forks City Code.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THE CITY (or any like term). Any
retailer having or maintaining within the city, directly or by a subsidiary or an affiliate, an office,
place of distribution, sales or sample room or place, warehouse or other place of business, or
having any representative, including an affiliate, agent, sales person, canvasser or solicitor
operating in the city under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, for any purpose, including
the repairing, selling, delivering, installation, or soliciting of order of the retailer’s goods or
services, or the leasing of tangible personal property located in the city, whether the place of
business or agent, representative, affiliate, sales person, canvasser, or solicitor, is located in the
city permanently or temporarily, or whether or not the retailer or subsidiary is authorized to do
business within the city.
EAST GRAND FORKS SALES AND USE TAX. The sales and use tax imposed and collected
pursuant to the ordinance codified herein.
§ 33.05 SALES AND USE TAX.
Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, there is hereby imposed an additional excise
tax in the amount of 1.0% of the gross receipts from the sales at retail, and the storage, use,
distribution or consumption of goods or services which are taxable, pursuant to M.S. Chapter 297A
and occur within the City of East Grand Forks, MN. The imposition, administration, collection
and enforcement of this tax shall be governed by the provisions of M.S. Chapters 297A, 270C, and
289A.
§ 33.06 SEPARATE STATEMENT; COLLECTION FROM PURCHASER; ADVERTISING
NO TAX; MINIMUM UNIFORM TAX COLLECTION METHODS.
3
The sales and use tax shall be stated and charged separately from the sales price or charge for
service insofar as practical, and should be a debt from the purchaser to the seller recoverable at
law in the same manner as other debts. In computing the tax to be collected as a result of any
transaction, any amount of tax less than $.005 may be disregarded and amounts of tax $.005 or
more may be considered an additional $.01. If the sales price of any sale at retail is $0.99 or less,
no tax shall be collected.
§ 33.07 EXEMPTION CERTIFICATES.
A fully completed exemption certificate taken from a purchaser to the effect that the property
purchased is for resale or that the sale is otherwise exempt from the application of the tax imposed
by this subchapter will conclusively relieve the retailer from collecting and remitting the tax. A
person who has obtained from the Commissioner an exemption certificate pursuant to the M.S.
Chapter 297A may use such exemption certificate for the purposes of the sales tax imposed by the
city.
§ 33.08 PRESUMPTION OF PURPOSE OF SALE.
For the purpose of the proper administration and enforcement of § 33.05, it shall be presumed
that all retail sales for delivery in the city are for storage, use, or other consumption in the city until
the contrary is established.
§ 33.09 COLLECTION OF SALES AND USE TAX AT TIME OF SALE.
(A) Any retailer making deliveries within the city, any retailer maintaining a place of business
in the city, or any other retailer otherwise doing business within the city, upon making sales or any
items described in § 33.05 which are not exempted from the sales tax imposed under that section
and which are to be delivered or caused to be delivered within the city to the purchaser, shall at
the time of making such sales and collect the sales and use tax from the purchaser. The tax
collected by such retailer shall be remitted to the Commissioner on behalf of the city.
(B) Any retailer required to collect the sales and use tax and remit the tax to the Commissioner
pursuant to this section shall register with the Commissioner and provide such other information
as the Commissioner may require.
§ 33.10 AGENT OF RETAILER.
When in the opinion of the Commissioner it is necessary for the efficient administration of the
tax, the Commissioner may regard any salesman, representative, trucker, peddler or canvasser as
the agent of the dealer, distributor, supervisor, employer or other person under whom such
salesman, representative, trucker, peddler or canvasser operated or from whom the tangible
property is being sold is obtained, and may regard the dealer, distributor, supervisor, employer or
other person as a retailer for the purposes of this subchapter.
4
§ 33.11 EFFECTIVE DATE, TRANSITIONAL SALES.
(A) Except as otherwise provided herein, the sales and use tax authorized by this subchapter
shall apply to sales made on or after January 1, 2018 and shall be in addition to all other taxes now
in effect.
(B) The sales and use tax shall not apply to the following:
(1) The gross receipts from the purchase or lease of tangible personal property made under
an enforceable contract entered into before January 1, 2018, provided that delivery or possession
of items is taken on or before December 31, 2017.
(2) Payments made prior to December 31, 2017, for contracts to provide taxable services,
provided that such contracts were enforceable prior to January 1, 2018, however the sales and use
tax shall apply to payments made pursuant to such contracts to provide services on or after January
1, 2018.
(3) The gross receipts from the purchase of construction materials used to complete a lump
sum or fixed price construction contract that was signed and enforceable before January 1, 2018,
and that does not provide for an allocation of future taxes, provided that the construction materials
are used exclusively in performing the contract and the materials are delivered before December
31, 2017.
(4) The gross receipts from the purchase of utility services if the utility bill includes charges
for services furnished before January 1, 2018, however, the sales and use tax shall apply to all
utility bills for services provided after January 1, 2018.
§ 33.12 COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.
The sales and use tax imposed by the city pursuant to this subchapter shall be subject to the same
interests, penalties, and other rules as are applicable to the state general sales tax imposed by M.S.
Chapter 289A and 297A. The sales and use tax imposed by the city pursuant to this subchapter
may be collected by the state on behalf of the city as provided by an appropriate agreement with
the Minnesota Commissioner of Revenue.
§ 33.13 TAX CLEARANCE ISSUANCE OF LICENSES.
(A) The city may not issue or renew a license for the conduct of trade or business in the city if
the Commissioner notifies the city that the applicant for such license owes delinquent sales and
use taxes as provided in this subchapter, or penalties or interest due on such taxes. For the purposes
of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires
a different meaning.
5
EAST GRAND FORKS SALES AND USE TAXES. Include sales and use tax as provided in
this subchapter. Penalties and interest are penalties and interest due on taxes included in this
definition.
DELINQUENT TAXES. Do not include a tax liability if:
(a) In administrative or court action which contests the amount of validity or the liability
has been filed or served;
(b) The appeal period to contest tax liability has not expired; or
(c) The applicant has entered into a payment agreement and is current with the payments.
APPLICANT. An individual if the license is issued to or in the name of an individual or the
corporation, partnership or other entity if the license is issued to or in the name of a corporation,
partnership or other entity.
(B) A copy of the notice of delinquent taxes given to the city shall also be sent to the applicant
taxpayer. In the case of renewal of a license, if the applicant requests a hearing in writing, within
30 days of the receipt of the notice of delinquent taxes, then a contested case hearing shall be held
by the Commissioner under the same procedures as provided in M.S. § 270C.72 for the state sales
and use tax imposed under M.S. Chapter 297A, provided that if a hearing must be held on the state
sales and use tax, hearings may be combined.
§ 33.14 PENALTY.
(A) Any person who shall willfully fail to make a return required by this chapter or who shall
fail to pay the tax after written demand for payment, or who shall fail to remit the taxes collected
or any penalty or interest imposed by this chapter after written demand for such payment or who
shall refuse to permit the Finance Director or any duly authorized agents or employees to examine
the books, records and papers under his or her control, or who shall willfully make any incomplete,
false or fraudulent return shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(B) Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this chapter when
he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is
thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails
to act when such failure is prohibited or declared unlawful by a code adopted by reference by this
chapter, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise
stated in specific provisions hereof.
Section 2. City Code Chapter 10 entitled "General Provisions” Applicable to Entire City Code
Including Penalty for Violation" and Section 10.99 entitled "General Penalty” are hereby adopted
in their entirety, by reference, as though repeated verbatim herein.
6
Section 3. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and
publication and be given the Number 20, 4th Series.
Voting Aye: DeMers, Vetter, Pokrzywinski, Tweten, Olstad, and Grassel.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: Riopelle.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
ATTEST: PASSED: August 1, 2017
______________________________ ______________________________
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 1st day of August, 2017.
______________________________
Mayor
1
ORDINANCE NO. 21 4th SERIES
(As amended correcting a typographical error and adding language suggested by the State of
Minnesota Department of Revenue)
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA, AMENDING
CITY CODE CHAPTER 33 ENTITLED "FINANCE AND TAXATION" BY REMOVING
SECTION 33.11 EFFECTIVE DATE, TRANSACTIONAL SALES AND ADDING “NEW”
SECTION 33.11 HANDING TRANSCTIONAL SALES TO INCLUDE AND
CORRECTING A TYPOGRAPHICAL ERROR REGARDOING EFFECTIVE DATE.
WHEREAS, the City of East Grand Forks adopted an ordinance amending City Code Chapter 33
entitled “Finance and Taxation” by Adding Sections 33.03 to 33.14 regarding a Sales and Use tax
authorized by the Minnesota Legislature by Law of Minnesota 2017 First Special Sessions,
Chapter 1, Section 18. City of East Grand Forks;
WHEREAS, the City Clerk Megan Nelson was contacted on August 10, 2017 by Penny Demko
of the Minnesota Department of Revenue informing the City that our ordinance had an incorrect
date and with corrected language to be used for transitional sales;
WHEREAS, it is the desire of the East Grand Forks City Council to follow the suggestions of
the Minnesota Department of Revenue;
WHEREAS, the following language that is underlined shall be replaced with the language that is
in BOLD.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. That Section 33.11 EFFECTIVE DATE, TRANSITIONAL SALES which reads as
follows shall be replaced.
(A) Except as otherwise provided herein, the sales and use tax authorized by this subchapter
shall apply to sales made on or after January 1, 2018 and shall be in addition to all other taxes now
in effect.
(B) The sales and use tax shall not apply to the following:
(1) The gross receipts from the purchase or lease of tangible personal property made under
an enforceable contract entered into before January 1, 2018, provided that delivery or possession
of items is taken on or before December 31, 2017.
(2) Payments made prior to December 31, 2017, for contracts to provide taxable services,
provided that such contracts were enforceable prior to January 1, 2018, however the sales and use
tax shall apply to payments made pursuant to such contracts to provide services on or after January
1, 2018.
2
(3) The gross receipts from the purchase of construction materials used to complete a lump
sum or fixed price construction contract that was signed and enforceable before January 1, 2018,
and that does not provide for an allocation of future taxes, provided that the construction materials
are used exclusively in performing the contract and the materials are delivered before December
31, 2017.
(4) The gross receipts from the purchase of utility services if the utility bill includes charges
for services furnished before January 1, 2018, however, the sales and use tax shall apply to all
utility bills for services provided after January 1, 2018.
Section 2. That Section 33.11 shall be replace with the following:
33.11 EFFECTIVE DATE, TRANSITIONAL SALES
East Grand Forks sales and use tax applies to sales on or after January 1, 2018, but
the tax does not apply to the following:
(A). Lease payments for tangible personal property and motor vehicles that include
periods before January 1, 2018. (The tax does apply to payments for periods that begin on
or after that date.)
(B). The purchase of tangible personal property ordered before January 1, 2018, if the
transfer of title or possession is prior to that date.
(C). The purchase of taxable services, including utility services, if the billing period includes
charges for services furnished before and after January 1, 2018, (But the tax does apply if
the billing period begins with services furnished on or after that date.)
(D). The purchase of admission tickets if they are paid for before January 1, 2018, even if
the event occurs after that date.
(E). The purchase of construction materials used to complete a lump sum or fixed price
construction contract that was signed and enforceable before January 1, 2018, but only if all
the following are true:
1. The contract does not provide for an allocation of future taxes.
2. The materials are used exclusively in performing the contract.
3. The materials are delivered before June 1, 2018.
Section 3. The remainder of the ordinance in sections 33.03 to 33.14 continues to remain in
effect.
3
Section 4. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication
and be given the Number 21, 4th Series.
Voting Aye: Tweten, Olstad, Grassel, DeMers, Vetter, Pokrzywinski, and Riopelle.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: None.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
ATTEST: PASSED: September 5, 2017
______________________________ ______________________________
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 5th day of September, 2017.
______________________________
Mayor
ORDINANCE NO. 22, 4th SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA, AMENDING CITY
CODE TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS, CHAPTER 110 ENTITLED "GENERAL BUSINESS
LICENSING AND REGULATIONS" BY ADDING SECTION 110.36 ENTITLED “GARAGE OR
RUMMAGE SALE” AND BY ADOPTING BY REFERENCE CITY CODE CHAPTER 10 “GENERAL
PROVISIONS” AND SECTION 10.99 WHICH, AMONG OTHER THINGS, CONTAIN PENALTY
PROVISIONS.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. That Section 110.36 of the City Code is adopted and added to the City Code to read
as follows, to wit:
§ 110.36 GARAGE OR RUMMAGE SALE.
(A) Definition.
GARAGE OR RUMMAGE SALE. Any display and sale of personal property, conducted on
premises located in any Residentially Zoned District by the occupant and which garage or rummage sales
does not require a business license or make taxable sales, leases, or services.
(B) Restrictions and Prohibitions.
(1) None of the items offered for sale shall have been obtained for resale or received on
consignment for sale.
(2) Any garage or rummage sales (community or neighborhood sale) shall be conducted solely
within the boundaries of the property owned or occupied by the occupant who is conducting the sale.
(3) There shall be no more than three garage or rummage sales conducted at any one premises
during any period of 12 calendar months running from January to December.
(4) No garage or rummage sale shall be conducted more than three consecutive days.
(5) There shall be no more than two consecutive sales with a 45 day separation between all others.
( Example: A garage or rummage sale may be held for two consecutive weekends but would then
need a 45 day separation period for the third sale during any 12 month period.)
(6) No garage or rummage sale may be conducted before 7:00am or after 8:00pm.
(7) Any related signage shall be limited to the premises and to other residential property, provided
permission from the property owner is obtained, and shall be removed at the termination of the sale. Signs
shall be limited to four square feet.
(C) Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to any sale under court order, nor to any bona fide auction sale, nor to
a sale of farm or garden products by the person producing the same.
(D) Penalty.
It is unlawful for any person to conduct a garage or rummage sale in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter and upon conviction shall be punished as for a misdemeanor as provided under
Section 10.99 of the City Code.
Additionally, any violation may be subject to an Administrative Penalty which shall result in a fine
not exceeding $300.00 fine for each violation.
Section 2. City Code Chapter 10 entitled " General Provisions” applicable to entire City Code and
Section 10.99 entitled "General Penalty" are hereby adopted in their entirety, by reference, as though
repeated verbatim herein.
Section 3. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and
publication and be given the Number 22, 4th Series.
Voting Aye: Vetter, Pokrzywinski, Riopelle, Tweten, Olstad, Grassel, and DeMers.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: None.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
ATTEST: PASSED: November 21, 2017
______________________________ ______________________________
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 21st day of November, 2017.
______________________________
Mayor
ORDINANCE NO. 23 4th SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA, PURSUANT TO CITY
CHARTER CHAPTER IV, SECTION 4.02 AMENDING CITY CODE TITLE III:
ADMINISTRATION, CHAPTER 31 ENTITLED "DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND
COMMISSIONS" BY ADDING SECTION 31.65 THOUGH 31.68 ENTITLED “PARK AND
RECREATION COMMISSION” AND BY ADOPTING BY REFERENCE CITY CODE CHAPTER
10 “GENERAL PROVISIONS” AND SECTION 10.99 WHICH, AMONG OTHER THINGS,
CONTAIN PENALTY PROVISIONS.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
SECTION: 1 That Title III of the City Code is hereby amended to include a Section establishing
a park and Recreation Commission pursuant to Chapter IV, Section 4.02 of the City Charter to read as
follows:
§ 31.65 ESTABLISHMENT OF A PARK AND RECREATIONAL COMMISSION.
A City Park and Recreation Commission for the City of East Grand Forks, MN is Established.
§ 31.66 COMPOSITION
The Park and Recreation Commission shall consist of 7 members. The Council shall select 2
members of the Commission from its own members. The two Council commissioners shall not be
appointed chairman or hold any other office on the commission. The remaining 5 members shall consist
of one commissioner from each ward, be appointed by the Mayor with approval of council, and shall
serve without compensation. Two (2) of these 5 members shall be initially appointed as a Commissioner
for a one (1) year term, two (2) shall be initially appointed for a two (2) year term, and the remaining
member shall be appointed for a three (3) year term. Thereafter, all Commissioners shall be appointed
for three (3) year terms. Both original and successive appointees shall hold their offices until their
successors are appointed and qualified. A vacancy is created on the Board of Commissioners when the
Council member of the Board of Commissioners ends council membership. A vacancy for this or any
reason must be filed for the balance of the unexpired term in the way the original appointment was made.
A Commissioner may be removed by the Mayor, with the approval of the Council, for Cause after a
hearing. The Commission may also have ex officio members from interested organizations in the
community. The ex-officio members shall be invited to attend by Motion of the Commission passed by
a majority vote. Ex-officio members are non-voting positions.
§ 31.67 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
Immediately after appointment, the Board of Commissioners shall elect 1 of its members Chair and
1 of its members as Vice-Chair. The Board of Commissioners shall appoint a Secretary who need not
be a member of the Commission, who shall be responsible for the records of the Commission
and such other duties as the Commission may determine. The Park and Recreation Director may
also serve as the Secretary.
§ 31.68 BY-LAWS.
The Board of Commissioners shall submit proposed by-laws to the Council for its
consideration. The by-laws shall not take effect until approved by the Council. Thereafter, the
Board of Commissioners shall amend its by-laws only with the Council approval.
SECTION: 2 This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances, and the Code of Ordinances
itself, shall take effect upon publication of this ordinance in the city’s official newspaper and be
given the number 23, 4th Series.
Voting Aye: Olstad, Grassel, DeMers, Pokrzywinski, Riopelle, and Tweten.
Voting Nay: Vetter.
Absent: None.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
ATTEST: PASSED: February 6, 2018
______________________________ ______________________________
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 6th day of February, 2018.
______________________________
Mayor
CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS
ORDINANCE NO. 24, 4th Series
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA, AMENDING CITY
CODE CHAPTER 152 ENTITLED "ZONING CODE" BY ADDING SUBPARAGRAPH H TO
THE PERMITED USES SECTION 152.076, ADDING SUBPARAGRAPH K TO THE
PERMITED USE SECTION 152.091, ADDING SUBPARAGRAPH M TO PERMITED USE
SECTION 152.106, ADDING SUBPARAGRAPH N TO PERMITTED USES SECTION 152,122,
ADDING SUBPARAGRAPHS AA, BB, CC, DD, EE TO PERMITTED USES SECTION 152.196,
ADDING SUBPARAGRAPHS AA AND BB TO PERMITTED USE SECTION 152.216 ADDING
SUBPARAGRAPH W, X, AND Y TO PERMITTED USE SECTION 152.231, ADDING
SUBPARAGRAPH G, H TO THE PERMITTED USE SECTION AND Q TO THE SPECIAL USE
SECTION IN 152.245 AND BY ADOPTING BY REFERENCE CITY CODE CHAPTER 1 AND
SECTION 10.99 WHICH, AMONG OTHER THINGS, CONTAIN PENALTY PROVISIONS. .
GENERAL ZONING DISTRICT PROVISIONS
The following amendments were added to the zoning code:
Section 10.07 or 152.075 (R-1) Single Family Residential District - Uses Permitted:
H. Small cell antennas, microcell antennas within the Right of Way (ROW), provided they meet the
following criteria set forth in Section 152.XXX – Right of Way Ordinance (to be adopted at a later
date)
Section 10.08 or 152.090 (R-2) Two-Family Residential District - Uses Permitted:
K. Small cell antennas, microcell antennas within the Right of Way (ROW), provided they meet the
following criteria set forth in Section 152.XXX – Right of Way Ordinance (to be adopted at a later
date)
Section 10.09 or 152.105 (R-3) High Density Residential District - Uses Permitted:
M. Small cell antennas, microcell antennas within the Right of Way (ROW), provided they meet the
following criteria set forth in Section 152.XXX – Right of Way Ordinance (to be adopted at a later
date)
Section 10.10 or 152.120 Planned Unit Development (PUD) - Uses Permitted:
N. Small cell antennas, microcell antennas within the Right of Way (ROW), provided they meet the
following criteria set forth in Section 152.XXX – Right of Way Ordinance (to be adopted at a later
date)
Section 10.14 or 152.195 (C-1) Downtown Commercial - Uses Permitted:
AA. Photography studios
BB. Health clubs, gyms
CC. Brewpub, brewer taproom, microdistillery, and cocktail room
DD. Churches, synagogues, and similar places of worship
EE. Small cell antennas, microcell antennas within the Right of Way (ROW), provided they meet the
following criteria set forth in Section 152.XXX – Right of Way Ordinance (to be adopted at a later
date)
Section 10.13 or 152.215 (C-2) Highway Commercial - Uses Permitted:
Under Section A. Photography studios, Health clubs, gyms, Brewpub, brewer taproom,
microdistillery, and cocktail room, Churches, synagogues, and similar places of worship, and Small
cell antennas, microcell antennas within the Right of Way (ROW), provided they meet the following
criteria set forth in Section 152.XXX – Right of Way Ordinance (to be adopted at a later date)
AA. Parcel delivery store or station
BB. Contractors shops and offices, provided outdoor storage meets district performance standards
152.218(E)
Section 10.16 or 152.231 (I-1) Light Industry - Uses Permitted:
W. Bottling establishment, Brewpub, brewer taproom, microdistillery and cocktail room
X. Small animal boarding and daycare facilities
Y. Small cell antennas, microcell antennas within the Right of Way (ROW), provided they meet the
following criteria set forth in Section 152.XXX – Right of Way Ordinance (to be adopted at a later
date)
Section 10.17 or 152.245 (I-2) General Industry - Uses Permitted:
G. Auction houses
H. Small cell antennas, microcell antennas within the Right of Way (ROW), provided they meet the
following criteria set forth in Section 152.XXX – Right of Way Ordinance (to be adopted at a later
date)
(I-2) General Industry Uses by Special Permit:
Q. Indoor Shooting gallery and ranges
City Code Chapter 10 entitled “General Provisions” applicable to entire City Code and Section 10.99
entitled “General Penalty” are hereby adopted in their entirety, by reference as though repeated
verbatim herein.
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication and be given
the Number 24, 4th Series.
Voting Aye: Vetter, Pokrzywinski, Riopelle, Tweten, Olstad, and Grassel.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: DeMers.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
ATTEST: PASSED: April 17, 2018
______________________________ ______________________________
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 17th day of April, 2018.
______________________________
Mayor
1
ORDINANCE NO. 25 4TH SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA, BY AMENDING
CHAPTER 72 ENTITLED “PARKING REGULATIONS” BY ADDING SECTION 72.19; AND
BY ADOPTING BY REFERENCE CITY CODE CHAPTER 10 AND SECTION 10.99 WHICH,
AMONG OTHER THINGS, CONTAIN PENALTY PROVISIONS.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this ordinance is to
authorize reserved parking on Demers Avenue N.W. between River Drive and Second Avenue
N.W. on both sides of Demers Avenue N.W. The parking will begin 20 feet east of River Street
and continue to 20 feet west of the intersection of Second Avenue N.W. and Demers Avenue N.W.
Said reserve parking will be to allow motorcycle parking on Wednesday nights to host a special
event, “Bike Night” at Sickie’s Garage Burgers and Brews.
Section 2. Amendments Chapter 72.
Chapter 72 of Title VII of the Traffic Code is hereby amended to add Section 72.19 as
follows:
SECTION 72.19. RESERVED PARKING ON DEMERS AVENUE.
To facilitate an annual special event “Bike Night” at Sickies Garage (hereinafter
“the promotor”) in downtown East Grand Forks the following parking restriction
will be implemented.
(A) Unless specifically revoked or modified by Resolution of the City Council each
Wednesday from 4:00 p.m. until 10:00 p.m. beginning after Memorial Day and
ending Labor Day the on-street parking along Demers Avenue N.W. from River
Street N.W. to Second Street N.W. shall be reserved for the annual special event
“Bike Night” being promoted each Wednesday evening.
(B) Demers Avenue is a Minnesota Trunk Highway. The Minnesota Department
of Transportation (hereinafter “MnDOT”) must be kept informed of any ordinance
affecting the Trunk Highway System and approve all proposed signage. The
reserved parking is contingent upon annual approval by MnDOT.
(C) The promoter shall place MnDOT approved temporary special event parking
signs along the route to notify the public of the reserved parking. Any motor vehicle
2
parked in violation of the parking restrictions shall be relocated to the nearest City
parking lot preferably on River Street at the expense of the promotor, at the
promotor’s discretion. Said relocation shall be performed by a towing company
licensed to do business in the City of East Grand Forks.
Section 3. City Code Title 1 General Provisions, Chapter 10 entitled General Provisions
are hereby adopted in their entirety, by reference, as though repeated verbatim herein.
Section 4. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force after its passage, publication
and then beginning on August 15, 2018. It shall be given the Number 25, 4th Series.
Voting Aye: Grassel, DeMers, Vetter, Riopelle, Tweten, and Olstad.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: Pokrzywinski.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
ATTEST: PASSED: August 7, 2018
______________________________ ______________________________
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 7th day of August, 2018.
______________________________
Mayor

Page 1
ORDINANCE NO. 26 4th Series
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA ADDING
CODE CHAPTER SEVENTY-EIGHT (78) ENTITLED “UTILITY TASK VEHICLES”;
AND BY ADOPTING BY REFERENCE CITY CODE CHAPTER TEN (10) AND
SECTION 10.99 WHICH AMOUNG OTHER THINGS CONTAINS PENALTY
PROVISIONS.
THE CITY COUNCIL OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA ORDAINS:
Section 1. That Chapter Seventy-eight of the City Code is hereby revised to read as follows
§ 78.01 UTILITY TASK VEHICLES
(A) (1) No person shall operate a UTV on the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public
property without obtaining a permit as provided herein.
(2) Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall
contain all of the following information:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) Model name, make, and year and number of the UTV.
(c) Current driver’s license.
(d) Other information as the city may require.
Upon investigation of the applicant the Chief of Police or his designee shall enter upon the
application his or her recommendation for approval or disapproval. Should it be for disapproval
he or she shall also enter on the application the reasons for disapproval. The application shall be
returned to the City Administrator who shall have the authority to approve of the application
without presentation to the City Council. If approved a permit shall be issued by the City Clerk.
If disapproved the applicant may appeal to the City Council. If not appealed within 14 calendar
days the disapproval is final. The Council in its sole discretion and for any reasonable cause may
refuse to grant any application.
(3) The permit fee shall be as set forth by resolution of Council may be amended from
time to time. The fee schedule will be available in the City Administrator’s Office.
(4) Permits shall be granted for a period of three (3) years and may be renewed.
(5) No permit shall be granted or renewed unless the following conditions are met:
(a) The applicant must demonstrate that he or she currently holds a valid
driver’s license.
Page 2
(b) The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in compliance with the
provisions of Minnesota Statutes concerning insurance coverage for UTV. If a
person cannot get insurance on the UTV, the state insurance plan offers
coverage.
(c) The UTV passing an inspection by the EGF Police that it complies with the
requirements of this chapter.
(d) The applicant has not had his or her driver’s license revoked as the result of
criminal proceedings.
(6) The City Council may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a finding
that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this section or Minn. Stat.
ch. 169, as it may be amended from time to time, or if there is evidence that the
permit holder cannot safely operate the utility task vehicle on the designated
roadways.
§ 78.02 OPERATION RULES
(1) UTV are permitted to operate only on city streets, not state or federal highways,
except to cross at designated intersections.
(2) Prohibited areas of operation.
(a) Business Highway 2 (Business 2 begins at the Sorlie bridge continues to
the intersection of 4th Street N.W. and Demers Ave.., N.W., then proceeds south
and continues until it intersects with US Highway 2 at the City limits);
(b) Gateway Drive (US Highway 2); and
(c) Highway 220 North from 10th street north to the city limits.
See attached Map
(3) It is unlawful to operate a UTV, except as otherwise provided by this
article, within the City or East Grand Forks, as follows:
(a) It is unlawful to operate on the private property of another without permission.
(b) On public sidewalks, walkways or trails provided or used for pedestrian travel.
(c) On or across any publicly owned lands, including but not limited to dikes, levee,
parks, school grounds, recreational areas and playgrounds, unless a permit has
been obtained from the proper authorities, or unless such areas have been
specifically designated for such use, nor shall UTV park on such areas unless a
permit has been obtained from the proper public authorities.
(d) At any place under the influence of intoxicating liquor or controlled substances
in violation of Minn.Stat. Chapter 169A Driving While Impaired.
(e) In such a manner as to create or cause unnecessary engine noise or tire squeal,
or that causes tires to spin or slide upon acceleration or stopping of said vehicle,
or that cause the vehicle to unnecessarily turn abruptly or sway from side to side,
Page 3
or to operate said vehicle in such a careless, reckless or negligent manner as to
endanger the person or property of another or to cause injury or damage thereto.
(f) In any cemetery.
(g) On any golf course, with the exception of any vehicle authorized by the
management of the golf course for business or event purposes.
(h) Unless equipped with a standard muffler or mufflers which are properly
attached, and which will reduce noise of operation of such UTV to a noise level
which shall not be a disturbance to residents or violate the city noise ordinance
and no person shall use a muffler cut-out, by-pass or similar device.
(i) Without a valid policy of liability insurance in effect providing coverage for
liability arising out of the operation of the ownership, maintenance or use of the
UTV in an amount not less that required by still state law
(j) When operating the UTV upon any street, avenue, roadway, alley or otherwise
designated route, such operation shall be at the right side of the street and as near
to the curb or shoulder thereof as practicable under the circumstances and in the
same direction as the direction of other motor vehicles traveling on the roadway.
(k) The operator of the UTV shall yield the right of way to all oncoming and
crossing traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard;
(l) Drivers of a UTV must yield to pedestrians whether or not a crosswalk is at
the point the pedestrian is crossing or about to cross the street, avenue, roadway
or alley
(m) The driver of a UTV may cross any street or highway intersecting a designated
roadway. When crossing the crossing must be made at approximately a ninety
(90) degree angle to the direction of the roadway and at a place where there is
no obstruction preventing a safe crossing.
(n) The number of occupants on the UTV may not exceed the design occupant load.
(o) It is unlawful to operate a UTV unless the Driver is at least 16 years of age with
a valid Minnesota driver’s license.
(p) No persons shall operate a UTV faster than the posted speed limit.
(q) Every person operating a UTV under permit on designated roadways has all the
rights and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under the
provisions of Minn. Stat. ch. 169, as it may be amended from time to time.
(r) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the use of any UTV by or at the
direction of a law enforcement agency.
§ 78.03 HOURS OF OPERATION
(1) A UTV may only be operated on designated roadways from sunrise to sunset, unless
equipped with original equipment headlights, taillights, and rear-facing brake
lights. They shall not be operated in inclement weather conditions or at any time
when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles on the
roadway at a distance of 500 feet.
Page 4
§ 78.04 EQUIPMENT REQUIRED
(A) (1) All UTV’s operated within the City limits shall have the following equipment:
at least one (1) review mirror to satisfy Minn. Stat. § 169.70, an operating horn,
a speedometer, an odometer, rear brake lights, headlamps, turn signals, operating
mufflers, at least 4 rubber tires, steering wheel, brakes in good working order,
seatbelts, and full windshield.
(B) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DRIVER. The person driving and having physical control over the utility task vehicle and
being the licensee.
UTILITY TASK VEHICLE. (UTV) As defined by Minn. Stat. § 169.045, subd. 1 (3), a sideby-
side, four-wheel drive, off-road vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an internal
combustion engine with a piston displacement capacity of 1,200 cubic centimeters or less and has
a total dry weight of 1,800 but less than 2,600 pounds.
(C) Authorized city staff may operate city owned equipment, UTV or other vehicles without
obtaining a permit within the city on city streets, sidewalks, trails, rights-of-way, and
public property including the greenway when conducting city business.
Passed by the City Council of East Grand Forks, Minnesota this 18th day of June, 2019.
Voting Aye: DeMers, Helms, Riopelle, Johnson, and Olstad.
Voting Nay: Vetter.
Absent: Grassel.
ATTEST:
City Administrator, David Murphy Council President, Mark Olstad
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 18th day of June, 2019.
Mayor, Steven Gander
1
ORDINANCE NO. 27 4TH SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA, AMENDING
CITY CODE CHAPTER 117 ENTITLED “ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES” SECTION 117.07
SUBDIVISION E REGARDING PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSES, BY ADDING
IMPORTER TO SUBPART 4, AND CHANGING SUBPART 5 TO ALLOW A PERSON TO
HAVE AN OWNERSHIP INTEREST IN MORE THAN ONE ON-SALE LIQUOR
ESTABLISHEMENT BUT RESTRICTING A LICENSEE FROM HAVING AN OWNERSHIP
INTEREST IN MORE THAN ONE OFF-SALE RETAIL LIQUOR STORE.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. That Section 117.07 Entitled “Granting of Licenses”, Subpart E Currently Reads:
E Persons Ineligible for License. No license shall be granted to or be held by any
person:
1. Under the age of twenty-one (21) years;
2. Who is not of good moral character or repute;
3. Who is or has been convicted of any violation of any law in the United States
or the State of Minnesota, or of any local ordinance regarding the
manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession for sale or distribution of
Intoxicating Liquor, 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor or Wine, or whose license has
been revoked or who has committed a willful violation of any such laws or
ordinances.
4. Who is a manufacturer or wholesaler of Intoxicating Liquor, 3.2 Percent Malt
Liquor or Wine, or is interested directly or indirectly in the ownership or
operation of any such business.
5. Who is directly or indirectly interested in any other establishment in the City
to which a license of the same class has been issued under this Ordinance.
6. Who has had a license issued under this Ordinance (or prior ordinances) that
has been revoked for cause within five (5) years of the date of license
application, or to any person who at the time of the violation owned any
interest in the premises or business for which a license was revoked.
This ordinance shall add “importer” to subpart 4 and change subpart remove subpart 5 which
restricts a person from having an ownership interest in more than one (1) on-sale establishment
and prohibiting an off-sale licensee from having an ownership interest in another off-sale retail
liquor store in East Grand Forks.
2
Section 2. That Section 117.07 Entitled That Section 117.07 ENTILED Granting of Licenses
entitled “Alcoholic Beverages” Subpart E AMENDED SHALL NOW READ:
E Persons Ineligible for License. No license shall be granted to or be held by any
person:
1. Under the age of twenty-one (21) years;
2. Who is not of good moral character or repute;
3. Who is or has been convicted of any violation of any law in the United States
or the State of Minnesota, or of any local ordinance regarding the
manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession for sale or distribution of
Intoxicating Liquor, 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor or Wine, or whose license has
been revoked or who has committed a willful violation of any such laws or
ordinances.
4. Who is a manufacturer, wholesaler, or importer of Intoxicating Liquor, 3.2
Percent Malt Liquor or Wine, or is interested directly or indirectly in the
ownership or operation of any such business.
5. The off-sale licensee and anyone with an interest in the business shall not have
any interest, direct or indirect, in another off-sale retail liquor store in East
Grand Forks neither as proprietor, partner, or corporate stockholder.
6. Who has had a license issued under this Ordinance (or prior ordinances) that
has been revoked for cause within five (5) years of the date of license
application, or to any person who at the time of the violation owned any
interest in the premises or business for which a license was revoked.
Section 3. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and
publication and be given the Number 27, 4th Series.
Voting Aye: DeMers, Vetter, Helms, Riopelle, Johnson, Olstad, and Grassel.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: None.
ATTEST:
_________________________ _________________________________
David Murphy Mark Olstad
City Administrator President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 1st day of October, 2019.
______________________________
Mayor Steven Gander
ORDINANCE NO. 28 4TH SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA, AMENDING CITY
CODE CHAPTER 116 ENTITLED "TOBACCO PRODUCTS" TO COMPLY WITH NEW FEDERAL
AGE REQUIREMENTS AND TO INCLUDE ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY PROVISIONS FOR
FAILING COMPLIANCE CHECKS; AND BY ADOPTING BY REFERENCE CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1 AND SECTION 10.99 WHICH, AMONG OTHER THINGS, CONTAIN PENALTY
PROVISIONS.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. That Chapter 116 of the City Code is hereby amended to read as follows, to-wit:
CHAPTER 116: TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Section
116.01 Purpose
116.02 Definitions
116.03 License
116.04 Fees
116.05 Basis for denial of license
116.06 Prohibited sales
116.07 Vending machines
116.08 Self-service sales
116.09 Responsibility
116.10 Compliance checks and inspections
116.98 Violations
116.99 Penalty
116.01 PURPOSE.
Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 21 years purchase or otherwise
obtain, possess, and use tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, electronic delivery devices,
and nicotine solutions products, and such sales, possession, and use are violations of both state and
federal laws; and because studies, which are accepted and adopted, have shown that most smokers or
users of nicotine products begin using before they have reached the age of 21 years and that those persons
who reach the age of 21 years without having started are significantly less likely to begin using nicotine;
and because smoking and use of nicotine solution products have been shown to be the cause of several
serious health problems which subsequently place a financial burden on all levels of government; this
chapter shall be intended to regulate the sale, possession, and use of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco
related devices, electronic delivery devices, and nicotine solutions products for the purpose of enforcing
and furthering existing laws, to protect minors against the serious effects associated with the illegal use
of tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco related devices, and to further the official public policy of the
state in regard to preventing young people from starting to smoke or the use of nicotine solution products
as stated in M.S. 144.391, M.S. 609.685 and 297F.01 as it may be amended from time to time.
116.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that those authorized
to sell tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices are following and complying with the
requirements of this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall involve the use of minors as authorized
by this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall also mean the use of minors who attempt to purchase
tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices for educational, research, and training purposes as
authorized by state and federal laws. COMPLIANCE CHECKS may also be conducted by other units
of government for the purpose of enforcing appropriate federal, state, or local laws and regulations
relating to tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices.
ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE. Means any product containing or delivering nicotine,
lobelia, or any other substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate
smoking in the delivery of nicotine or any other substance through inhalation of vapor from the product.
Electronic delivery device includes any component part of a product, whether or not marketed or sold
separately. Electronic delivery device does not include any product that has been approved or certified
by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco-cessation product, as a tobaccodependence
product, or for other medical purposes, and is marketed and sold for such an approved
purpose.
INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED. The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco product wrapped
individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco products shall include, but are not
limited to, single cigarette packs, single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or
other packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a single
pack or other container as described in this section shall not be considered individually packaged.
LOOSIES. The common term used to refer to a single or individually packaged cigarette.
MINOR. Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 21 years.
MOVABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated out of a truck, van,
automobile, or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a fixed address store front or other
permanent type of structure authorized for sales transactions.
NICOTINE SOLUTION PRODUCTS. Means “any cartridge, bottle or other package that contains
nicotine, including nicotine made or derived from tobacco, or sources other than tobacco, that is in a
solution that is consumed, or meant to be consumed, through the use of a heating element, power source,
electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means that produces vapor or
aerosol…[including] any electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or
similar product or device, and any batteries, heating elements, or other components, parts, or accessories
sold with and meant to be used in the consumption of a solution containing nicotine.”
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco
related devices, electronic delivery devices and nicotine solution products are available for sale to the
general public. Retail establishments shall include, but not be limited to, grocery stores, convenience
stores, and restaurants.
SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other consideration.
SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco
related devices, electronic delivery devices and nicotine solution products in any manner where any
person shall have access to the tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, electronic delivery
devices or nicotine solution products without the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the
licensee’s employee. The assistance or intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the
tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, electronic delivery devices or nicotine solution
products between the customer and the licensee or employee. Self-service merchandising shall not
include vending machines.
TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Any substance or item containing tobacco leaf, including
but not limited to, cigarettes; cigars; pipe tobacco; snuff, fine cut or other chewing tobacco; cheroots;
stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff flower;
cavendish; shorts, plug and twist tobaccos; dipping tobaccos; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and
sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco leaf prepared in such a manner as to be
suitable for chewing, sniffing, or smoking of tobacco or tobacco products.
TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES. Cigarette papers or pipes for smoking or other devices
intentionally designed or intended to be used in a manner which enables the chewing, sniffing, or
smoking of tobacco, tobacco products. Tobbacco related devices include components of tobacco-related
devices which may be marked or sold separately. or nicotine solution products.
VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of device which
dispenses tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices upon the insertion of money, tokens, or
other form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco
product, tobacco related device, electronic delivery devises or nicotine solution products.
116.03 LICENSE.
It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related
device without first having obtained a license to do so from the city.
(A) Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related
devices, electronic delivery devises or nicotine solution products shall be made on a form provided by
the city. The application shall contain the full name of the applicant, the applicant’s residential and
business addresses and telephone numbers, the name of the business for which the license is sought, and
any additional information the city deems necessary. Upon receipt of a completed application, the City
Administrator shall forward the application to the Council for action at its next regularly scheduled
Council meeting. If the City Administrator shall determine that an application is incomplete, he or she
shall return the application to the applicant with notice of the information necessary to make the
application complete.
(B) Action. The Council may either approve or deny the license, or it may delay action for such
reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any investigation of the application or the applicant
it deems necessary. If the Council shall approve the license, the City Administrator shall issue the license
to the applicant. If the Council denies the license, notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant
along with notice of the applicant=s right to appeal the Council’s decision.
(C) Term. The term of all license issued under this chapter shall be from January 1 through
December 31 of the year of issuance.
(D) Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended
as provided in the section 116.99.
(E) Transfers. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid only on the premises for which
the license was issued and only for the person to whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license
to another location or person shall be valid without the prior approval of the Council.
(F) Movable place of business. No license shall be issued to a movable place of business. Only fixed
locations businesses shall be eligible to be licensed under this chapter.
(G) Displays. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of the general public on the
licensed premise.
(H) Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this chapter shall be handled in the same
manner as the original application. The request for a renewal shall be made at least 30 days but not more
than 60 days before the expiration of the current license.
116.04 FEES.
No license shall be issued under this chapter until the appropriate license fee shall be paid in full.
The fee for a license under this chapter shall be set and may from time to time be amended by the Council
by resolution.
116.05 BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this chapter;
however, except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any particular ground for denial
does not mean that the city must deny the license. If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person,
it shall be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under this chapter.
(A) The applicant is under the age of 21 years.
(B) The applicant has been convicted within the past 5 years of any violation of a federal, state or
local law or City Code provision, or other regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco products or tobacco
related devices or electronic delivery devices or nicotine solution products.
(C) The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices,
electronic delivery devices or nicotine solution products revoked within the preceding 12 months of the
date of application.
(D) The applicant fails to provide any information required on the application or provides false or
misleading information.
(E) The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or local law, City Code provision or other
regulation from holding such a license.
116.06 PROHIBITED SALES
It is a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco product,
tobacco related device, electronic delivery devices or nicotine solution products:
(A) To any person under the age of 21 years;
(B) By means of any type of vending machine, except as may otherwise be provided in this section;
(C) By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need to make verbal or written
request to any employee of the licensed premise in order to receive the tobacco, tobacco related product,
tobacco related device, electronic delivery devices or nicotine solution products and whereby there is not
a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco related device, electronic delivery devices
or nicotine solution products between the licensee or the licensee’s employee and the customer;
(D) By means of loosies as defined herein;
(E) Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or other
deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic, or controlled substances except nicotine and other substances found
naturally in tobacco or added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process;
(F) By any other means, or to any other person, or in any other manner or form prohibited by federal,
state or other local law, city code provision, or other regulations.
116.07 VENDING MACHINES
It is unlawful for any person licensed under this chapter to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco related devices, electronic delivery devices or nicotine solution products by the means
of a vending machine. Penalty, see 116.99
116.08 SELF-SERVICE SALES
It is unlawful for a licensee under this chapter to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco
related devices, electronic delivery devices or nicotine solution products by any means whereby the
customer may have access to the items without having to request the item from the licensee or the
licensee’s employee and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, the
tobacco related device, electronic delivery devices or nicotine solution products between the licensee or
his or her clerk and the customer. All tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, electronic
delivery devices or nicotine solution products shall either be stored behind a counter or other area not
freely accessible to customers or in a case or other storage unit not left open and accessible to the general
public. Any retailer selling tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, electronic delivery
devices or nicotine solution products at the time this chapter is adopted shall comply with this chapter
within 90 days following the effective date of this chapter.
Penalty, see 116.99
116.09 RESPONSIBILITY
All licensees under this chapter shall be responsible for the actions of their employees in regard to
the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, electronic delivery devices or nicotine
solution products on the licensed premises, and the sale of such an item by an employee shall be
considered a sale by the license holder. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the city
from also subjecting the clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate under this chapter, state or federal
law, or other applicable law or regulation.
Penalty see 116.99
116.10 COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.
All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the city law enforcement or other authorized
city official during regular business hours. From time to time, but at least once per year, the city shall
conduct compliance checks by engaging, with the written consent of their parents or guardians, minors
over the age of 18 years but less than 21 years to enter the licensed premise to attempt to purchase
tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, electronic delivery devices or nicotine solution
products. Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised by designated law
enforcement officers or other designated personnel. Minors used for compliance checks shall not be
guilty of unlawful purchase or attempted purchase, nor the unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco related devices, electronic delivery devices or nicotine solution products when such
items are obtained or attempted to be obtained as a part of the compliance check. No minor used in
compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the minor’s age and all
minors lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall answer all questions about the minor’s age asked
by the licensee or his or her employee and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he or
she is asked. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by state or federal laws
for educational, research, or training purposes or required for the enforcement of a particular state or
federal law.
116.98 VIOLATIONS.
(A) Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged violator shall be issued, either
personally or by mail, a citation[ notice]. The notice shall set forth the nature, date and time of offense,
and the amount of the scheduled penalty. The Notice shall inform the alleged violator of his or her right
to be heard on the accusation.
(B) Hearing. If a person accused of violating this chapter so requests, a hearing shall be scheduled,
the time and place of which shall be published and provided to the accused violator.
(C) Hearing officer. A person(s) designated by the Council shall serve as the hearing officer.
(D) Decision. If the hearing officer determines that violation of this chapter did occur, that decision,
along with the hearing officer’s reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed
under 116.99 shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the accused violator.
Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any
penalty, the findings shall be recorded, and a copy provided to the acquitted accused violator.
(E) Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer shall be filed in the District Court
for the jurisdiction of the city in which the alleged violation occurred.
(F) Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from seeking
prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of this chapter. If the city elects to seek
misdemeanor prosecution, no administrative penalty shall be imposed.
(G) Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or continues,
shall constitute a separate offense.
116.99 PENALTY.
(A) Licensees. Any licensee found to have violated this chapter, or whose employee shall have
violated this chapter, shall be charged an administrative fine in an amount set by City Council for a first
violation of this chapter; a fine in an amount set by City Council for a second offense at the same licensed
premises; and a fine in an amount set by City Council for a third or subsequent offense at the same
location within a 24-month period. In addition, after the third offense, the license shall be revoked.
(B) Administrative offense defined. An administrative offense is any 1 of the offenses listed and
identified in division (J) of this section.
(C) Event defined. An EVENT is a determination that a licensee has committed an administrative
offense. A licensee can never be found to have committed more than 1 event per business day, regardless
of the number of administrative offenses committed. However, the number of administrative offenses
committed within an event may be taken into consideration when determining the appropriate penalty.
(D) Administrative penalties for non-compliance. For any license granted under the provisions of
this chapter, the City Council may suspend such a license for up to 60 days, may revoke such a license,
and/or may impose on a licensee a civil fine not to exceed $2,000 for each event on a finding that the
licensee or its employee has failed to comply with a statute, regulation, or provision of the City Code
relating to tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco related devices, electronic delivery devices or nicotine
solution products.
(E) Notice. Any officer of the Police Department or any other person authorized to enforce this
code, upon making a determination that an event has occurred, shall so notify the offender. The notice
shall set forth the nature, date and time of offense, and the amount of the scheduled penalty.
(F) Payment of civil monetary penalty without suspension or revocation. Once such notice is given,
the alleged offender may, within 7 days of the time of issuance of the notice, pay the amount set forth in
the notice or may request in writing a hearing, as provided for in division (G) of this section. The penalty
may be paid in person or by mail, and payment shall be deemed to be an admission of the offense.
(G) Hearing prior to imposition of civil monetary penalty. Any person contesting the determination
of an event pursuant to this section may, within 7 days of the time of issuance of the notice, request in
writing a hearing by the City Council or designated committee which shall forthwith conduct an informal
hearing to determine if a violation has occurred. The City Council or designated committee shall have
authority to dismiss the violation or reduce or waive the penalty. If the violation is sustained, the violator
shall pay the penalty imposed.
(H) Failure to pay.
(1) In the event a party charged with an event fails to pay the penalty, a misdemeanor or petty
misdemeanor charge may be brought against the alleged violator in accordance with applicable statutes.
If the penalty is paid or if an individual is found not to have committed the event, no such charge may
be brought by the city for the same violation.
(2) In the event a party participates in the administrative offense procedures but does not pay
the monetary penalty which may be imposed, the city may seek to collect the costs of the administrative
offense procedures as part of the subsequent criminal sentence in the event the party is charged and is
convicted guilty of the criminal violation.
(I) Disposition of penalties. All penalties collected pursuant to this section shall be paid to the
Clerk-Treasurer.
(J) Minimum penalty. In no event shall a penalty be less than the following:
Administrative Offense
Events Within a 24-Month Period
1st Event
2nd Event
3rd Event
4th Event
1. Commission of a felony related to
the licensed activity
Revocation
NA
NA
NA
2. Sale of tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco related devices, electronic
delivery devices or nicotine solution
products while license is under
suspension.
Revocation
NA
NA
NA
3. Sale/purchase of tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco related devices,
electronic delivery devices or
nicotine solution products to/by
underage person
$250
$500 and 3-
day
suspension
$750 and 21-
day
suspension
Revocati
on
4. Refusal to allow city inspectors or
police admission to inspect premises
$250
$500 and 3-
day
suspension
Revocation
NA
Note: A day shall be defined as a business day.
(K) Hearing prior to suspension or revocation. No suspension or revocation shall take effect until
the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the Council, a committee of the
Council, or a hearing under the Administrative Procedures Act, as may be determined by the Council
(L) Other individuals. Other individuals, other than minors regulated elsewhere in this code, found
to be in violation of this chapter may be charged an administrative fee as follows:
(1) A fine not exceeding $50 for a first violation;
(2) A fine not exceeding $100 for a second violation within 1 year of the first violation;
(3) A fine not exceeding $200 for each violation within 1 year of the second violation.
(M) Misdemeanor. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a
misdemeanor for any violation of this chapter.
Section 2. City Code Chapter 1 entitled "Definitions and General Provisions Applicable to Entire
City Code Including Penalty for Violation" and Section 10.99 entitled "Violation a Misdemeanor" are
hereby adopted in their entirety, by reference, as though repeated verbatim herein.
Section 3. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and
publication and be given the Number 28, 4th Series.
Voting Aye: DeMers, Vetter, Riopelle, Johnson, Olstad, and Grassel.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: Helms.
ATTEST:
_________________________ _________________________________
David Murphy Mark Olstad
City Administrator President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 18th day of February, 2020.
______________________________
Steven Gander
Mayor
ORDINANCE NO. 309 3RD SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA,
CLARIFYING CITY CODE CHAPTER 8 a.k.a. THE PROPOSED RECODIFIED CODE
PROVISION IN TITLE VII, CHAPTER 72 ENTITLED “(PARKING REGULATIONS)” BY
REAFFIMING SECTION 8.10 D a.k.a. 72.10 (A) definitions COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
AND PERIOD OF ENFORCEMENT AS ORDAINED IN ORDINANCE NO. 296 3RD
SERIES PASSED DECEMBER 19,2006
AND BY REAFFIRMIN THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA, CODE
AMENDMENT OF CHAPTER 8 PARKING REGULATIONS A.K.A. THE PROPOSED
RECODIFIED CODE PROVISION IN TITLE VII TRAFFIC CHAPTER 72 ENTITLED
"(PARKING REGULATIONS)" BY REAFFIRMING SECTION 8.11 TRUCK PARKING
SUBD. 2. B, A.K.A. 72.11 TRUCKING (2) AS ORDAINED IN ORDINANCE NUMBER
292 3RD SERIES PASSED AUGUST 1, 2006 :
AND BY AMENDING THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA CODE
CHAPTER 8 TRUCK PARKING SUBD. 3 (A.K.A. PROPOSED CODE CHAPTER 72 BY
AMENDING 72.11 TRUCK PARKING (C);
AND BY ADOPTING BY REFERENCE CITY CODE CHAPTER 1 AND SECTION 1.09
A.K.A. PROPOSED CHAPTER 1 AND SECTION 1.09 (A.K.A. CHAPTER 10 AND
SECTION 10.99) WHICH, AMONG OTHER THINGS, CONTAINING PENALTY
PROVISIONS.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. That Section 8.10 Calendar Parking Subd. 1 D (a.k.a Proposed code
72.10 (A) definitions period of enforcement) shall continue to be commenced on the 15th
day of November of each year, unless declared otherwise by the Chief of Police and
shall terminate at noon on the 15th ay of March.
Section 2. That Section 8.11 Truck Parking Subd. 2. B (a.k.a. proposed 72.11
Truck Parking (B) (2) of the City Code is hereby affirmed to read as follows, to-wit:
It is unlawful to park any of the following on any city street or municipally owned
parking lot: Truck-tractor, Farm tractor, Road tractor, Semitrailer, Commercial Motor
Vehicle, Mobile Crane, Flatbed Trailer, Trailers, implements of husbandry, road
construction equipment, and any other type of self-propelled construction equipment.
An exception to this section is allowed for any construction project or event for which a
permit has been issued. Example 1. Road construction or repair authorized by the City
of East Grand Forks.; Example 2. Contractor’s trailer for home remodel/siding
equipment which has been authorized by the City of East Grand Forks; and Example 3.
Venders for Cats Incredible.
Section 3. That Section 8.11 Truck Parking Subd. 3 (a.k.a. proposed 72.11
Truck Parking (C) of the City Code is hereby amended to read as follows, to-wit:
It is unlawful to park a commercial vehicle of more than 12,000 pounds gross
weight upon any street in the commercial/Industrial District as defined in the City Zoning
Ordinance except streets as specifically designated by the Council by resolution and
sign posted, but parking of such vehicle for a period of not more than 60 minutes shall
be permitted in such space for the purpose of necessary access to abutting property
while actively loading or unloading when such access cannot reasonably be secured
from an alley or from an adjacent street where truck parking is not so restricted.
Section 4. City Code Chapter 1 entitled "Definitions and General Provisions
Applicable to Entire City Code Including Penalty for Violation" Section 1.09 entitled
"Violation a Misdemeanor" (a.k.a. proposed Title Chapter 10 General provisions and
Section 10.99) are hereby adopted in their entirety, by reference, as though repeated
verbatim herein.
Section 4. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its
passage and publication and be given the Number 309, 3rd Series.
Voting Aye: Pokrzywinski, DeMers, Grassel, Buckalew, Tweten, Gregoire, and Leigh.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: None.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
ATTEST: PASSED: November 3, 2009
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 3rd day of, November, 2009
Mayor
1
ORDINANCE NO. 310 3RD SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA,
AMENDING CITY CODE TITLE XI BUSINESS REGULATIONS CHAPTER 117
ENTITLED "(ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES" BY ADDING SECTION 117.70 ENTITLED
CATERER’S PERMIT; AND BY ADOPTING BY REFERENCE CITY CODE TITLE I,
CHAPTER 10 AND SECTION 10.99 WHICH, AMONG OTHER THINGS, CONTAIN
PENALTY PROVISIONS.
WHEREAS, the City of East Grand Forks monitors on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses and
catering permits issued to businesses located within the City of East Grand Forks, and
WHEREAS, the City of East Grand Forks has been made aware that businesses with on-sale
intoxicating liquor licenses with caterer’s permits who are located outside the City are authorized
under Minnesota Statutes to sell liquor at social events in locations other than their licensed
premise, and
WHEREAS, the City of East Grand Forks believes that, for public safety purposes, it is a
fundamental duty that the City be aware of and monitor all locations within the City where liquor
is sold;
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. Title XI, Chapter 117 of the City of East Grand Forks’ Ordinances entitled
“Alcoholic Beverages” shall be amended by adding a new Section, Caterer’s Permit which shall
read as follows:
117.70 Illegal Sale. It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Caterer’s Permit to sell
alcoholic beverages off the holder’s licensed premises in the City of East Grand
Forks, except as an incidental part of the service of prepared meals at an event
sponsored by a person with whom the holder has contracted for such prepared meal
service.
117.71 Illegal Interest. It shall be unlawful for the person who has contracted with the
holder for prepared meal service to have any legal, equitable or pecuniary interest in
the holder, or the holder’s compensation from the catered event.
117.72 Information Required. Except for holders who also hold an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license issued by the City of East Grand Forks, it is unlawful for any person
holding a Caterer’s Permit to sell or otherwise provide alcohol to any individual or
group located within the corporate boundaries of the City of East Grand Forks unless
said person has first provided the Police Chief for the City of East Grand Forks with
the following:
2
1. A copy of their valid caterer’s permit as issued by the State of Minnesota,
and
2. A copy of their valid on-sale liquor license as issued by the city where their
primary on-sale liquor premises is located, and
3. A copy of their dram shop insurance policy clearly indicating that dram
shop coverage is currently in force, and
4. A completed caterer’s permit application form, and
5. Payment of an application fee as set by resolution by the City Council of
East Grand Forks.
117.73 Aiding and Abetting. It is unlawful for any person to intentionally aid, advise, hire,
counsel, or conspire with or otherwise procure another to commit the prohibited act.
117.74 Enforcement. This ordinance shall be enforced by any duly licensed law
enforcement officer.
117.75 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word, or other
portion of this ordinance is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or invalid, in
whole, or in part, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed severable, and such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this law, which remaining portions shall
continue in full force and effect.
117.76 Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §10.99.
Section 2: Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect upon its summary publication
in the City’s official newspaper. Said publication shall read as follows:
Ordinance #310, 3rd Series amends East Grand Forks City Ordinances by adding a new
Section outlining the requirements for a person with a State issued caterer’s license to sell
alcohol within the corporate boundaries of the City of East Grand Forks. A complete copy
of the ordinance is available for review or purchase at East Grand Forks City Hall.
Section 3. City Code Title I entitled "General Provisions” Applicable to Entire City Code
Including “General Penalty Section 10.99” are hereby adopted in their entirety, by reference, as
though repeated verbatim herein.
Section 4. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and
publication as indicated in Section 2 above, and be given the Number 310, 3rd Series.
3
Voting Aye: Pokrzywinski, DeMers, Grassel, Buckalew, Tweten, Gregoire, and Leigh.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: None.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
Passed: March 2, 2010
Attest:
____________________________________ ______________________________
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing ordinance this 2nd of March, 2010.
______________________________
Mayor
4
Application to Conduct Business as Allowed by a Caterer's Permit,
Issued in Accordance with Minnesota Statutes 340A.404 Subdivision 12
Full legal name of the business associated with the Caterer's Permit:
______________________________________________________________________________
Physical address of business for which the associated on-sale license is issued:
Business Telephone number:
Home or Cell telephone number:
The name(s) of the person(s) for whom the licensee will be providing catering services:
The home address of the person(s) for whom the licensee will be providing catering services:
The telephone number(s) of person(s) for whom the licensee will be providing catering services:
______________________________________________________________________________
The location and address of the location where the catered event will take place:
State the intended/requested start date and time of the event: _____/_____/_____ _____:_____
State the intended/requested end date and time of the event: _____/_____/_____ _____:_____
Applicant and his/her associates in this application will strictly comply with all the laws of the
State of Minnesota governing the taxation and sale of intoxicating liquor; the rules and
regulations promulgated by the Liquor Control Commissioner; and all ordinances of the
municipality. I hereby certify that I have read and understand every question in this application
and attachment forms, and that the answer to every question is true of my own knowledge,
information, and belief. I further understand that the giving of false information in this
application, and/or the failure to give required pertinent information constitutes cause for the
immediate revocation of the permit issued hereunder.
Signature of Applicant Date
1
ORDINANCE NO. 311 3rd SERIES
CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS
STATE OF MINNESOTA
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF EAST
GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA, AMENDING, RESTATING, REVISING, UPDATING,
CODIFYING, AND COMPILING CERTAIN ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING
WITH THE SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN THE CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND
PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
WHEREAS Minnesota Statutes §§ 415.02 and 415.021 authorize the city to cause its ordinances
to be codified and printed in a book,
NOW THEREFORE the City Council of the City of East Grand Forks, Minnesota, ordains:
Section 1. The general ordinances of the city as amended, restated, revised, updated, codified,
and compiled in book form, including penalties for the violations of various provisions thereof,
are adopted and shall constitute the Code of Ordinances of the City of East Grand Forks. This
Code of Ordinances also adopts, by reference, certain statutes and administrative rules of the
State of Minnesota as named in the Code of Ordinances.
Section 2. The Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the following titles:
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
TITLE IX: GENERAL REULATIONS
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Section 3. Further, to prevent any confusion Ordinance number 309 3rd Series clarifying Title
VII, Chapter 72.and Ordinance number 310 3rd Series amending Title XI Business Regulations
Chapter 117 shall be included in the Code of Ordinances as they were adopted after the Code of
2
Ordinances were published. They will officially be included in the Code of Ordinances and shall
be kept in the office of the city administrator.
Section 4. All prior ordinances pertaining to subjects treated in the Code of Ordinances shall be
deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as they are included
and re-ordained in whole or in part in the Code of Ordinances; provided this repeal shall not
affect any offense committed or penalty incurred, or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall this repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying taxes;
appropriating money; annexing or detaching territory; establishing franchises; granting special
rights to certain persons; authorizing public improvements; authorizing the issuance of bonds or
borrowing of money; authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property; granting or
accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use; or vacating or setting the
boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall this repeal affect any other ordinance of a
temporary or special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code of
Ordinances. All fees established in prior ordinances shall remain in effect unless amended in this
Code of Ordinances, or until an ordinance adopting a fee schedule is adopted or amended.
Section 5. This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances shall be a sufficient publication of
any ordinance included in it and not previously published in the city’s official newspaper. The
city clerk shall cause a substantial quantity of the Code of Ordinances to be printed for general
distribution to the public at actual cost, and shall furnish a copy of the Code of Ordinances to the
County Law Library or its designated depository. The official copy of this Code of Ordinances
shall be marked and be kept in the office of the city administrator.
Section 6. The Code of Ordinances is declared to be prima facie evidence of the law of the city
and shall be received in evidence as provided by Minnesota Statutes by the courts of the State of
Minnesota.
Section 7. This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances, and the Code of Ordinances itself,
shall take effect upon publication of this ordinance in the city’s official newspaper.
Voting Aye:
Voting Nay:
Absent:
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
Passed: June 15, 2010
Attest:
____________________________________ ______________________________
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing ordinance this 15th of June, 2010.
______________________________
Mayor
1
ORDINANCE NO. 312 3rd SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA,
AMENDING CITY CODE TITLE XV ENTITLED “LAND USAGE” BY AMENDING
CHAPTER 152 ENTITLED “ZONING CODE” "GENERAL PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS" BY ADDING SECTION 152.293 (G) “BUILDING PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS”; AND BY ADOPTING BY REFERENCE CITY CODE TITLE I,
CHAPTER 10 AND SECTION 10.99 WHICH, AMONG OTHER THINGS, CONTAIN
PENALTY PROVISIONS.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. That Chapter 152 entitled “Zoning Code shall have the following changes:
152.293 (G). Residential Accessory buildings: Residential Accessory Structures are subject to
the following:
1. In case an accessory building is attached to the main building, it shall be made
structurally a part of the main building and shall comply in all respects the requirement of this
ordinance applicable to the main building.
2. A detached accessory building shall not be located in any required front or side yard.
3. No accessory building shall exceed the height of the principal building.
4. Properties under ten thousand (<10,000) square feet in area are allowed up to one
thousand (1,000) square feet of accessory building area. Properties having lot areas between ten
thousand (10,000) square feet and twenty thousand (20,000) are allowed up to one thousand five
hundred (1500) square feet in accessory building area. Properties over twenty thousand
(>20,000) square feet in area are allowed up to three thousand (3,000) square feet of accessory
building area. The accessory building area includes all garages, sheds or other buildings on the
property. The above mentioned maximum allowable areas govern only when other more
restrictive regulations are met (impervious coverage, setbacks, etc.)
Section 2. City Code Title I, Chapter 10 entitled "General Provisions” applicable to
entire city code including penalty for violation and Section 10.99 entitled "General Penalty" are
hereby adopted in their entirety, by reference, as though repeated verbatim herein.
Section 3. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and
publication and be given the Number 312, 3rd Series.
Voting Aye: Buckalew, Tweten, Gregoire, Leigh, Pokrzywinski, and Grassel.
Voting Nay: DeMers.
Absent: None.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
Passed: September 21, 2010
2
Attest:
____________________________________ ______________________________
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing ordinance this 21st of September, 2010.
______________________________
Mayor
1
ORDINANCE NO. 313 3rd SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA,
AMENDING CITY CODE TITLE XV ENTITLED "LAND USAGE" BY AMENDING
CHAPTER 151 “SUBDIVISION REGULATION” SECTION 151.106(B) STREET
WIDTH AND GRADE, (12), SIDEWALKS; AND BY ADOPTING BY REFERENCE
CITY CODE TITLE I, CHAPTER 10 AND SECTION 10.99 WHICH, AMONG OTHER
THINGS, CONTAIN PENALTY PROVISIONS.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. That Chapter 151 entitled “Subdivision Regulations” shall have the following
changes:
(12) Sidewalks. The following are the requirements for sidewalks in all new subdivisions in
the City.
(a) Sidewalk design. The following section explains the design requirement for all
sidewalks built in the City.
(i) All sidewalks built are required to be in compliance with the most current
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards.
(ii) All sidewalks will be built to the widths that follow: residential districts, five
feet; commercial districts, eight feet; and industrial districts, five feet.
(iii) Sidewalks will be a minimum of four-inch thick concrete placed on a fourinch
gravel base. The portion of the sidewalk that crosses a driveway must be a
minimum of 6 inch thick concrete.
(iv) Sidewalks will be installed at a 2% grade towards the street. From the
property edge to the back of the curb, the grade shall be 4%.
(b) Installation time. In new developments, all sidewalks are to be installed on each
parcel within nine months of the day the building permit for that parcel is filed. Once
66% of the parcels in the subdivision are developed, all other parcels will have
sidewalks installed, unless the property owner files a petition saying that they will build
within one year.
(c) Location requirements. All sidewalks installed in areas in compliance with the
following.
(i) Sidewalks will be located on both sides of the street.
2
(ii) Placement of the sidewalk will start 1 foot from the property line inside the
road right-of-way and proceed 5 feet toward the curb.
(iii) Driveway area that contains the sidewalk must be constructed so that it
provides a level passage of at least 5 feet wide for placement of a sidewalk across
the driveway.
(d) Sidewalks on cul-de-sacs. Sidewalks will not be required in cul-de-sacs less
than three hundred feet in length. Nothing in this section shall prohibit individual
property owners or agreement from all property owners from installing a sidewalk
on or adjacent to their property.
(e) Waiver of protest.
(i) Prior to the issuance of a building permit relating to properties designated for
sidewalk construction, the owner must sign a request for sidewalk or a waiver of
protest; said waiver shall be recorded with the recorder’s office and shall deny the
property owner, said owner’s heirs or assigns the right to protest the installation of
sidewalks on designated public rights-of-way.
(ii) The lots for which waiver of protest forms have been signed shall be counted
as in favor of sidewalks in determining the percentage in 151.106B.12.b
Section 2. City Code Title I, Chapter 10 entitled "General Provisions” applicable to entire city
code including penalty for violation and Section 10.99 entitled "General Penalty" are hereby
adopted in their entirety, by reference, as though repeated verbatim herein.
Section 3. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and
publication and be given the Number 313, 3rd Series.
Voting Aye: Buckalew, Tweten, Gregoire, Pokrzywinski, DeMers, and Grassel.
Voting Nay: None.
Absent: None.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
Passed: September 21, 2010
Attest:
____________________________________ ______________________________
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing ordinance this 21st of September, 2010.
______________________________
Mayor
ORDINANCE NO. 314 3RD SERIES
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS, MINNESOTA, AMENDING
CITY CODE PROVISION IN TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE, CHAPTER 70 ENTITLED
“GENERAL PROVISIONS” BY AMENDING SECTION 70.02 ENTITLED DEFINTIONS
AND BY AMENDING CHAPTER 72 ENTITLED “PARKING REGULATIONS” BY
AMENDING SECTION 72.04, SECTION 72.10 AND SECTION 72.11;
AND BY ADOPTING BY REFERENCE CITY CODE CHAPTER 10 AND SECTION
10.99 WHICH, AMONG OTHER THINGS, CONTAIN PENALTY PROVISIONS.
THE CITY OF EAST GRAND FORKS ORDAINS:
Section 1. Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this ordinance is to update
the general provisions definitions to reflect the amendments to Minnesota Statute Chapter 169
and to amend the parking regulations in the City of East Grand Forks to have the ordinance
reflect the definitions set forth in the Minnesota Statutes, to enact a year round period of
enforcement for street maintenance for the purpose the removal of snow, ice, sand, gravel and
other debris from the public streets, and to amend trucking parking in the cities commercial and
industrial zones.
Section 2. Amendments Chapter 70.
Chapter 70 of Title VII of the Traffic Code is hereby amended as follows:
SECTION 70.02. DEFINITIONS. The introductory sentence shall read as follows:
“ALL Terms used in this title “TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE” shall have the
meanings set forth in M.S. ' 169.001 unless otherwise provided.”
VEHICLE shall be defined as:
VEHICLE. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon any street or highway, excepting
devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks as the same are defined in
M.S. Chapter 169, as such chapter may be from time to time amended,
supplemented or replaced, or as known in the highway traffic regulations, as
adopted by the Council, as such regulations may be from time to time amended,
supplemented or replaced.
Section 3. Amendments Chapter 72.
SECTION 72.04 shall be amended to read as follows:
72.04 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE, TRAILER, TRAVEL TRAILER,
PARK TRAILER AND OTHER TRAILER PARKING.
It is unlawful for any person to leave, park or let stand any trailer, travel trailer,
park trailer motor home, recreational vehicle, bus or other similar vehicle or
trailer as defined in either section 168.002 of Chapter 168 or section 169.001 of
Chapter 169 of Minnesota Statutes as they may be amended from time to time, on
or within the limits of any street or right of way or municipal parking lot, except
where signs are erected designating the same as a campsite for more than 12
consecutive hours.
SECTION 72.10 CALANDER PARKING shall be amended to read as follows:
72.10 STREET MAINTENANCE PARKING.
In order to facilitate the removal of snow, ice, sand, gravel and other debris from
the public streets and other rights-of-way, the following additional parking
restrictions shall be in effect.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BUSINESS DISTRICT.
Bygland Rd. SE from 5th Ave. SE to 4th St. SE
Central Ave. NE NW
Central Ave. service roads NE and NW
College Dr. NE
Demers Ave.
Gateway Dr. NE service road
Gateway Dr. NW service road from Central Ave. service road NW to 3rd Ave.
NW
River St. NW
Sherlock Parkway to Demers Ave.
Terrace Dr. NW to Sherlock Parkway
1st St. SE from Point Bridge to 3rd Ave. SE
2nd Ave. NE 17th St. NW - Louie Murray Bridge
2nd St. NW
3rd Ave. NW from Central Avenue to River St.
3rd Ave. SE to 5th Ave. SE
3rd St. NW
3rd St. NE 200 - 1000 blocks
4th St. NE from 5th Ave. NE - 9th Ave. NE
4th St. NW
5th Ave. NE from 23rd St. NE to 4th Ave. NW east side of street 1400 - 1600
blocks
5th Ave. NW from Hwy 2 - 4th St. NW
6th Ave. NE
6th Ave. NW west side 1400 - 1500 blocks
7th Ave. NE
8th Ave. NE
9th Ave. NE
10th St. NW from Central to Terrace Dr. NW
10th St. NE
14th St. NE
15th St. NE
15th St. NW south side 600 - 700 blocks
17th St. NE
20th St. NE
Maintenance District 1 – All areas North of 17th Street NW and West of Central
Avenue.
Maintenance District 2 – The areas South of 17th Street NW and North of
Gateway Drive and Northstar Terrace.
Maintenance District 3 – East end and Central Areas – South of Gateway Drive
and North of the Red Lake River.
Maintenance District 4 – Point area – East of Bygland Road.
Maintenance District 5 – Point area – West of Bygland Road
PERIOD OF ENFORCEMENT – Year round.
(B) Parking prohibitions.
(1) It is unlawful to park or leave standing any vehicle or trailer in the business
district between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday though Friday
during the period of enforcement.
(2) In all areas of the city excluding the business district, it is unlawful to park or
leave standing any vehicle or trailer on any street or right-of-way designated
between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 12:00 noon during the period of enforcement
based upon the following schedule:
• Monday – District 4
• Tuesday – District 5
• Wednesday – District 2
• Thursday – District 1
• Friday – District 3
(3) It shall not be unlawful to otherwise lawfully park a vehicle with its motor
idling on any street for a duration of 5 minutes or less during the time periods in
which parking is restricted as set forth in this section.
(4) During such hours that the street maintenance parking prohibitions are in
effect, the owner or occupant of real property adjacent to any street, avenue, road,
court, drive, way or cul-de-sac may park operable, registered, licensed and
insured motor vehicles on the city right-of-way between the curb and the sidewalk
(or adjacent to the curb if there is no sidewalk) commonly referred to as the berm,
with the exception that such owner or occupant of real property may only park the
motor vehicles on the portion of the berm that is immediately adjacent to the
residence occupied by the owner or occupant, and with the further exceptions that
the parking shall not be permitted within 10 feet of an intersection or corner, or
within 10 feet of a fire hydrant, and that the parked motor vehicles shall not block
a sidewalk.
(C) Presumption. For purposes of this section, any vehicle or trailer parked or left
on a street or right-of-way of the city in violation of this section shall be presumed
to have been parked or left by the registered owner of the vehicle or trailer.
(D) Snow emergency. A snow emergency automatically goes into effect when 2
inches or more of snow has fallen until the streets are cleaned. Under a snow
emergency, no parking on any city street is allowed until that street has been
cleared to its full width. Violators will be ticketed and towed
Section 4.
SECTION 72.11 TRUCK PARKING subdivision (C) shall be amended to read as
follows:
SECTION 72.11 TRUCK PARKING
(C) It is unlawful to park a vehicle of more than 12,000 pounds gross weight
upon any street in the Commercial/Industrial District as defined in the City
Zoning Ordinance except streets as specifically designated by the Council by
resolution and sign posted, but parking of such vehicle for a period of not more
than 60 minutes shall be permitted in such space for the purpose of necessary
access to abutting property while actively loading or unloading when such access
cannot reasonably be secured from an alley or from an adjacent street where truck
parking is not so restricted.
Section 5. City Code Title 1 General Provisions, Chapter 10 entitled General Provisions
are hereby adopted in their entirety, by reference, as though repeated verbatim herein.
Section 6. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force after its passage, publication
and then beginning on November 21, 2010. It shall be given the Number 314, 3rd Series.
VOTING AYE: Buckalew, Tweten, Leigh, Pokrzywinski, DeMers, and Grassel.
VOTING NAY: None.
ABSENT: Gregoire.
The President declared the Ordinance passed.
PASSED: November 4, 2010
ATTEST:
______________________________ ______________________________
City Administrator/Clerk-Treasurer President of Council
I hereby approve the foregoing Ordinance this 4 day November, 2010.
Mayor
Adopted by the City Council this 4 day of November 2010.