CITY CODE CITY OF EAGAN, MINNESOTA 
____________ 
Published in 1997 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
EAGAN, MINNESOTA 
____________ 
Mike Maguire 
Mayor 
____________ 
Paul Bakken 
Cyndee Fields 
Gary Hansen 
Meg Tilley 
City Council 
____________ 
Dave Osberg 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Michael Dougherty 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Dianne Miller 
Assistant City Administrator 
____________ 
Christina M. Scipioni 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This volume is a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Eagan, Minnesota, originally published in 1983. The original arrangement and the original numbering system have been retained. New state law references have been added and existing references were verified and updated. A state law reference table was prepared. In this publication, a uniform style of punctuation and capitalization has been employed. Obvious typographical errors and misspellings have been corrected without notation. 
Source materials used in the preparation of this Code were the 1983 publication, as amended, a legal analysis of the 1983 publication, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a point. The figure before the point refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the point refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1.02, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6.01. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6.01 and 6.02 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6.01.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as chapter 12.5. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Milt Lefkoff, Supervising Editor, and Jody S. Wilson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. James Sheldon, City Attorney, and Mr. E.J. VanOverbeke, Finance Director/City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City of Eagan readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Eagan, Minnesota. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Eagan, Minnesota. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Eagan, Minnesota. 1997. 
The following paragraphs are reprinted from the Foreword of the 1983 publication: 
This book contains a codification of the ordinances of the City of Eagan pursuant to authority granted the City Council by Minnesota Statutes, Section 415.021. It is known and may be cited as the "City Code". 
In this codification, most of the original ordinances have lost their identity and are referred to by Chapter, Section, Subdivision, etc. rather than by a number indicating the sequence in which they were adopted. They have also been supplemented by other essential legislative items. Certain ordinances retain their number and effective dates because of the nature of the subject matter contained therein. 
A complete codification of the proportions desired is a difficult and lengthy task, but the effort will be well-rewarded if it is found that the City Code accomplishes (1) the elimination of repetition and non-essentials; (2) easy revision and incorporation of each new ordinance or amendment; (3) comprehensiveness; and, (4) the ease of locating a particular subject or provision. 
The reader will find in this book a topical Analysis and a Sub-Analysis, followed by a full text of the City Code. This physical layout is designed to make local laws more accessible to the layman for it is closest to him and touches his life every day. The City Code is dedicated to this purpose. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 230 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF EAGAN, MINNESOTA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF EAGAN DOES ORDAIN: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "City Code, City of Eagan, Minnesota" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of chapters 1 through 25, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 26, 1996, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished as provided in the specific chapter or provision. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so the reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after September 26, 1996, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective April 17, 1997. 
Passed and adopted by this council this fifteenth day of April, 1997. 
CITY OF EAGAN CITY COUNCIL 
	/s/   
      Thomas Egan, Mayor 
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/   
      E. J. VanOverbeke, Finance 
      Director/City Clerk 	
 	 
 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS APPLICABLE TO THE ENTIRE CITY CODE INCLUDING PENALTY FOR VIOLATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority for codification of ordinances, Minn. Stat. § 415.021 
 
Sec. 1.01. - Application. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all the chapters, sections, subdivisions, paragraphs and provisions in the City Code, and the City Code shall apply to all persons and property within the city and within such adjacent area as may be stated in specific provisions. 
(Code 1983, § 1.01, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 1.02. - Definitions. 
Unless the language or context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended, the following words, terms and phrases, for the purpose of every chapter, section, subdivision, paragraph and provision of this City Code, shall have the following meanings and inclusions: 
Boulevard means the area of a street right-of-way that lies between the property line nearest to any street to which such property abuts and the edge of pavement or back of curb of such street. 
City means the City of Eagan, Minnesota, acting by or through its duly authorized representative. 
City administrator means the person duly appointed by the city council and acting in such capacity. 
City clerk and city clerk-treasurer mean the person duly appointed by the city council and acting in such capacity. 
Code or "this Code," without further qualification, means the City Code, City of Eagan, Minnesota. 
Conviction means either of the following accepted and recorded by the court: 
A.  A plea of guilty; or 
B.  A verdict of guilty by a jury or a finding of guilty by the court. 
Council and city council mean the city council of the City of Eagan, Minnesota. 
County means the County of Dakota, Minnesota. 
Crime means conduct which is prohibited by this Code for which the violator may be sentenced to imprisonment or fine. 
Ex officio member means a person who is not counted for the purpose of determining a quorum and has no right to vote, but shall have the right and obligation, within his discretion, to speak to any question coming before the board, commission or other deliberative body of which he is such member. 
Intersection means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curbline or, if no curb, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways or streets which join one another at or approximately at right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
May is permissive. 
Minn. Stat. means and refers to the latest edition or supplement of the Minnesota Statutes. 
Misdemeanor means the crime for which a sentence of not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $700.00, or both, may be imposed. 
Officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency, when referred to by title only, shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Eagan, Minnesota." 
Ordinance means an ordinance duly adopted by the council. 
Person includes all firms, partnerships, associations, corporations and natural persons. 
Petty misdemeanor means an offense, which does not constitute a crime, and for which a sentence of a fine of not more than $200.00 may be imposed. 
Police officer, public safety officer, and peace officer mean every officer, including special police, authorized to direct or regulate traffic, keep the peace, and appointed or employed for the purpose of law enforcement. 
Premises means any lot, piece or parcel of land within a continuous boundary, whether publicly or privately owned, occupied or possessed. 
Private property means all property not included within the definition of public property and public place. 
Public property and public place mean any place, property or premises dedicated to public use, owned by the city, occupied by the city as a lessee or occupied by the city as a street by reason of an easement, including but not limited to streets, parks or parking lots so owned or occupied. 
Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event a street includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway," as used herein, shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
Shall is mandatory. 
State means the State of Minnesota. 
Street and street right-of-way mean the entire area dedicated to public use, or contained in an easement or other conveyance or grant to the city, and shall include but not be limited to roadways, boulevards, sidewalks, trails, alleys, and other public property between lateral property lines in which a roadway lies. 
Tense. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used in the future tense shall include the present. 
Violate includes failure to comply with. 
Written and in writing mean any mode of representing words and letters in the English language. 
(Code 1983, § 1.02, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 6, 2nd series, eff. 4-27-84; Ord. No. 64, 2nd series, eff. 8-26-88; Ord. No. 151, 2nd series, eff. 12-11-92)  
Sec. 1.03. - Violation a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor. 
Every person violates a chapter, section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this City Code when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof such person shall be punished as for a misdemeanor or as for a petty misdemeanor, except as otherwise stated in specific provisions herein, as set forth in the specific chapter in which the section, subdivision, paragraph or provision violated appears. Upon conviction for a crime, the actor may be convicted of either the crime charged if it is a misdemeanor, or a petty misdemeanor as an included offense necessarily proved if the misdemeanor charge were proved. 
(Code 1983, § 1.03, eff. 1-1-83) 
State Law reference— Maximum penalty for ordinance violations, Minn. Stat. §§ 412.231, 609.034.  
Sec. 1.04. - Otherwise unlawful. 
The City Code does not authorize an act or omission otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Code 1983, § 1.04, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 1.05. - Severability. 
Every chapter, section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of the City Code shall be and is hereby declared severable from every other such chapter, section, subdivision, paragraph or provision, and if any part or portion of any of them shall be held invalid, it shall not affect or invalidate any other chapter, section, subdivision, paragraph or provision. 
(Code 1983, § 1.05, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 1.06. - Payment into city treasury of fines and penalties. 
All fines, forfeitures and penalties recovered for the violation of any ordinance, charter, rule or regulation of the city shall be paid into the city treasury by the court or officer thereof receiving such monies. Payment shall be made in the manner, at the time, and in the proportion provided by law. 
(Code 1983, § 1.06, eff. 1-1-83) 
Cross reference— City clerk-treasurer, § 2.13.  
Sec. 1.07. - Meanings. 
As used in this City Code, words of the male gender shall include the female and neuter, and the singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular. 
(Code 1983, § 1.07, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 1.08. - Citation. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the City Code, City of Eagan, Minnesota, and may be so cited. This codification of the ordinances of the city shall henceforth be known as the City Code and cited thus: "City Code, Sec. _____." 
(Code 1983, § 1.08, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 1.09. - Penalties for each offense. 
When a penalty or forfeiture is provided for the violation of a chapter, section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this City Code, such penalty or forfeiture shall be construed to be for each such violation. 
(Code 1983, § 1.09, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 1.10. - Section catchlines and other headings. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of such sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter, subdivision, subparagraph or other provision of this City Code. 
(Code 1983, § 1.10, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 29, 2nd series, eff. 6-6-86)  
Sec. 1.11. - Reference to a public official. 
Wherever an appointed public official is referred to in the City Code, the reference shall include such public official or his designee. 
(Code 1983, § 1.11, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 46, 2nd series, eff. 6-12-87) 
Cross reference— Administration and general government, ch. 2.  
Sec. 1.12. - Source and effective date notes. 
The source and effective date notes appearing after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source and effective date of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1.13. - Editor's notes and references. 
The editor's notes, cross references and state law references in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to assist the user of this Code.  
Sec. 1.14. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Subd. 1.  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
A.  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred before the effective date of this Code. 
B.  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city. 
C.  Any administrative ordinances of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
D.  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance. 
E.  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
F.  Any appropriation ordinance. 
G.  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes. 
H.  Any ordinance prescribing fees, fines, charges, rates, or other specific monetary values. 
I.  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any ordinance extending the boundaries of the city. 
J.  Any ordinance establishing traffic or parking regulations on any street or public way, including traffic schedules. 
K.  Any ordinance regarding salaries or compensation of city officers or employees. 
L.  Any temporary or special ordinances. 
Subd. 2.  All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. All ordinances are on file in the office of the city administrator.  
Sec. 1.15. - Amendments to Code. 
Subd. 1.  Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make such additions or amendments a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Subd. 2.  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section, subdivision, paragraph or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
Subd. 3.  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____ of the City Code, City of Eagan, Minnesota, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
Subd. 4.  If a new section not then existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the City Code, City of Eagan, Minnesota, is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full. 
Subd. 5.  All chapters, sections, subdivisions, paragraphs or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by chapter, section, subdivision or paragraph number, as the case may be.  
Sec. 1.16. - Supplementation of Code. 
Subd. 1.  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
Subd. 2.  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
Subd. 3.  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
A.  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
B.  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
C.  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
D.  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this section" or "this subdivision," as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
E.  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Secs. 1.17—1.99. - Reserved.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND GENERAL GOVERNMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Reference to a public official, § 1.11; municipal and public utilities—rules and regulations, rates, charges and collections, ch. 3; administration of beer, wine and liquor regulations, § 5.02; administration and enforcement of land use regulations, § 11.40; administration and enforcement of subdivision regulations, § 13.40. 
State Law reference— Statutory cities, Minn. Stat. § 412.013 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2.01. - Authority and purpose. 
Pursuant to authority granted by statute, this chapter of the City Code is enacted so as to set down for enforcement the government and good order of the city by and through the council. 
(Code 1983, § 2.01, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 2.02. - Council meetings—Time and place. 
Regular meetings of the council shall be held in the council chambers on the first and third Tuesdays of each month at 6:30 p.m. Special and adjourned meetings shall also be held in the council chambers or such place as the council designates. In the event that any regular meeting falls on a holiday, then the meeting shall be held on the next day or such other day as the council designates, at the same time. The organizational meeting shall be held at the time of the second regular meeting in January. 
(Code 1983, § 2.02, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 2.03. - Special meetings. 
Special meetings of the council may be called by the mayor or by any two other members of the council by writing filed with the city administrator stating the time, place and purpose of the meeting. Notice of a special meeting shall be given by the city administrator to each member of the council by mailing a copy of such filing to all members who did not sign or issue the call at least three days prior to the time stated therein, or by personal service at least 72 hours prior to the projected time of meeting. Special meetings may be held without prior written notice to the council when all councilmembers are present at the meeting or consent thereto in writing. Any such consent shall be filed with the city administrator prior to the beginning of the meeting. Any special meeting attended by all councilmembers shall be a valid meeting for the transaction of any business that may come before the meeting. Meetings of the council which are adjourned from time to time shall not be subject to the foregoing notice requirements, nor shall special meetings which, in the judgment of the council, require immediate consideration to meet an emergency require such notice, but may be called by telephone communication or any other expeditious means. Notice to the public and to news media shall be given as required by statute. 
(Code 1983, § 2.03, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 115, 2nd series, eff. 6-14-91)  
Sec. 2.04. - Council procedure at regular meetings. 
The city administrator shall prepare the following items: (1) an agenda for the forthcoming meeting; (2) a report from the city administrator on administrative activities of the preceding month; (3) a compiled list of claimants; and (4) a copy of all minutes to be considered. The city administrator shall forthwith cause to be mailed or delivered to each member of the council copies of all said documents. Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, copyright 1970, shall govern all council meetings as to procedural matters except as amended in specific instances by unanimous vote of the councilmembers present. The order of business at regular meetings shall be as determined by the council. Matters inappropriate for consideration at a meeting, or not in the order specified, shall not be considered except (1) with the unanimous consent of the members of the council, or (2) scheduled public hearings or bid lettings at the time stated in the notice. 
(Code 1983, § 2.04, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 2.05. - City seal. 
All contracts to which the city is a party shall be sealed with the city seal. Said seal shall be kept in the custody of the city clerk-treasurer and affixed by him. The official city seal shall be a circular disc having engraved thereupon "CITY OF EAGAN" and such other words, figures or emblems as the council may, by resolution, designate. 
(Code 1983, § 2.05, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 2.06. - Right to administrative appeal. 
If any person shall be aggrieved by any administrative decision of the city administrator or any other city official or any board or commission not having within its structure an appellate procedure, such aggrieved person is entitled to a full hearing before the council upon serving a written request therefor upon the mayor and city administrator at least five days prior to any regular council meeting. Such request shall contain a general statement setting forth the administrative decision to be challenged by the appellant. At such hearing the appellant may present any evidence he deems pertinent to the appeal, but the city shall not be required to keep a verbatim record of the proceedings. The mayor or other officer presiding at the hearing may, in the interest of justice or to comply with time requirements and on his own motion or the motion of the appellant, the city administrator, or a member of the council, adjourn the hearing to a more convenient time or place, but such time or place shall be fixed and determined before adjournment so as to avoid the necessity for formal notice of reconvening. 
(Code 1983, § 2.06, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 2.07. - Rules of procedure for appeals and other hearings. 
The council may adopt by resolution certain written rules of procedure to be followed in all administrative appeals and other hearings to be held before the council or other bodies authorized to hold hearings and determine questions therein presented. Such rules of procedure shall be effective 30 days after adoption and shall be for the purpose of establishing and maintaining order and decorum in the proceedings. 
(Code 1983, § 2.07, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 2.08. - Facsimile signatures. 
The mayor and city clerk-treasurer are hereby authorized to request a depository of city funds to honor an order for payment when such instrument bears a facsimile of their signatures and to charge the same to the account designated thereon or upon which it is drawn as effectively as though it were their manually written signatures. Such authority is granted only for the purpose of permitting such officers an economy of time and effort. 
(Code 1983, § 2.08, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 2.09. - City administrator. 
Subd. 1. Position established. The position of city administrator is hereby established. 
Subd. 2. Appointment and removal. The city administrator shall be appointed by the council for an indefinite term. He shall not be removed except by affirmative action taken by the council twice at two regular meetings held within 60 days. The action taken at the first such meeting shall be an expression of intent to vote thereon at the second such regular meeting not to be held sooner than ten days thereafter. If, at any time after he has completed six months of continuous service, the council takes such action, the city administrator may, within 30 days after written notice of removal, request a public hearing which the council must grant and which must be started within 30 days after the request. 
Subd. 3. Qualifications. The city administrator shall be selected solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference both to his experience, formal education, as well as his knowledge of accepted practices pertaining to the duties of his office. 
Subd. 4. Duties. The city administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the city, and he shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city and to that end shall have the power and shall be required to: 
A.  Supervise the administration of all departments, offices and divisions of the city, except as otherwise provided by law, and carry out any other responsibilities placed under his jurisdiction by this chapter or by subsequent council action. He shall interview and screen all prospective city employees as permitted by law and shall make recommendations for terminating and suspending employees and may suspend any employee until the next council meeting when the council shall affirm, modify or rescind the suspension. 
B.  Develop and issue all administrative rules, regulations and procedures necessary to ensure the proper functioning of all departments and offices under his jurisdiction as permitted by law and council approval. 
C.  Prepare and submit an annual budget to the council and keep the council advised of the financial condition of the city and make such recommendations as he may from time to time determine desirable and necessary. 
D.  Attend and participate in discussions at all meetings of the council and other official bodies as directed by the council. The city administrator shall also represent the city at all official or semiofficial functions as may be directed by the council and not in conflict with the prerogatives of the mayor. He shall be entitled to notice of all regular and special meetings of the council. 
E.  See that all laws and provisions of the City Code are duly enforced. 
F.  Make or award purchases and contracts when the amount thereof does not exceed $2,000.00. 
G.  Recommend from time to time the adoption of such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety and welfare of the community or for the improvement of the administration. 
H.  Perform such other duties as may be required by the council and referred to in the Position Description Guide, and consistent with Minnesota Statutes and the City Code. 
Subd. 5. Compensation. The city administrator shall receive such compensation as the council shall fix from time to time. 
Subd. 6. Agreement. This section shall be subject to any agreement already entered into with respect to this position. 
(Code 1983, § 2.09, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 2.10. - Interim emergency succession. 
Subd. 1. Purpose. Due to the existing possibility of a nuclear attack or a natural disaster requiring a declaration of a state of emergency, it is found urgent and necessary to ensure the continuity of duly elected and lawful leadership of the city to provide for the continuity of the government and the emergency interim succession of key governmental officials by providing a method for temporary emergency appointments to their offices. 
Subd. 2. Succession to local offices. In the event of a nuclear attack upon the United States or a natural disaster affecting the vicinity of the city, the mayor, council and city administrator shall be forthwith notified by any one of said persons and by any means available to gather at the city hall. In the event that safety or convenience dictate, an alternative place of meeting may be designated. Those gathered shall proceed as follows: 
A.  By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number, they shall elect a chairman and secretary to preside and keep minutes, respectively. 
B.  They shall review and record the specific facts relating to the nuclear attack or natural disaster and injuries to persons or damage to property already done or the imminence thereof. 
C.  They may, based on such facts, declare a state of emergency. 
D.  By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number, they shall fill all positions on the council, including the office of mayor, of those persons upon whom notice could not be served or who are unable to be present. 
E.  Such interim successors shall serve until such time as the duly elected official is again available and returns to his position, or the state of emergency has passed and a successor is designated and qualifies as required by law, whichever shall occur first. 
Subd. 3. Duties of the interim emergency council. The interim emergency council shall exercise the powers and duties of their offices and appoint other key government officials to serve during the emergency. The council shall implement the city emergency plan then in effect. 
(Code 1983, § 2.10, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 2.11. - Salaries of mayor and councilmembers. 
Salaries of the mayor and council are hereby fixed as follows, the amounts of which are deemed reasonable: 
Subd. 1. The annual salary of the mayor shall be $13,625.00. 
Subd. 2. The annual salary of each council member shall be $10,000.00. 
(Code 1983, § 2.11, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 178, 2nd series, eff. 3-18-94; Ord. No. 224, 2nd series, eff. 9-26-96; Ord. No. 427, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 1-1-09)  
Sec. 2.12. - Workers' compensation. 
Subd. 1. Contractors. The city shall not enter into any contract for doing public work before receiving from all other contracting parties acceptable evidence of compliance with the workers' compensation insurance coverage requirement of Minnesota Statutes. 
Subd. 2. City officers. All officers of the city elected or appointed for a regular term of office or to complete the unexpired portion of any such regular term shall be included in the definition of "employee" as defined in Minnesota Statutes relating to coverage for purposes of workers' compensation entitlement. 
(Code 1983, § 2.12, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 115, 2nd series, eff. 6-14-91) 
State Law reference— Workers' compensation, Minn. Stat. ch. 176.  
Sec. 2.13. - City clerk-treasurer. 
The offices of city clerk and city treasurer should be and they are hereby combined. 
(Code 1983, § 2.13, eff. 1-1-83) 
Cross reference— Payment into city treasury of fines and penalties, § 1.06.  
Sec. 2.14. - Mayoral term of office. 
The term of office of the mayor of the city is hereby established to be four years, commencing with the ensuing term after the effective date of this section. 
(Ord. No. 123, 2nd series, eff. 8-16-91)  
Secs. 2.15, 2.16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An official action of the city council at a special meeting on December 29, 1998 repealed the ordinances from which former §§ 2.15 and 2.16 derived. Former § 2.15 pertained to odd-year elections, and derived from Ord. No. 124, 2nd series, effective August 30, 1991; and Ord. No. 255, 2nd series, effective March 26, 1998. Former § 2.16 pertained to terms of office for transition to odd-year elections, and derived from Ord. No. 256, 2nd series, effective March 26, 1998.  
Secs. 2.17—2.29. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2.30. - Departments generally. 
Subd. 1. Control. All departments of the city are under the overall control of the city administrator. Heads of all departments are responsible to the city administrator and subject to his supervision and direction, except as otherwise provided herein. 
Subd. 2. Appointment. All department heads and employees shall be recommended by the city administrator and appointed by the council. All appointments shall be for an indeterminate term and subject to any applicable civil service regulations in effect in the city. 
Subd. 3. Compensation. All wages and salaries shall be fixed and determined by the council. 
Subd. 4. Table of organization and lines of responsibility. The city administrator shall recommend, and the council may by resolution adopt, amend and from time to time revise, a table of organization and define lines of responsibility and authority for the efficient governmental organization of the city. 
Subd. 5. Budgetary information. The heads of all departments shall, during July in each year, file with the city administrator the projected financial needs of his department for the ensuing year. Such projections shall include information as to maintenance and operation of equipment, new equipment, personnel and such other information as may be requested by the city administrator. 
(Code 1983, § 2.30, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 2.31. - Police department. 
A police department is hereby established. The head of this department shall be known as the chief of police, and the number of additional members and employees of the police department shall be determined by the council, which may be changed from time to time. The mayor shall have, without the approval of the council, authority to appoint additional members of the police department for temporary duty when in his judgment an emergency exists for the preservation of life or property. The chief of police and all members of the police department shall have the powers and authority of police officers generally and shall perform such duties as are required of them by the council or by law. The chief of police shall have general superintendence of the police department and custody of all property used and maintained for the purposes of said department. It is the duty of the chief of police, on or before the second business day in each month, to file with the city administrator a report as to all arrests made by and other activities of his department during the previous month. The chief of police shall also make and file such other reports as may be required by the council. For purposes of administration, animal control, civil defense and ambulance service are all a part of this department. 
(Code 1983, § 2.31, eff. 1-1-83) 
Cross reference— Traffic regulations, ch. 8; parking regulations, ch. 9; public protection, crimes and offenses, ch. 10.  
Sec. 2.32. - Fire department. 
A fire department is hereby established. The size and composition, including, but not limited to, a determination as to permanent and volunteer members, shall be established by resolution of the council, which may be changed from time to time by a subsequent resolution. The council shall also establish and from time to time revise and amend written rules and regulations of the department, including, but not limited to, its internal structural organization and compensation, a copy of which shall be distributed to each of its members whenever established, revised or amended. The chief of the fire department shall have general supervision of the fire department and custody of all property used and maintained for the purposes of said department. He shall see that the same are kept in proper order and that all rules and regulations and all provisions of the laws of the state and ordinances of the city relative to a fire department and to prevention and extinguishment of fires are duly observed. He shall supervise the preservation of all property endangered by fire and shall control and direct all persons engaged in preserving such property. In case of the absence or disability of the chief for any cause, the assistant chief shall exercise all powers, perform all the duties and be subject to all the responsibilities of the chief. It is the duty of the chief of the fire department, on or before the second regular business day in each month, to file with the city administrator a report as to all fires occurring during the previous month stating the probable cause thereof and estimated damages; such reports shall also state the other activities of the department. The chief of the fire department shall also make and file such other reports as may be requested by the council. 
(Code 1983, § 2.32, eff. 1-1-83) 
Cross reference— Minnesota Uniform Fire Code, § 10.40; fire, burglary and safety alarm regulations and requirements, § 10.43. 
State Law reference— Municipal fire prevention, Minn. Stat. § 412.221, subd. 17.  
Sec. 2.33. - Legal department. 
A legal department is hereby established. The council shall appoint a city attorney, who shall be head of the legal department, together with such assistants as may be necessary who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The city attorney shall perform such duties as are required of him by law or referred to him by the council. It shall be the official duty of the city attorney to act as "revisor of ordinances." 
(Code 1983, § 2.33, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 2.34. - Public works department. 
A public works department is hereby established. The head of such department shall be the director of public works. The city water and sewer systems and streets shall be under the direct supervision of the director, and he shall be responsible for and have custody of all property of such department. It is also the duty of the director of public works, on or before the date of the first regular council meeting in each month, to file with the city administrator a report as to any recommendations as to repairs or improvements he deems advisable, together with a report of the activities of his department during the preceding month. The director shall also make and file such other reports as may be requested by the council. All engineering activities shall be under this department. 
(Code 1983, § 2.34, eff. 1-1-83) 
Cross reference— Municipal and public utilities, ch. 3; streets and sidewalks generally, ch. 7.  
Sec. 2.35. - Protective inspections department. 
A protective inspections department is hereby established. The head of this department is the chief building official. It is the duty of the chief building official to carry out the provisions of the state building code and the provisions of the City Code relating to construction, including, but not limited to, buildings, individual sewage disposal systems, plumbing, heating, and electrical inspections. This department shall also inspect standby auxiliary fuel tanks and supervise the attachment of correct building numbers. 
(Code 1983, § 2.35, eff. 1-1-83) 
Cross reference— Construction licensing, permits and regulation, excavations and mobile home parks, ch. 4.  
Sec. 2.36. - Planning and zoning department. 
A planning and zoning department is hereby established. The head of this department shall be the city planner. All planning and zoning activities shall be the responsibility of this department. It is the duty of the city planner to act in an advisory capacity to the planning commission and the council in all planning and zoning matters, to make recommendations as to planning and subdivision ordinance amendments, and to administer the enforcement of ordinances relating thereto. The city planner shall submit a periodic report to the city administrator covering the work of his department for intervals required by the city administrator. 
(Code 1983, § 2.36, eff. 1-1-83) 
Cross reference— Land use regulations, ch. 11; subdivision regulations, ch. 13.  
Sec. 2.37. - Park and recreation department. 
A park and recreation department is hereby established. The head of this department shall be the director of parks and recreation. All park and recreation activities shall be the responsibility of this department. It is the duty of the director of parks and recreation to act in an advisory capacity to the advisory park and recreation commission and the council in all matters of park and recreation activities, ordinances and policies. The director of parks and recreation shall submit a periodic report to the city administrator covering the work of his department for intervals required by the city administrator. 
(Code 1983, § 2.37, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 2.38. - Issuance of citations. 
Subd. 1. Except as otherwise provided by statute, only a peace officer and part-time peace officer may: 
A.  Ask a person receiving a citation to give a written promise to appear in court; or 
B.  Take a person into custody as permitted by Minn. Stat. § 629.34. 
Subd. 2. The following city individuals may issue citations in lieu of arrest or continued detention for violation of the City Code. Areas of jurisdiction will be contained in city policy as set forth in resolution form by the council. 
A.  Peace officers and part-time peace officers. 
B.  Reserve officers. 
C.  Community development director, senior planner, planner, associate planner, and planning aide. 
D.  Chief building official and building inspectors. 
E.  Code enforcement technicians. 
F.  Director of public works and engineering technicians. 
G.  Fire inspection officers. 
H.  Animal control officers. 
I.  Community service officers. 
J.  Water resources coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 62, 2nd series, eff. 6-24-88; Ord. No. 121, 2nd series, eff. 7-26-91; Ord. No. 146, 2nd series, eff. 8-28-92; Ord. No. 226, 2nd series, eff. 11-4-96; Ord. No. 238, 2nd series, eff. 8-5-97; Ord. No. 323, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 11-22-01)  
Sec. 2.39. - Criminal background investigations. 
Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish regulations governing access to the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension's Computerized Criminal History System and the Minnesota Department of Public Safety's driver's license records for specified non-criminal purposes of conducting background investigations for city employment and volunteer positions and license and permit applications. 
Subd. 2. Investigation . Upon request of the city administrator or his or her designee, the Eagan Police Department is hereby required, as the exclusive department within the city, to complete a driver's license and criminal history background investigation on the following persons: 
A.  Applicants 18 years of age or older who are finalists for full-time, part-time or seasonal employee and volunteer positions with the city, unless the city's hiring authority concludes that a background investigation is not needed. 
B.  All persons subject to a background investigation in relation to a license or permit application submitted to the city as provided elsewhere in this Code. 
In conducting a background investigation, the police department is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension's Computerized Criminal History System in accordance with Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension policy and driver's license data maintained by the Minnesota Department of Public Safety. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the police department under the care and custody of the chief of police or his or her designee. A summary of the results of the computerized criminal history data and driver's license data may be released by the police department to the city's hiring or licensing/permitting authority, as applicable, including the council and the city administrator, the city clerk, city fire marshal, or other city staff involved in the hiring or licensing/permitting process. 
Subd. 3. Consent to investigation. Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant shall authorize the police department by written consent to undertake the investigation. An applicant's failure to provide consent may disqualify the applicant for the city employment or volunteer position or the license or permit sought. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of Minn. Stat. ch. 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of the information. 
Subd. 4. Denial, suspension or revocation. Except for employment positions or licenses set forth in Minn. Stat. § 364.09, the city may not reject an applicant for a city employment or volunteer position or a license or permit on the basis of the applicant's prior conviction, or a prior conviction of any other person subject to a background investigation in relation to a license or permit application, unless the crime is directly related to the position or license or permit sought, and the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor subject to a possible jail sentence. If the city denies the applicant the employment or volunteer position or the license or permit request or suspends or revokes a license or permit on this basis, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the following: 
A.  The grounds and reasons for the denial, suspension or revocation. 
B.  The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minn. Stat. ch. 364. 
C.  The earliest date the applicant may re-apply for an employment or volunteer position or the license or permit, as applicable. 
D.  All competent evidence of rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of employment or volunteer position or occupation will be considered upon reapplication. 
(Ord. No. 352A, 2nd series, eff. 10-3-02; Ord. No. 517, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-19-2013)  
Secs. 2.40—2.49. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2.50. - Advisory commissions and committees generally. 
All advisory commission and committee appointments authorized by ordinance or resolution shall be made by the council at the second regular meeting in April of each year or at such other time as determined by the council and such appointments confirmed prior to the expiration of the existing terms. The term of each appointee shall be established and stated at the time of appointment. Each commission or committee shall be composed of a maximum of seven regular members who shall serve staggered (three or four members subject to appointment each year) two-year terms, unless otherwise required by statute, code or resolution. However, no member may serve more than five consecutive two-year terms or more than ten consecutive years on any one commission or committee. An additional person may be appointed to each commission or committee as an alternate for a period of one year and shall have all of the powers and duties of a commission or committee member during the absence of a regular member. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the council may by resolution establish special ad hoc committees or groups consisting of any number of members appointed for periods at the council's discretion. New appointees shall assume office at the first meeting of the commission or committee after appointment. However, all appointees to commissions and committees shall hold office until their successors are appointed and qualified. All vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as for an expired term, but the appointment shall be effective immediately when made and only for the unexpired term. No appointed commission or committee member shall be an employee of the city, but an ex officio member may be so employed. All appointed commission and committee members shall serve without remuneration, but may be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses incurred in the performance of their duties when such expenses have been authorized by the council before they were incurred. The chairman and secretary shall be chosen from and by the commission and committee membership to serve for the current year. Any commission or committee member may be removed by the council for misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office and the position filled as any other vacancy. Each commission and committee shall hold its regular meetings at a time established and approved annually by the commission or committee. The city administrator shall be an ex officio member of all commissions and committees, and may be represented by an assistant or some person duly authorized by the city administrator. All commissions and committees shall act as advisory to the council. Except as otherwise provided, this section shall apply to all commissions and committees. 
(Code 1983, § 2.50, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 53, 2nd series, eff. 4-8-88; Ord. No. 329, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-4-02; Ord. No. 409, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-31-07; Ord. No. 479, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 2.51. - Advisory planning commission. 
Subd. 1. Establishment. An advisory planning commission is hereby established. 
Subd. 2. Powers and duties. The advisory planning commission shall have all the powers and duties defined or granted in the statutes and the City Code relating to planning, zoning and subdivision regulations and shall act in an advisory capacity to the council in all of such areas. 
(Code 1983, § 2.51, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 53, 2nd series, eff. 4-8-88)  
Sec. 2.52. - Advisory parks commission. 
Subd. 1. Establishment. An advisory parks commission is hereby established. The director of parks and recreation, by reason of his position, shall be an ex-officio member. 
Subd. 2. Powers and duties. The advisory park commission shall make recommendations as to acquisition of park sites and facilities, park programs, operation of public parks, park budgets and general development of recreational facilities within land developments. 
(Code 1983, § 2.52, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 113, 2nd series, eff. 4-12-91; Ord. No. 236, 2nd series, eff. 7-1-97)  
Sec. 2.53. - Advisory board of adjustments and appeals. 
Codifier's note— The advisory board of adjustments and appeals (zoning) is provided for in chapter 11 of the City Code. 
(Code 1983, § 2.53, eff. 1-1-83)  
Secs. 2.54—2.69. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2.70. - Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles, unclaimed property and excess property. 
Subd. 1. Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles. 
A.  Definitions. 
1.  Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle, as defined in Minn. Stat. § 169.01, that: 
(a)  Has remained illegally: 
(1)  For a period of more than 48 hours on property owned or controlled by a unit of government, or more than four hours on that property when it is properly posted; or 
(2)  On private property for a period of time, as determined under Minn. Stat. § 168B.04, subd. 2, without the consent of the person in control of the property; and 
(b)  Lacks vital component parts or is in an inoperable condition such that it has no substantial potential for further use consistent with its usual functions, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building. 
A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in Minn. Stat. § 168.10, is not considered an abandoned vehicle. 
Vehicles on the premises of junkyards or automobile graveyards that are defined, maintained and licensed in accordance with Minn. Stat. § 161.242 or that are licensed and maintained in accordance with local laws and zoning regulations are not considered abandoned vehicles. 
A vehicle being held for storage by agreement or being held under police authority or pursuant to a writ or court order is not considered abandoned, nor may it be processed as abandoned while the police hold, writ or court order is in effect. 
2.  Vital component parts means those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, the motor, drive train and wheels. 
B.  Custody. The city may take into custody and impound any abandoned motor vehicle. 
C.  Immediate sale. When an abandoned motor vehicle is more than seven model years of age, is lacking vital component parts, and does not display a license plate currently valid in Minnesota or any other state or foreign country, it shall immediately be eligible for sale at public auction and shall not be subject to the notification, reclamation or title provisions of this subdivision. 
D.  Notice. 
1.  When an abandoned motor vehicle does not fall within the provisions of subparagraph C of this subdivision, the city shall give notice of the taking within ten days. The notice shall set forth the date and place of the taking, the year, make, model and serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle, if such information can be reasonably obtained, and the place where the vehicle is being held, shall inform the owner and any lienholder of their right to reclaim the vehicle under subparagraph E of this subdivision, and shall state that failure of the owner or lienholder to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle and contents shall be deemed a waiver by them of all rights, title and interest in the vehicle and a consent to the sale of the vehicle and contents at a public auction pursuant to subparagraph F of this subdivision. 
2.  The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if any, of the abandoned motor vehicle and to all readily identifiable lienholders of record. If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all lienholders, the notice shall be published once in the official newspaper. Published notices may be grouped together for convenience and economy. 
E.  Right to reclaim. 
1.  The owner or any lienholder of an abandoned motor vehicle shall have a right to reclaim such vehicle from the city upon payment of all towing and storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into custody within 15 days after the date of the notice required by this subdivision. 
2.  Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to impair any lien of a garage keeper under the laws of this state, or the right of the lienholder to foreclose. For the purposes of this subparagraph E, "garage keeper" is an operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a motor vehicle storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair or maintenance of motor vehicles. 
F.  Public sale. 
1.  An abandoned motor vehicle and contents taken into custody and not reclaimed under subparagraph E of this subdivision shall be sold to the highest bidder at public auction or sale, following one published notice published at least seven days prior to such auction or sale. The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the registrar of motor vehicles, which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership. Before such a vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must receive a motor vehicle safety check. 
2.  From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, the city shall reimburse itself for the cost of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle and all administrative, notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to this subdivision. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days and then shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
G.  Disposal of vehicles not sold. Where no bid has been received for an abandoned motor vehicle, the city may dispose of it in accordance with this subdivision. 
H.  Contracts and disposal. 
1.  The city may contract with any qualified person for collection, storage, incineration, volume reduction, transportation or other services necessary to prepare abandoned motor vehicles and other scrap metal for recycling or other methods of disposal. 
2.  Where the city enters into a contract with a person duly licensed by the state pollution control agency, the agency shall review the contract to determine whether it conforms to the agency's plan for solid waste disposal. A contract that does so conform may be approved by the agency. Where a contract has been approved, the agency may reimburse the city for the costs incurred under the contract which have not been reimbursed. 
3.  If the city utilizes its own equipment and personnel for disposal of the abandoned motor vehicle, it shall be entitled to reimbursement for the cost thereof along with its other costs as herein provided. 
Subd. 2. Disposal of unclaimed/abandoned property. 
A.  Definition. The terms "abandoned tangible property" or "unclaimed tangible property" mean tangible property that has lawfully come into the possession of the city in the course of municipal operations, remains unclaimed by the owner, and has been in the possession of the city for at least 60 days and has been declared abandoned or unclaimed property by a resolution of the city council. The term "abandoned intangible property" or "unclaimed intangible property" means intangible property that has remained unclaimed by the owner and has been in the possession of the city for more than three years and has been declared abandoned or unclaimed property by a resolution of the city council. 
B.  Preliminary notice. If the city administrator knows the identity and whereabouts of the owner, he shall serve written notice upon the owner at least 30 days prior to a declaration of abandonment by the council. If the city acquired possession from a prior holder, the identity and whereabouts of whom are known by the city administrator, notice shall also be served upon such prior holder. Such notice shall describe the property and state that unless it is claimed and proof of ownership or entitlement to possession established, the matter of declaring it abandoned property will be brought to the attention of the council after the expiration of 30 days from the date of such notice. 
C.  Notice and disposal of tangible property. Except as provided otherwise for certain other tangible property, upon adoption of a resolution declaring tangible property to be abandoned property, the city administrator shall publish a notice thereof describing the same, together with the names, if known, and addresses, if known, of prior owners and holders thereof and including a brief description of such property. The text of such notice shall also state the time, place and manner of sale of all such property, except cash and negotiables. Such notice shall be published once ten days prior to sale. Sale shall be made to the highest bidder at public auction or public sale, or by a private sale through a non-profit organization that has a significant mission of community service as determined by the council in its resolution declaring property abandoned and stated in the notice. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of the Subparagraph, firearms, narcotics or other drugs, drug paraphernalia, any weapon constituting a dangerous weapon under the City Code, or other contraband that is declared to be unclaimed and abandoned property and continued possession by the city is not necessary for any criminal prosecution proceedings or purposes may be destroyed, or kept by the city for official police use, or given to the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension for its ballistic testing database, as determined by city council, in lieu of disposal by sale as provided herein, provided the city administrator publishes notice thereof as required for the sale of abandoned property as provided herein. 
D.  Fund and claims thereon. All proceeds from such sale shall be paid into the general fund of the city and expenses thereof paid therefrom. The former owner, if he makes claim within eight months from the date of publication of the notice herein provided, and upon application and satisfactory proof of ownership, may be paid the amount of cash or negotiables or, in the case of property sold, the amount received therefore, less a pro rata share of the expenses of storage, publication of notice, and sale expenses, but without interest. Such payment shall be also made from the general fund. 
E.  Disposal of intangible property. Any intangible property that is deemed abandoned or unclaimed and held by the city for the owner shall be subject to the reporting to and disposal with the Minnesota Commissioner of Commerce as required by Minn. Stat. Chapter 345. This provision shall apply only to intangible personal property which is held for the owner by the city and not tangible personal property that is merely held by the city in the course of its normal municipal operations. 
Subd. 3. Disposal of surplus property. 
A.  Declaration of surplus and authorizing sale of property. The city administrator may, from time to time, recommend to the council that certain personal property (chattels) owned by the city is no longer needed for a municipal purpose and should be sold. By action of the council, said property shall be declared surplus, the value estimated and the city administrator authorized to dispose of said property in the manner stated herein. 
B.  Sale of surplus property. Property declared surplus and authorized to be sold by city council shall be sold in accordance with and pursuant to the method of sale required by the Minnesota Municipal Contracting Law (competitive bidding law) and city policy. Where more than one method of sale is permitted, the city administrator, or his/her duly appointed designee, shall determine the method of sale to be used. 
C.  Receipts from sales of surplus property. All receipts from sales of surplus property under this section shall be placed in the appropriate fund. 
Subd. 4. Persons who may not purchase; exception. 
A.  No employee of the city who is a member of the administrative staff, department head, a member of the council, or an advisor serving the city in a professional capacity may be a purchaser of property under this section. Other city employees may be purchasers if they are not directly involved in the sale, if they are the highest responsible bidder, and if at least one week's published or posted notice of sale is given. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to be a purchaser of property under this section if such purchase is prohibited by the terms of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 2.70, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 365, 2nd series, eff. 9-25-03; Ord. No. 393, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 9-6-05) 
Cross reference— Traffic regulations, ch. 8; abandoning a motor vehicle, § 10.50. 
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles, Minn. Stat. ch. 168B.  
Sec. 2.71. - Personnel rules and regulations. 
The council may, by resolution, establish personnel rules setting forth the rights, duties and responsibilities of employees. Such rules may from time to time be amended. 
(Code 1983, § 2.71, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 2.72. - Franchises. 
Subd. 1. Definition. The term "franchise" as used in this section shall be construed to mean any special privileges granted to any person in, over, upon, or under any of the streets or public places of the city, whether such privilege has heretofore been granted by it or by the state or shall hereafter be granted by the city or by the state. 
Subd. 2. Franchise ordinances. The council may grant franchises by ordinance. Franchise rights shall always be subject to the superior right of the public to the use of streets and public places. All persons desiring to make any burdensome use of the streets or public places inconsistent with the public's right in such places or desiring the privilege of placing in, over, upon, or under any street or public place any permanent or semipermanent fixtures for the purpose of constructing or operating railways, telegraphing, or transmitting electricity, or transporting by pneumatic tubes, or for furnishing to the city or its inhabitants or any portion thereof transportation facilities, water, light, heat, power, gas, or any other such utility, media distribution, or for any other purpose shall be required to obtain a franchise before proceeding to make such use of the streets or public places or before proceeding to place such fixtures in such places. 
Subd. 3. Power of regulation reserved. The city shall have the right and power to regulate and control the exercise by any person of any franchise, however acquired, and whether such franchise has been heretofore granted by it or by the state. 
Subd. 4. Conditions in every franchise. All conditions specified in this section shall be a part of every franchise even though they may not be expressly contained in the franchise: 
A.  That the grantee shall be subject to and will perform on its part all the terms of this section and will comply with all pertinent provisions of any City Charter and City Code, as the same may from time to time be amended. 
B.  That the grantee shall in no case claim or pretend to exercise any power to fix fares, rates, and charges; but that such fares, rates, and charges shall at all times be just, fair and reasonable for the services rendered and shall in all cases be fixed and from time to time changed, unless regulated by an agency of the state, in the manner following: 
1.  A reasonable rate shall be construed to be one which will, with efficient management, normally yield, above all operating expenses and depreciation, a fair return upon all money invested. 
2.  If possible, maximum rates and charges shall be arrived at by direct negotiation with the council. 
3.  If direct negotiations fail to produce agreement, the council shall, not less than 30 days before the expiration of any existing rate schedule or agreement, appoint an expert as its representative; the franchisee shall likewise appoint an expert as its representative and the two of them shall appoint a third person, preferably an expert, and the three of them shall constitute a board of arbitration. The board shall report its findings as soon as possible and the rates and charges it shall agree upon by majority vote shall be legal and binding, subject only to review by a court of competent jurisdiction upon application of one of the parties. 
C.  That the council shall have the right to require reasonable extensions of any public service system from time to time, and to make such rules and regulations as may be required to secure adequate and proper service and to provide sufficient accommodations for the public. 
D.  That the grantee shall not issue any capital stock on account of the franchise or the value thereof, and that the grantee shall have no right to receive, upon condemnation proceedings brought by the city to acquire the public utility exercising such franchise, any return on account of the franchise or its value. 
E.  That no sale or lease of said franchise shall be effective until the assignee or lessee shall have filed with the city an instrument, duly executed, reciting the facts of such sale or lease, accepting the terms of the franchise, and agreeing to perform all the conditions required of the grantee thereunder. 
F.  That every grant in said franchise contained of permission for the erection of poles, masts, or other fixtures in the streets and for the attachment of wires thereto, or for the laying of tracks in or of pipes or conduits under the streets or public places, or for the placing in the streets or other public places of any permanent or semipermanent fixtures whatsoever shall be subject to the conditions that the council shall have the power to require such alterations therein or relocation or rerouting thereof as the council may at any time deem necessary for the safety, health, or convenience of the public, and particularly that it shall have the power to require the removal of poles, masts, and other fixtures bearing wires and the placing underground of all facilities for whatsoever purpose used. 
G.  Every franchise shall contain a provision granting the city the right to acquire the same in accordance with statute. 
H.  That the franchisee may be obligated by the city to pay the city fees to raise revenue or defray increased costs accruing as a result of utility operations or both, including, but not limited to, a sum of money based upon gross operating revenues or gross earnings from its operations in the city. 
Subd. 5. Further provisions of franchises. The enumeration and specification of particular matters which must be included in every franchise or renewal or extension thereof shall not be construed as impairing the right of the city to insert in any such franchise or renewal or extension thereof such other and further conditions and restrictions as the council may deem proper to protect the city's interests, nor shall anything contained in this section limit any right or power possessed by the city over existing franchises. 
(Code 1983, § 2.72, eff. 1-1-83) 
State Law reference— Municipal franchises, Minn. Stat. §§ 300.03, 300.04.  
Sec. 2.73. - Absentee ballot counting board. 
The council hereby authorizes an absentee ballot counting board and further authorizes the election judges of such board to receive, examine, and validate absentee ballots. The further duties of such board shall be those provided by statute. 
(Code 1983, § 2.73, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 2.74. - Special assessment policy. 
The council may, by resolution, adopt, from time to time amend, or repeal a special assessment policy. 
(Code 1983, § 2.74, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 2.75. - Deferment of special assessments. 
Subd. 1. The council may defer the payment of any special assessment on homestead property owned by a person who is 65 years of age or older or who is retired by virtue of permanent and total disability, and the city clerk-treasurer is hereby authorized to record the deferment of special assessments where the following conditions are met: 
A.  The applicant must apply for the deferment not later than 90 days after the assessment is adopted by the council. 
B.  The applicant must be 65 years of age or older or retired by virtue of permanent and total disability. 
C.  The applicant must be the owner of the property. 
D.  The applicant must occupy the property as his principal place of residence. 
E.  The average annual payment for all assessments levied against the subject property exceeds one percent of the adjusted gross income of the applicant as evidenced by the applicant's most recent federal income tax return. The average annual payment of an assessment shall be the total cost of the assessment divided by the number of years over which it is spread. 
Subd. 2. The deferment shall be granted for as long a period of time as the hardship exists and the conditions as aforementioned have been met. However, it shall be the duty of the applicant to notify the city clerk-treasurer of any change in his status that would affect eligibility for deferment. 
Subd. 3. The entire amount of deferred special assessments shall be due within 60 days after loss of eligibility by the applicant. If the special assessment is not paid within 60 days, the city clerk-treasurer shall add thereto interest at eight percent per annum from the due date through December 21 of the following year, and the total amount of principal and interest shall be certified to the county auditor for collection with taxes the following year. Should the applicant plead and prove, to the satisfaction of the council, that full repayment of the deferred special assessment would cause the applicant particular undue financial hardship, the council may order that the applicant pay within 60 days a sum equal to the number of installments of deferred special assessments outstanding and unpaid to date, including principal and interest, with the balance thereafter paid according to the terms and conditions of the original special assessment. 
Subd. 4. The option to defer the payment of special assessments shall terminate and all amounts accumulated plus applicable interest shall become due upon the occurrence of any one of the following: 
A.  The death of the owner when there is no spouse who is eligible for deferment. 
B.  The sale, transfer or subdivision of all or any part of the property. 
C.  Loss of homestead status on the property. 
D.  Determination by the council for any reason that there would be no hardship to require immediate or partial payment. 
(Code 1983, § 2.75, eff. 1-1-83) 
State Law reference— Senior citizens or retired and disabled persons hardship special assessment deferral, Minn. Stat. § 435.193.  
Sec. 2.76. - Partial prepayment of special assessments. 
Subd. 1. Scope. Partial prepayment of assessments in connection with any assessments adopted by the council and certified to the county auditor for collection may be made at any time. 
Subd. 2. Payment. The owner of any property so assessed may, within 30 days of adoption of the assessment roll by the council, prepay any or all of his assessment to the city. No interest will be charged on any portion of the assessment paid within said 30 days. The remaining unpaid balance of the assessment shall be spread at the same rate of interest and for the same term of years as the original assessment. 
(Code 1983, § 2.76, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 2.77. - Emergency preparedness plan. 
The council may, by resolution, adopt, from time to time amend, or repeal an emergency preparedness plan for the city. 
(Code 1983, § 2.77, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 2.78. - Building numbers. 
Subd. 1. Building numbers required. The owner or occupant of any building fronting upon any street shall place and maintain on the front of the building the proper building number assigned by the city. 
Subd. 2. Posting. The building number shall be conspicuously posted in a location on the front of the building so as to be readily identifiable for all purposes. The building number shall be placed in the upper corner of the building, if possible, so as to be clearly seen from the street, or at or near the building entrance in such a suitable location that it can be clearly seen from the street. 
Subd. 3. Specifications. 
A.  The building number shall be clearly displayed, of a color in contrast with the color of the building to which it is attached, in such a manner that the number may be easily and clearly seen and read during all hours of the day, including during the hours of darkness, from the public street. 
B.  Numbers shall be displayed with a minimum height of four inches for residential structures. 
C.  On multi-tenant or commercial structures, numbers shall be displayed with a minimum height of 12 inches for single story buildings, 18 inches for two story buildings, and 24 inches for three or more story buildings. 
D.  On multi-tenant commercial structures, rear entry access doors must display the tenant business name and unit number, address of the commercial space, or indicate access doors to mechanical, electrical or sprinkler rooms. The letters and numbers shall be a minimum three inches in height. 
Subd. 4. Definitions. 
A.  The term "front of the building" shall be defined as the side of the building facing the street to which the building is addressed. 
(Code 1983, § 2.78, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 423, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 4-15-08)  
Sec. 2.79. - Community investment fund. 
Subd. 1.  Fund created. There is hereby created a separate fund to be designated as the community investment fund. This fund shall be maintained in the official city records and administered by the finance director in accordance with the provisions of this section and city policy as determined by the council. The following shall be deposited in this fund: 
A.  All surplus moneys in the consolidated debt service bond fund which remain after the costs of each improvement have been fully funded, and which are not transferred to another separate improvement fund. 
B.  All collections of special assessments and taxes levied for the payment of the costs of an improvement which are received after the improvement costs have been fully funded. 
C.  Investment earnings generated by the moneys in the community investment fund. 
D.  Any other moneys appropriated by the council or donated for the purpose of the fund. 
Subd. 2. Purpose of fund. This fund shall be used solely to pay the capital costs and council designated start-up operational costs of projects of general benefit to the city. 
(Code 1983, § 2.79, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 180, 2nd series, eff. 6-24-94)  
Sec. 2.80. - Local lodging tax. 
Subd. 1. Purpose and definitions. 
A.  Purpose. In order to fund a local convention or tourism bureau for the purpose of marketing and promoting the city as a tourist or convention center, it is in the best interest of the city to impose a local lodging tax in accordance with Minnesota Statutes. 
B.  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
1.  Lodging means the furnishing for consideration of accommodations at a hotel, motel, roominghouse, tourist court, or resort, other than the renting or leasing of it for a continuous period of 30 days or more. 
2.  Operator means any person, corporation, partnership or association who provides lodging to others. 
Subd. 2. Imposition of tax. All operators shall impose and collect a tax of three percent on the gross receipts from the furnishing of lodging at the time the lodging fee is paid. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the lodging charges. The lodging operator shall hold in trust for the city all taxes collected hereunder. 
Subd. 3. Payment and returns. The operator shall remit to the city all taxes collected hereunder not later than 25 days after the end of the month in which the taxes were collected. The operator may offset against the taxes payable and due with respect to any reporting period the amount of taxes imposed by this section previously paid hereunder as a result of any transaction, the consideration for which became uncollectible during such reporting period, but only in proportion to the portion of such consideration which became uncollectible. At the time the taxes are remitted to the city, the operator shall file with the city a tax return on a form furnished by the city containing the following information and such other information as the city may require: 
A.  The gross receipts from furnishing lodging during the period covered by the return. 
B.  The amount of tax imposed and collected as required hereunder for the return period. 
C.  The signature of the person filing the return or that of his agent duly authorized in writing. 
D.  The period covered by the return. 
E.  The amount of uncollectible lodging receipts subject to the lodging tax. 
Subd. 4. Examination of return, adjustments, notices and demands. After a return is filed, the city shall examine it and may make any investigation or examination of the records and accounts of the operator making the return as deemed necessary for determining its correctness. The operator shall provide to the city for inspection and examination its records and accounts within 15 days of the city's request. If, after any investigation or examination hereunder, it is determined that the tax due is greater than that paid, such excess shall be paid to the city within ten days after receipt of a notice thereof given either personally or sent by registered mail to the address shown on the return; if the tax paid is greater than the tax found to be due, the excess shall be refunded to the person who paid the tax to the city within ten days after determination of such refund. Whenever any tax due has a ten-percent or more discrepancy, the operator shall reimburse the city for any costs incurred by the city in reviewing the operator's return. 
Subd. 5. Refunds. Any operator may apply to the city for a refund of taxes paid in excess of the amount legally due for that period, provided that no application for refund shall be considered unless filed within one year after such tax was paid, or within one year from the filing of the return, whichever period is the longer. The city may deny or allow the claim, in whole or in part, and shall issue and file written findings of such decision. The city shall notify the operator at the address stated upon the refund claim application by registered mail of its decision on the claim. If such claim is allowed, in whole or in part, the city shall credit the amount of the refund against any taxes due and owing hereunder by the operator, and any balance of the refund shall be promptly paid by the city to the operator. 
Subd. 6. Failure to file a return. Any operator, who fails to file a return as required hereunder or files an incorrect, false, or fraudulent return, shall, upon written notice and demand by the city, file such return or corrected return, together with any tax due, within 30 days of receipt of such written notice. Whenever any person fails to file the appropriate return under this provision and the tax due after such notice and demand, the city may determine the appropriate tax from such knowledge and information as the city is able to obtain and assess such tax accordingly. Any tax determined to be due and owing under this provision shall be paid by the operator within five days of the receipt of written notice and demand for such payment. Any assessment made by the city hereunder shall be prima facie correct and valid, and the operator shall have the burden of establishing the incorrectness or invalidity of such assessment in any action or proceedings in respect thereto. 
Subd. 7. Failure to remit tax payment. If any portion of a tax required hereunder, including penalties thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be paid, the city may certify the tax as a lien against the real property on which the lodging establishment is located, and the city attorney may institute such legal action as may be necessary to recover the amount due, plus any interest, penalties, costs, disbursements and all attorney's fees, as a result of such action. 
Subd. 8. Extension for filing or payment. Upon a showing of good cause, the city may grant an operator a 30-day extension period within which to file a return or make payment of taxes as required under this section, provided that interest shall accrue during such extension period at the rate of eight percent per annum. 
Subd. 9. Penalties. If any tax required under this section is not paid within the time herein specified or within the approved extension period thereof, the operator shall pay a penalty equal to ten percent of the amount remaining unpaid, in addition to the tax due and owing. 
Subd. 10. Interest. Any tax required under this section not paid within the 25 days after the end of the month in which the taxes were collected, together with any penalty provided herein, shall bear interest at the rate of eight percent per annum to begin accrual at the time such tax was required to be paid. Any interest and penalty shall be added to the tax and shall be collected as part thereof. 
Subd. 11. Violations. It is unlawful for any operator to fail to comply with any provision of this section, or make any false or fraudulent return. 
Subd. 12. Use of proceeds. Ninety-five percent of the gross proceeds from the collection of taxes pursuant to this section shall be used to fund a local convention or tourism bureau for the purpose of marketing and promoting the city as a tourist or convention center. 
Subd. 13. Appeals. Any operator who is aggrieved by any notice, order or determination made by the city under this section may file a petition for administrative review of such notice, order or determination detailing the operator's reasons for contesting the order, notice or determination. The petition shall contain the name of the operator, the operator's address and the location of the lodging establishment subject to the order, notice or determination. The petition for review shall be filed with the city clerk within 30 days after the notice, order or determination has been served upon the operator. Upon receipt of the petition, the city administrator or the administrator's designees shall set a date for a hearing and give the operator at least 14 days' prior written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the operator has the burden to prove that the notice, order or determination is in error. The operator may be represented by counsel of the operator's choosing at the operator's own expense. The hearing shall be conducted by the city administrator or administrator's designee, provided only that the person conducting the hearing shall not have participated in the drafting of the notice, order or determination for which review is sought. The notice, order or determination made by the city may be affirmed, reversed or modified. Any decision rendered by the city administrator pursuant to this subdivision shall be supported by written findings of fact and conclusions based upon the applicable provisions of this section and the evidence presented. The operator shall have the right to appeal to the council, upon filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days after the administrator's decision has been served upon the operator. The matter will thereupon be placed on the council agenda as soon as is practical, and the operator shall be given 14 days' notice of council hearing. The council standard of review of the administrator's decision shall be on the record, and the operator shall have the burden to prove the city's notice, order or determination is in error. The council may modify, reverse or affirm the decision of the city administrator. 
(Code 1983, § 2.80, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 168, 2nd series, eff. 7-15-93) 
Codifier's note— The right to administrative appeals provision contained in this chapter shall not apply to this subdivision. 
State Law reference— Local lodging tax, Minn. Stat. § 469.190.  
Sec. 2.81. - Municipal planning fees. 
The city may prescribe fees sufficient to defray the costs incurred by it in reviewing, investigating, and administering an application for an amendment to an official control or an application for a permit or other approval required under an official control established pursuant to Minn. Stat., Chapter 462. All fees shall be as set forth in a duly adopted resolution of the city council. 
The term "official control" has the meaning as set forth in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 462. 
(Ord. No. 328, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 1-17-02)  
Sec. 2.82. - Domestic partnership registration. 
Subd. 1. Purpose . The City of Eagan authorizes and establishes a voluntary program of registration of domestic partners. The domestic partnership registry is a means by which unmarried, committed couples who reside in Eagan and who share a life and home together may document their relationship. 
This section or the registration process hereunder does not create any rights, privileges, or responsibilities that are otherwise available to legally married couples under state or federal law. 
Subd. 2. Definitions . As used in this section, the following words and terms have the meanings stated: 
A.  Domestic partner means any two adults who meet all of the following: 
1.  Are not related by blood closer than permitted under marriage laws of the State of Minnesota; 
2.  Are not married; 
3.  Are competent to enter into a contract; 
4.  Are jointly committed to each other for the necessities of life; 
5.  Are committed to one another to the same extent as married persons are to each other, except for the traditional marital status and solemnities; 
6.  Do not have any other domestic partner(s); 
7.  Are both at least 18 years of age; and 
8.  Are residing together and are both residents of the City of Eagan. 
B.  Domestic partnership shall mean a significant relationship between domestic partners, which may be evidenced by: 
1.  A valid registered domestic partnership with a governmental body pursuant to local, state or other law authorizing such registration, including a domestic partnership registration with the City of Eagan. 
2.  Marriages that may be legally recognized as a contract of lawful marriage in another local, state or foreign jurisdiction, but for the operation of Minnesota law. The term domestic partnership shall be construed liberally to include unions, regardless of title, in which two individuals are committed to one another as married persons are traditionally committed, except for the traditional marital status and solemnities. 
Subd. 3. Registration of domestic partnerships. 
A.  The city clerk shall accept a domestic partnership registration application that is fully completed and signed before a notary public by both domestic partners certifying under oath that they meet the definition of domestic partners as set forth herein and is accompanied by payment of all fees required under this section. The application shall be on a form provided by the city. If such domestic partnership is terminated after registration, it is expected that the city will be notified of the termination on a form provided by the city that is signed by at least one of the registered domestic partners before a notary public and filed with the city clerk. The city shall not be liable for any claims that may arise due to failure to provide such notification of termination or for improper filing of a termination notice. 
B.  The city clerk shall charge a separate fee for each of the following: domestic partnership registration application; filing of any amendment to a domestic partnership registrations on file with the city; filing of a notice of termination of a domestic partnership registrations on file with the city; certified copies of any registration, amendment, or notice of termination documents on file with the city; and duplicate registration certificate. The fees required herein shall be set by a duly adopted resolution of the city council. 
C.  The city clerk shall provide to the domestic partners a registration certificate. 
D.  The city clerk shall keep a record of all registrations of domestic partnership, amendments to registrations and notices of termination. The records shall be maintained so that amendments and notices of termination are filed with the registration of domestic partnerships to which they pertain. 
E.  The application and amendments thereto, the registration certificate, and termination notices shall constitute government data and will be subject to disclosure pursuant to the terms of the Minnesota Government Data Practices Act. 
Subd. 4. Amendments. The city clerk may accept amendments for filing from persons who have domestic partnership registrations on file, except amendments which would replace one of the registered partners with another individual will not be accepted. 
Subd. 5. Termination of domestic partnership registration. Domestic partnership registration terminates when the earliest of the following occurs: 
1.  One of the partners dies; or 
2.  A notice of termination of the domestic partnership registration, on a form provided by the city which is signed by at least one of the registered domestic partners before a notary public, is filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 488, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 1-3-2012)  
Secs. 2.83—2.98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2.99. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this chapter, when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. 
(Code 1983, § 2.99, eff. 1-1-83)  
Chapter 3 - MUNICIPAL AND PUBLIC UTILITIES—RULES AND REGULATIONS, RATES, CHARGES AND COLLECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration and general government, ch. 2; public works department, § 2.34; storage, deposit and disposal of refuse, § 10.01; toilet installation, § 10.02; maintenance of individual sewerage systems, § 10.03; public utility service for land use regulations, § 11.10, subd. 8; municipal utilities for residential development, § 11.10, subd. 23. 
State Law reference— Municipal utilities, Minn. Stat. § 412.321 et seq.; local improvements, special assessments, Minn. Stat. § 429.011 et seq. 
 
Sec. 3.01. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings stated: 
Company, grantee, and franchisee mean any public utility system to which a franchise has been granted by the city. 
Consumer and customer mean any user of a utility. 
Municipal utility means any city-owned utility system, including, but not by way of limitation, water, sewerage, and streetlights. 
Service means providing a particular utility to a customer or consumer. 
Utility means all utility services, whether the same be public city-owned facilities or furnished by public utility companies. 
(Code 1983, § 3.01, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 3.02. - Fixing rates and charges for municipal utilities. 
All rates and charges for municipal utilities, including, but not by way of limitation, rates for service, permit fees, deposit, connection and meter testing fees, disconnection fees, reconnection fees including penalties for nonpayment if any, shall be fixed, determined and amended by the council and adopted by resolution. Such resolution, containing the effective date thereof, shall be kept on file and open to inspection in the office of the city clerk-treasurer and shall be uniformly enforced. 
(Code 1983, § 3.02, eff. 1-1-83) 
Cross reference— See sections 3.06, 3.07 and 3.08 relating to water, stormwater drainage, and sanitary sewer connection and availability charges.  
Sec. 3.03. - Fixing rates and charges for public utilities. 
All rates and charges for public utility franchisees, not regulated by an agency of the state, shall be fixed and determined by the council and adopted by ordinance. Such ordinances shall be listed and referred to in chapter 25 of the City Code. Public utility company rates and charges may be fixed and determined by the respective franchisees in compliance with this section, as follows: 
Subd. 1.  No rate or charge involving an increase thereof shall become effective until approved by the council. To request such increase the franchisee shall prepare its written petition setting forth the then-current and proposed rates and charges, the effective date of the proposed increases, which may not be within 90 days of filing the petition, and the reason or reasons necessitating the proposed increase or increases. Such petition shall be filed with the council by serving the same on the city administrator in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
Subd. 2.  Within 30 days of such filing the council shall adopt a resolution and serve the same upon the resident superintendent of the franchisee in like manner as the petition may be served either approving the proposed increases or ordering a hearing thereon to be held within 60 days thereof. If no such action is taken by the council, such increase or increases shall take effect on the date stated in the franchisee's petition as though approved by the council. 
Subd. 3.  Prior to the hearing date, the franchisee shall, without delay, comply with the city's reasonable requests for examination and copying of all books, records, documents and other information relating to the subject matter of the petition. Should the franchisee unreasonably delay, fail or refuse such requests, the same shall be grounds for a continuance of the hearing date. 
Subd. 4.  Notice of hearing shall be in the form and manner stated in the resolution. At the hearing all persons wishing to be heard thereon shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity. Findings and a decision shall be made by the council within 15 days after the hearing and served upon the franchisee. 
(Code 1983, § 3.03, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 3.04. - Contractual contents. 
Provisions of this chapter relating to municipal utilities shall constitute portions of the contract between the city and all consumers of municipal utility services, and every such consumer shall be deemed to assent to the same. All contracts between franchisees and consumers of utility services other than municipal shall be in strict accord with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 3.04, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 3.05. - Rules and regulations relating to municipal utilities. 
Subd. 1.  Billing, payment and delinquency. All municipal utilities shall be billed monthly or quarterly and a utilities statement or statements shall be mailed to each consumer. All utilities charges shall be deemed delinquent if they are unpaid at the close of business on the due date shown on the billing. A penalty shall be charged on all delinquent balances. The penalty rate shall be one and one-half percent per month. The penalty charges shall be added to and become part of the delinquent balances. 
Subd. 2.  Application, connection and sale of service. Application for municipal utility services shall be made upon forms supplied by the city, and strictly in accordance therewith. No connection shall be made until consent has been received from the city to make the same and all fees, charges and assessments required by this chapter have been paid in full. All municipal utilities shall be sold and delivered to consumers under the then-applicable rate applied to the amount of such utilities taken as metered or ascertained in connection with such rates. 
Subd. 3. Discontinuance of service. All municipal utilities may be shut off or discontinued whenever it is found that: 
A.  The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any person working on any connection with the municipal utility systems, has violated any requirement of the City Code relative thereto, or any connection therewith; 
B.  There is fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant in connection with any application for service or delivery or charges therefor; or 
C.  The utility charges remain unpaid and delinquent 15 days or more after the due date shown on the billing statement for municipal utility service. 
Subd. 4.  Ownership of municipal utilities. Ownership of all municipal utilities, plants, lines, mains, extensions and appurtenances thereto, except such as are owned and operated by the Metropolitan Waste Water Control Commission, shall be and remain in the city, and no person shall own any part or portion thereof. Provided, however, that private facilities and appurtenances constructed on private property are not intended to be included in municipal ownership. 
Subd. 5. Right of entry. The city has the right to enter in and upon private property, including buildings and dwelling houses, in or upon which is installed a municipal utility or connection therewith, at all times reasonable under the circumstances, for the purpose of reading utility meters, for the purpose of inspection, repair, and replacement of meters or a utility system or any part thereof, and for the purpose of connecting and disconnecting service. 
Subd. 6. Utility meter maintenance. 
A.  Meter test. Whenever a consumer shall request the city to test any utility meter in use by him, such a request shall be accompanied by a cash deposit for each meter to be tested. If any such meter is found to be inaccurate, the same shall be replaced with an accurate meter and the deposit thereon refunded. If the meter shall be found to be accurate in its recordings or calculations, it shall be reinstalled, and the deposit shall be retained by the city to defray the cost of such test. 
B.  Meter inspection, repair and replacement. The owner or occupant of any property within the city that is connected to the municipal water utility shall permit the city's designated utility employee onto the property and within the structure, at all times reasonable under the circumstances, for purposes of the inspection, repair or replacement of the water meter. The owner shall allow the city's designated utility employee to complete the inspection, repair or replacement within 30 days of written notice from the city that an inspection, repair or replacement of the meter is required. 
Upon a property owner's failure to permit the city onto the property for an inspection, repair or replacement as required in this paragraph, a monthly surcharge in an amount duly adopted by city council and set forth in the city's fee schedule shall be imposed against the property on which the meter is located. The monthly surcharge will be imposed for every month during which compliance with this paragraph is not met and charged on the property's municipal utility billing statement, whether the non-compliance has existed for the entire month or a portion thereof. 
Subd. 7.  Unlawful acts. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure, mar, deface, disturb, or in any way interfere with any buildings, attachments, machinery, apparatus, equipment, fixture, or appurtenance of any municipal utility or municipal utility system, or commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the use of any municipal utility. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to make any connection with, opening into, use, or alter in any way any municipal utility system without first having applied for and received written permission to do so from the city. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to turn on or connect a utility when the same has been turned off or disconnected by the city for any reason, without first having obtained a permit to do so from the city. 
D.  It is unlawful for any person to "jumper" or by any means or device fully or partially circumvent a municipal utility meter, or to knowingly use or consume unmetered utilities or use the services of any utility system, the use of which the proper billing authorities have no knowledge. 
Subd. 8. Municipal utility services and charges a lien. 
A.  Payment for all municipal utility services and charges, including the monthly surcharge assessed under subdivision 6 herein, shall be the primary responsibility of the owner of the premises served and shall be billed to the owner unless otherwise contracted for and authorized in writing by the owner and the tenant, as agent for the owner, and consented to by the city. The city may collect the same in a civil action or, in the alternative and at the option of the city, as otherwise provided in this subdivision. 
B.  Any delinquent account balance shall be taxed against the premises served. All such accounts which are more than 45 days past due may, when authorized by resolution of the council, be certified to the city clerk who shall prepare an assessment of the delinquent accounts against the property served. To each account there shall be added a certification charge (preparation for certification of taxes of delinquent accounts) in the amount provided for by council resolution. This assessment roll shall be delivered to the council for adoption. Such action shall not be the exclusive remedy for the city, but may be in addition to any legal or other action by the city to collect on the delinquent balance(s). 
(Code 1983, § 3.05, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 8, 2nd series, eff. 4-27-84; Ord. No. 30, 2nd series, eff. 6-6-86; Ord. No. 193, 2nd series, eff. 1-12-95; Ord. No. 434, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 11-6-08; Ord. No. 456, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 5-4-10; Ord. No. 506, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 5-15-2012)  
Sec. 3.06. - Water connection and availability charge. 
Subd. 1.  Purpose of funds derived and allocation of revenue. The purpose of all funds derived is to pay for all or part of the construction, reconstruction, repair, enlargement, improvement or other obtainment and the maintenance, operation and use of the water utility as established by the city. All revenues derived from the fee shall be credited to the appropriate water fund. 
Subd. 2.  Water utility fee. A water utility fee for connection and availability of the water facilities shall be determined by resolution of the council and shall be just and equitable. A charge for the connection and availability of water service may be imposed for all premises abutting on streets or other places where municipal water service is located, whether or not connected to it. A charge for the availability and connection to the water service may, in the discretion of the council, be fixed by reference to the portion of the cost which has been paid by assessment of the premises. 
Subd. 3.  Adjustments. The council may adopt, by resolution, policies and standards for the adjustment of the fee for parcels. Such adjustments shall not be made retroactively. 
Subd. 4.  Exemptions. Public rights-of-way are exempt from the fee. 
Subd. 5.  Billings. Bills for charges for the fee shall be made by the finance department. All bills shall be payable at the office of the finance director. 
Subd. 6.  Recalculation of fees. If a property owner or person responsible for paying the fee questions the correctness of such charge, that person may have the determination of the charge recomputed within six months of mailing, by submitting to the director of public works a written request for the recomputation. 
Subd. 7.  Collections. All fees are due on the due date specified by the city for the respective account and shall be delinquent 15 days thereafter. It is the duty of the city to endeavor to promptly collect delinquent accounts, and in all cases where satisfactory arrangements for payments have not been made, all such delinquent accounts shall be certified to the city clerk who shall prepare an assessment of the delinquent accounts against the property served or to be served. To each account, there shall be added a certification charge (preparation for certification of taxes of delinquent accounts) in the amount provided for by council resolution. This assessment roll shall be delivered to the council for adoption. Such action may be optional or subsequent to taking legal action to collect delinquent accounts. 
(Code 1983, § 3.06, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 90, 2nd series, eff. 10-27-89; Ord. No. 194, 2nd series, eff. 1-12-95)  
Sec. 3.07. - Stormwater drainage connection and availability charge. 
Subd. 1.  Stormwater drainage utility. A stormwater drainage utility for the city is hereby established. The municipal storm sewer system shall be operated as a public utility pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 444.075, from which revenue will be derived subject to the provisions of this chapter and to Minnesota Statutes. The stormwater drainage utility will be a part of the public works department and under the administration of the director of public works. 
Subd. 2.  Purpose of funds derived and allocation of revenue. The purpose of all funds derived is to pay for all or part of the construction, reconstruction, repair, enlargement, improvement or other obtainment and the maintenance, operation and use of the storm sewer utility as established by the city. All revenues derived from the fee shall be credited to the appropriate storm sewer fund. 
Subd. 3.  Storm sewer utility fee. 
A.  A storm sewer utility fee for connection and availability of the storm sewer facilities shall be determined by resolution of the council and shall be just and equitable. A charge for the connection and availability of storm sewer service may be imposed for all premises abutting on streets or other places where municipal storm sewers are located, whether or not connected to them. A charge for the availability and connection to the storm sewer service may, in the discretion of the council, be fixed by reference to the portion of the cost which has been paid by assessment of the premises. 
B.  A storm sewer utility fee for use of the storm sewer facilities shall be determined by resolution of the council and shall be just and equitable. Charges made for the use of the facilities may be fixed on the basis of water consumed, or by reference to a reasonable classification of the types of premises to which the service is furnished, or by reference to the quantity, pollution qualities and difficulty of disposal of the water, or in any other equitable basis including, but without limitation, any combination of those referred to above. 
Subd. 4.  Adjustments. The council may adopt, by resolution, policies and standards for the adjustment of the fee for parcels. Such adjustments shall not be made retroactively. 
Subd. 5.  Exemptions. 
A.  Public rights-of-way are exempt from the fees established in subdivision 3, above. 
B.  Vacant, unimproved land with ground cover and city-owned land are exempt from the fees established in subdivision 3, subparagraph B, above. 
Subd. 6.  Billings. Bills for charges for the fee shall be made by the finance department. All bills shall be payable at the office of the finance director. 
Subd. 7.  Recalculation of fees. If a property owner or person responsible for paying the fee questions the correctness of such charge, that person may have the determination of the charge recomputed within six months of mailing, by submitting to the director of public works a written request for the recomputation. 
Subd. 8.  Collections. All fees are due on the due date specified by the city for the respective account and shall be delinquent 15 days thereafter. It is the duty of the city to endeavor to promptly collect delinquent accounts, and in all cases where satisfactory arrangements for payments have not been made, all such delinquent accounts shall be certified to the city clerk who shall prepare an assessment of the delinquent accounts against the property served or to be served. To each account there shall be added a certification charge (preparation for certification of taxes of delinquent accounts) in the amount provided for by council resolution. This assessment roll shall be delivered to the council for adoption. Such action may be optional or subsequent to taking legal action to collect delinquent accounts. 
(Ord. No. 101, 2nd series, eff. 5-25-90; Ord. No. 195, 2nd series, eff. 1-12-95)  
Sec. 3.08. - Sanitary sewer connection and availability charge. 
Subd. 1.  Purpose of funds derived and allocation of revenue. The purpose of all funds derived is to pay for all or part of the construction, reconstruction, repair, enlargement, improvement or other obtainment and the maintenance, operation and use of the sanitary sewer utility as established by the city. All revenues derived from the fee shall be credited to the appropriate sanitary sewer fund. 
Subd. 2.  Sanitary sewer utility fee. A sanitary sewer utility fee for connection and availability of the sanitary sewer facilities shall be determined by resolution of the council and shall be just and equitable. A charge for the connection and availability of sanitary sewer service may be imposed for all premises abutting on streets or other places where municipal sanitary sewers are located, whether or not connected to them. A charge for the availability and connection to the sanitary sewer service may, in the discretion of the council, be fixed by reference to the portion of the cost which has been paid by assessment of the premises. 
Subd. 3.  Adjustments. The council may adopt, by resolution, policies and standards for the adjustment of the fee for parcels. Such adjustments shall not be made retroactively. 
Subd. 4.  Exemptions. Public rights-of-way are exempt from the fee. 
Subd. 5.  Billings. Bills for charges for the fee shall be made by the finance department. All bills shall be payable at the office of the finance director. 
Subd. 6.  Recalculation of fees. If a property owner or person responsible for paying the fee questions the correctness of such charge, that person may have the determination of the charge recomputed within six months of mailing, by submitting to the director of public works a written request for the recomputation. 
Subd. 7.  Collections. All fees are due on the due date specified by the city for the respective account and shall be delinquent 15 days thereafter. It is the duty of the city to endeavor to promptly collect delinquent accounts, and in all cases where satisfactory arrangements for payments have not been made, all such delinquent accounts shall be certified to the city clerk who shall prepare an assessment of the delinquent accounts against the property served or to be served. To each account there shall be added a certification charge (preparation for certification of taxes of delinquent accounts) in the amount provided for by council resolution. This assessment roll shall be delivered to the council for adoption. Such action may be optional or subsequent to taking legal action to collect delinquent accounts. 
(Ord. No. 92, 2nd series, eff. 10-27-89; Ord. No. 196, 2nd series, eff. 1-12-95)  
Secs. 3.09—3.19. - Reserved.  
Sec. 3.20. - Rules and regulations relating to water service. 
Subd. 1.  Deficiency of water and shutting off water. The city is not liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of water to customers, whether occasioned by shutting the water off for the purpose of making repairs or connections or by any other cause whatever. In case of fire or alarm of fire, water may be shut off to insure a supply for firefighting. In making repairs or construction of new works, water may be shut off at any time and kept off so long as may be necessary. 
Subd. 2.  Repair of leaks. It is the responsibility of the consumer or owner to maintain the service pipe from the curbstop into the house or other building. In case of failure upon the part of any consumer or owner to repair any leak occurring in his service pipe within 24 hours after oral or written notice has been given the owner or occupant of the premises, the water may be shut off and will not be turned on until a reconnection charge has been paid and the water service has been repaired. When the waste of water is great or when damage is likely to result from the leak, the water will be turned off if the repair is not proceeded with immediately. 
Subd. 3.  Abandoned services penalties. All service installations connected to the water system that have been abandoned or, for any reason, have become useless for further service shall be disconnected at the main. The owner of the premises served by this service, shall pay the cost of the excavation. The city shall perform the actual disconnection, and all pipe and appurtenances removed from the street right-of-way shall become the property of the city. When new buildings are erected on the site of old ones and it is desired to increase the old water service, a new permit shall be taken out, and the regular tapping charge shall be made as if this were a new service. It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow any service pipe to be hammered or squeezed together at the ends to stop the flow of water, or to save expense in improperly removing such pipe from the main. Also, such improper disposition thereof shall be corrected by the city, and the cost incurred shall be borne by the person causing or allowing such work to be performed. 
Subd. 4.  Service pipes. Every service pipe must be laid in such manner as to prevent rupture by settlement. The service pipe shall be placed not less than seven feet below the surface in all cases so arranged as to prevent rupture and stoppage by freezing. Frozen service pipes between the curbstop and the building shall be the responsibility of the owner. Service pipes must extend from the curbstops to the inside of the building, or if not taken into a building then to the hydrant or other fixtures which they are intended to supply. A valve, the same size as the service pipe, shall be placed close to the inside wall of the building, ahead of the meter and well protected from freezing and at the property or public utility easement line flush with the finished grade or surface elevation and fully accessible and operable by city authorized personnel. Joints on copper tubing shall be flared and kept to a minimum. Not more than one joint shall be used for a service up to 70 feet in length. All joints shall be left uncovered until inspected. Minimum size connection with the water mains shall be three-fourths inch in diameter. 
Subd. 5.  Private water supplies. No water pipe of the city water system shall be connected with any pump, well, pipe, tank or any device that is connected with any other source of water supply, and when such are found, the city shall notify the owner or occupant to disconnect the same and, if not immediately done, the city water shall be turned off. Before any new connections to the city system are permitted, the city shall ascertain that no cross connections will exist when the new connection is made. When a building is connected to "city water" the private water supply may be used only for such purposes as the city may allow. 
Subd. 6.  Restricted hours for sprinkling. Whenever the city shall determine that a shortage of water threatens the city, it may limit the times and hours during which water may be used from the city water system for lawn and garden sprinkling, irrigation, car washing, air conditioning, and other uses, or either or any of them. It is unlawful for any water consumer to cause or permit water to be used in violation of such determination after public announcement thereof has been made through the news media specifically indicating the restrictions thereof. 
Subd. 7.  Private fire hose connections. Owners of structures with self-contained fire protection systems may apply for and obtain permission to connect the street mains with hydrants, large pipes, and hose couplings, for use in case of fire only, at their own installation expense and at such rates as the council may adopt by resolution as herein provided. 
Subd. 8.  Water hydrant use. 
A.  Opening hydrants. It is unlawful for any person, other than members of the fire department or other person duly authorized by the city, in pursuance of lawful purpose, to open any fire hydrant or attempt to draw water from the same or in any manner interfere therewith, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city. It is also unlawful for any person so authorized to deliver or suffer to be delivered to any other person any hydrant key or wrench, except for the purposes strictly pertaining to their lawful use. A separate permit shall be required, in addition to all required fees and deposits, for each separate water hydrant to be used. 
B.  Permit application and fee. An application for a permit hereunder shall be filed with the city clerk upon an application form furnished by the city. The application shall include, but not be limited to, the name and address of the applicant and the person signing the application, the location of the proposed water hydrant to be used and the reason for the applicant's connection to or use of the water hydrant. The fee for a permit hereunder shall be established by the council, by resolution, from time to time. 
C.  Conditions of issuance of permit. No permit shall be issued unless the following conditions are met: 
1.  The connection and use of the public water hydrant is solely for temporary water supply where a public water connection is not otherwise available for building construction, dust control, turf irrigation and other related needs. 
2.  The permit fee, the hydrant damage deposit and the meter damage deposit is submitted with the application. 
D.  Permit conditions and restrictions. A permit issued hereunder shall be subject to the following standards, and any violation thereof shall constitute grounds for revocation of the permit: 
1.  The permit shall be in the possession of the water hydrant user pursuant to the permit while the water hydrant is in use. 
2.  The permit holder shall take all necessary actions to prevent the water meter or other city equipment from being damaged, stolen or operated by unauthorized persons. 
3.  The permit holder shall pay all water use charges no later than the due date specified by the city for its specific account. 
4.  The water hydrant shall not be used for any purpose other than that for which the permit was issued. 
5.  The permit holder shall not use any hydrant other than the hydrant for which the permit was specifically issued. 
6.  No water hydrant shall be used except with the use of a city-issued water meter properly installed. 
E.  Deposits and use charges. An applicant for a permit hereunder shall make a hydrant damage deposit and a meter damage deposit, the amounts of which shall be established by the council, by resolution, from time to time. The deposits shall be returned to the applicant only after compliance with the following conditions: 
1.  The meter and other equipment provided to the applicant has been returned to the city undamaged and in proper working order. The deposit shall be forfeited in an amount equal to the costs incurred by the city to repair or replace the damaged meter or other equipment. For every day after the expiration of the permit that the meter or other equipment provided by the city is not returned to the city, the deposit shall be forfeited at the rate of 20 percent per day. 
2.  Payment of all delinquent or unpaid water use charges accumulated to the date of the termination of the temporary water usage from the water hydrant. 
3.  The water hydrant is undamaged and in proper working order. The deposit shall be forfeited to the extent equal to the costs incurred by the city to repair or replace the damaged water hydrant. 
F.  Water emergency restrictions. The city shall have the right to cancel a permit issued hereunder without prior notice when a water emergency within the city requires such action. 
G.  All water use charges shall be charged against the permit holder and the owner and property for which the water is sought. The permit holder shall be required to pay the use charges at a rate established by the council, by resolution from time to time. 
H.  Private water hydrants . 
1.  Scope of application. This provision shall apply to all water hydrants that are: 
a.  Not city-owned; 
b.  Not located within utility easements or water utilities intended to be under easement; 
c.  Not located within city rights-of-way, or state or county rights-of-way under maintenance agreements with the city; 
d.  Isolated from public water mains by service gate valves; or 
e.  Covered by a maintenance agreement with a private owner. 
The purpose of this provision is to ensure compliance with the Minnesota State Fire Code, which requires inspections of water hydrants and that all water hydrants are maintained in working order and kept in good repair for proper and operational use when public safety and fire protection is necessary. 
2.  Inspections. All private water hydrants within the city shall be subject to an annual inspection and an inspection after each operation. Inspections may be conducted by the city or a person qualified in water hydrant maintenance ("qualified person"). 
If the inspection is to be conducted by the city, the property owner shall complete and submit to the city's public works a signed consent form as prescribed by the city. The property owner shall be charged an inspection fee for each water hydrant inspected by the city on a per occurrence basis and in an amount adopted by city council resolution. The inspection fee shall be included on the property owner's municipal utility billing statement. 
If the inspection is conducted by a qualified person, the property owner shall be responsible for submitting to the city's public works a certificate of compliance that is completed and signed by the qualified person. The certificate of compliance shall be on a form provided by the city. 
3.  Maintenance and repair . If upon inspection it is determined a water hydrant is not in good repair, does not operate as designed, or is otherwise in need of maintenance or repair, the property owner shall, in a timely manner, have the necessary maintenance, repair or replacement completed. 
If the maintenance, repair or replacement is to be conducted by the city, the property owner shall complete and submit to the city's public works a signed consent form as prescribed by the city. 
If the city provides material(s), part(s), and labor to maintain, repair or replace the water hydrant, the property owner shall pay and be fully responsible for the cost of all material(s) and part(s), plus labor at such rate as determined by city council resolution. All material, parts and labor costs shall be included on the property owner's municipal utility billing statement as governed by this chapter. 
If the maintenance, repair or replacement is conducted by a qualified person, the property owner shall be responsible for submitting to the city's public works a certificate of compliance that is completed and signed by the qualified person. The certificate of compliance shall be on a form provided by the city. 
4.  Penalties and special assessment . All of the charges imposed by the city for any work completed as set forth in this subpart (H) shall be deemed delinquent if unpaid at the close of business on the due date shown on the municipal utility billing statement. A penalty shall be charged on all delinquent balances at the rate set forth for delinquent municipal utility billing accounts as governed in this chapter. The penalty charges shall be added to and become part of the delinquent balances. Any delinquent account balance which is more than 45 days past due may be assessed against the property as set forth elsewhere in this chapter and as a "service charge" under Minn. Stat. ch. 429. 
Subd. 9.  Unmetered service. Unmetered service may be provided in accordance with a duly adopted and uniformly enforced policy. 
Subd. 10. Water meters. All water meters shall be purchased from the city and installed and maintained by the property owner. All new water meter installations and replacements shall be installed with an outside remote reader which shall be purchased, installed and maintained by the property owner. All water meters shall remain under the control and shall also remain the property of the city. All required repairs to faulty water meters and/or outside remote readers shall be performed by the city, with the exception that whenever a meter or outside remote reader has been damaged due to negligence on the part of the user, all costs associated with the replacement, removal, repair and installation of a meter shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property on which the meter is located. 
Subd. 11.  Code requirement. All piping, connections and appurtenances shall be installed and performed strictly in accordance with the state plumbing code. Failure to install or maintain the same in accordance therewith or failure to have or permit required inspections shall, upon discovery by the city, be an additional ground for termination of water service to any consumer. 
Subd. 12.  Additional rules and regulations. The council may, by resolution, adopt such additional rules and regulations relating to placement, size and type of equipment as it, in its discretion, deems necessary or desirable. Copies of such additional rules and regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the city administrator, and uniformly enforced. 
Subd. 13.  Cross connection with municipal water utility system regulations. In addition to those regulations set forth in this chapter governing connections to the municipal water utility system, a property owner and the customer of the municipal water service to the property if not the property owner shall comply with the following cross connection control requirements: 
A.  Any private water line, system, apparatus or equipment that is connected to or has a cross-connection with the city's municipal water system shall have a backflow prevention device installed, tested, and properly maintained in accordance with the state plumbing code. 
B.  Prior to the installation of or the repair to any private water line, system, apparatus or equipment that is connected to or has a cross-connection with the city's municipal water system, the property owner, or the customer if different than the owner, shall notify and obtain approval by the city's public works-utilities department of the installation or repair and the backflow prevention devices proposed to be installed. 
C.  The backflow prevention device is to be owned, tested, and maintained in working condition by the customer/owner of the premises being served and shall be done so in accordance with the state plumbing code. 
D.  The backflow prevention device shall be tested at the intervals set forth by the state building code for the type of device installed. The required test shall be performed by an ASSE/state certified backflow tester. All internal maintenance to the device shall be performed by an ASSE/state certified backflow prevention rebuilder. The owner/customer shall provide a certified report of the test results to the city. An ASSE certified cross-connection control surveyor is considered qualified by the city to investigate all potable water outlets for actual or potential connections between a potable water supply and sources of contamination or pollution. 
E.  All properties connected to the municipal water utility system shall be subject to annual inspections by a city designated inspector for the purpose of determining whether cross connection(s) exist and if so, whether the proper device is present on the property. The property owner or occupant shall permit the city's designated inspector on the property and within any structure thereon to complete the inspection. The compliance inspection shall occur within 30 days of written notice from the city that a compliance inspection is required on the property. The compliance inspection shall occur at a time and in the manner as reasonably determined by the city inspector. 
In lieu of a compliance inspection by the city designated inspector, the property owner or occupant may have the property inspected, at the sole expense of the owner or occupant, by an ASSE certified cross-connection control surveyor who shall inspect the property and file a certificate of compliance, on a form provided by the city, within 30 days of the city's notice of the required inspection. The private ASSE certified cross-connection control surveyor who conducts the compliance inspection shall certify on the certificate of compliance whether all backflow prevention devices required on the property are installed and in proper working condition in in compliance with the provisions of this section and the state plumbing code. 
If the property owner or occupant fails to permit or have completed a compliance inspection, the city may apply to the district court for an appropriate administrative search warrant authorizing the city to enter the property to conduct the inspection. 
In the event that backflow prevention device(s) is required on the property and said device(s) are not present or are not in compliance with this section, the installation or repair of the proper backflow prevention "device(s)"shall be completed and a second compliance inspection shall be completed within 60 days of the notice of noncompliance to determine if the necessary corrections have been made and compliance with this section has been met. The second compliance inspection shall be subject to the requirements set forth above. Thereafter, the property shall be subject to re-inspections on an annual basis to confirm continued compliance. Properties that are in compliance shall also be subject to re-inspections to confirm continued compliance. 
F.  Surcharges. A monthly surcharge in an amount duly adopted by city council resolution and set forth in the city's fee schedule shall be assessed against the property on which backflow prevention devices (or lack thereof) in violation of this section. The monthly surcharge will be charged on the property's municipal utility billing statement. A monthly surcharge will be assessed and charged as follows: (1) an inspection as required herein has not been allowed by the property owner or occupant or a certificate of compliance has not been filed with the city within 30 days after the city's notice of inspection; (2) the necessary corrections have not been made within the time specified; and (3) the property owner or occupant has failed to install, replace or repair any and all backflow prevention device(s) at the city's or a court's direction. A surcharge will be assessed for every month during which the property is not in compliance, whether the non-compliance has existed for the entire month or a portion thereof. 
G.  The city may impose an annual fee for administering a backflow preventer testing program which shall be as established by city council resolution. 
H.  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be cause to disconnect municipal water service to the property in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 3.20, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 8, 2nd series, eff. 4-27-84; Ord. No. 219, 2nd series, eff. 5-2-96; Ord. No. 506, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 5-15-2012; Ord. No. 523, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 9-17-2013; Ord. No. 558, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 1-17-2017)  
Secs. 3.21—3.39. - Reserved.  
Sec. 3.40. - Rules and regulations relating to sewer service. 
Subd. 1.  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
A.  Sewage means water-carried waste products from residences, public buildings, institutions or other buildings or premises, including the excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals, together with such groundwater infiltration and surface water as may be present. 
B.  Industrial waste means any liquid, gaseous or solid waste substance resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business, or from development of any natural resources. 
C.  Sewer system includes all street lateral, main and intersecting sewers and structures by which sewage or industrial wastes are collected, transported, treated and disposed of; provided that this shall not include plumbing inside or a part of a building or premises served, or service sewers from a building to the street lateral. 
D.  Sewerage service means the use of and benefit from the sewer system, including the collection, transportation, pumping, treatment and final disposal of sewage. 
E.  Clear water means storm water, natural precipitation, melting snow, ground water, water flow from a roof, ground surface, subsurface drainage, down spout, eave trough, rainspout, yard drain, sump pump, foundation drain, yard fountain, pond, swimming pool, cistern overflow, or any other water that is not required to be treated by state or federal law. 
Subd. 2.  Metered water not discharged. If a portion of the water furnished to any premises is not directly or indirectly discharged into the sewer system, the quantity of such water shall be deducted in computing the sewerage service charge or rental, provided a separate meter shall be installed and operated to register the quantity not so discharged into the sewer system. Provided also, that where it is not practicable to meter the portion of the water not discharged into the sewer system, such adjustment may be made as shall be fair and equitable in order to determine the amount of such service charge or rental; but until such adjustment shall be effected that water consumption basis hereinbefore prescribed shall remain in full force and effect. 
Subd. 3.  Classification of industrial wastes. The city shall have the power to classify the industrial wastes from any lot, parcel of land, building or premises discharged therefrom into the sewer system of the city, taking into consideration the quantity of sewage produced and its concentration, strength of river pollution qualities in general and of any other factors entering into the cost of its disposal, for the purpose of fixing and prescribing a distinct rate of rental or use charge, should it be found that as to such sewer uses the water basis consumption does not provide a practicable method in the premises, but until so determined and such distinct rate fixed, the water consumption basis hereinbefore prescribed shall remain in full force and effect as to such commercial or industrial users. 
Subd. 4.  Deleterious substances. No sewage, including industrial wastes, shall contain any substance which is deemed deleterious by the city to the operation of the sewer system or to any plant or facilities used in the treatment or disposal of such sewage. If a user of the sewer system discharges excessive loads or any deleterious substances therein which are likely to retard or injuriously affect sewerage operations, he shall discontinue such practice, and such practice is hereby declared to be a violation of this section. Each day of such violation continuing after the violator having been notified in writing by the city administrator to discontinue such practice shall be deemed a separate violation. 
Subd. 5.  Unlawful discharge. It is unlawful to discharge any of the following described wastes into the sewer system: 
A.  Liquids having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
B.  Water or waste which contains more than 100 ppm by weight of fat, oil or grease. 
C.  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other inflammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
D.  Garbage, except such as has been properly shredded. 
E.  Ashes, cinders, shavings, feathers, tar or other liquid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the sewer system or other interference with the proper operation of the system. 
F.  Noxious or malodorous substances capable of creating a public nuisance. 
G.  Clear water. 
Subd. 6.  Unmetered water supply. If any premises discharges normal sewage or industrial waste into the sanitary sewer system, either directly or indirectly, obtains part or all of the water used thereon from sources other than the city, and the water so obtained is not measured by a meter of equivalent specifications to the meters used by the city, then in such case the city shall permit the discharge of normal sewage or industrial waste into its sanitary sewer system only when the owner of such premises or some other interested person shall at his own expense installs and maintains for the purpose of metering such water supply a water meter of equivalent specifications to those installed by the city in connection with the city water system. Each water meter shall be installed to measure all water received on such premises, and the above charges and rates shall be applied to the quantity of water received as measured by such meter. If, because of the nature of the source of the water supply, the city deems it impracticable to thus meter the water on any premises, the council may by resolution establish a flat charge per month in accordance with the estimated use of water on such premises. 
Subd. 7.  Size, kind and depth of pipe. The city may prescribe the size, kind and depth of sewerage service pipe and connections. The minimum size, when placed underground, shall be four inches in diameter. 
Subd. 8.  Additional rules and regulations. The council may, by resolution, adopt such additional rules and regulations relating to placement, size and type of equipment as it, in its discretion, deems necessary or desirable. Copies of such additional rules and regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the city administrator, and uniformly enforced. 
Subd. 9.  Connections. It is unlawful for any person to uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. All costs and expenses associated with the installation and connection to a sewer system shall be the responsibility of the property owner benefiting from the installation and connection. The property owner shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from any loss, claim, damage and/or expense that may, directly or indirectly, be occasioned by the installation and/or connection of a sewer service line. All connections to the city sewer system shall be inspected by city authorized personnel. All excavations necessary for the installation and/or inspection of sewer service shall be safely and adequately stabilized and protected with necessary barriers so as to protect the public from any potential hazard. All restoration associated with the installation of this sewer connection shall be the responsibility of the benefited user and shall be performed to the specifications of the city. 
Subd. 10.  Clear water discharge prevention and prohibition. 
A.  Discharge requirements. 
1.  No clear water, as the term is defined in this section, shall be discharged, directly or indirectly, into the city's sewer system. 
2.  All sump pump systems within the city shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  No sump pump system shall discharge any water into the city's sewer system; 
b.  The sump pump system design shall provide and operate year-round discharge of water through a permanently installed discharge line from the interior of the structure to the exterior of the structure from which the clear water is discharged either onto the property which the sump pump system serves or directly into the city's storm sewer system by direct connection thereto or into the abutting city street for discharge into the street drainage, provided approval was first obtained by the public works director; 
c.  The sump pump system's permanent discharge line shall be made of solid, nonflexible material and shall not have any connection fittings as to permit alterative flow path subsequent to installation; and 
d.  If the sump pump system discharge line is connected directly to the city's storm sewer system upon approval by the city, then the discharge line shall have a check valve which shall be located within the property's boundaries and not within the public right-of-way. 
B.  Inspections. 
1.  Inspections required. Any property within the city that is connected to the city's sewer system shall be subject to a compliance inspection to determine whether the property's discharge of its clear water is in compliance with this section and is not discharged into the city's sanitary sewer system. The property owner or occupant shall permit the city's designated inspector on the property and within any structure thereon to complete the inspection. The compliance inspection shall occur within 30 days of written notice from the city that a compliance inspection is required on the property. The compliance inspection shall occur at a time and in the manner as reasonably determined by the city inspector. 
In lieu of a compliance inspection by the city inspector, the property owner or occupant may have the property inspected, at the sole expense of the owner or occupant, by a private licensed plumber who shall inspect the property and file a certificate of compliance, on a form provided by the city, within 30 days of the city's notice of the required inspection. The private licensed plumber who conducts the compliance inspection shall certify on the certificate of compliance that the property's discharge of clear water is in compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this section. 
In the event that the inspector cannot complete the compliance inspection because the sewer "cleanout" is not readily accessible as required by the state building code, the owner or occupant shall take all necessary steps to make the sewer cleanout readily accessible for the re-inspection to be completed within 30 days of the date the inspector was at the property to conduct the initial inspection. If the owner or occupant fails to make the sewer line cleanout accessible for inspection, such failure shall constitute a failure to comply with inspection requirements and subject to the monthly surcharge set forth herein. 
2.  Failure to comply with inspection requirements. If the property owner or occupant fails to permit or have completed a compliance inspection, the city may apply to the district court for an appropriate administrative search warrant authorizing the city to enter the property to conduct the inspection. 
3.  Re-inspections. In the event that the discharge of clear water on the property is not in compliance with this section, a second compliance inspection shall be completed within 60 days of the notice of noncompliance to determine if the necessary corrections have been made and compliance with this section has been met. The second compliance inspection shall be subject to the requirements set forth above. Thereafter, the property shall be subject to re-inspections on an annual basis to confirm continued compliance. Properties that are in compliance shall also be subject to re-inspections to confirm continued compliance. 
C.  Corrections. Upon notice that the discharge of clear water on the property is not in compliance with this section, the owner or occupant of the property shall immediately cease from discharging clear water in violation of this section and shall make the necessary repairs and corrections to discharge the clear water in accordance with this section. Discharge of clear water in compliance with this section shall be completed within 60 days of the date of notice of noncompliance. 
D.  Inspections with building permits. If a city inspector is on a property for the purpose of a building permit inspection, the city inspector has the authority to inspect the property for compliance with this section without further notice to the property owner or occupant. 
E.  Surcharges. A monthly surcharge in an amount duly adopted by city council and set forth in the city's fee schedule shall be assessed against the property on which clear water is discharged in violation of this section. The monthly surcharge will be charged on the property's municipal utility billing statement. A monthly surcharge will be assessed and charged as follows: (1) an inspection as required herein has not been allowed by the property owner or occupant or a certificate of compliance has not been filed with the city within 30 days after the city's notice of inspection; (2) the property owner or occupant fails to make the sewer line cleanout readily available for the inspection; (3) the necessary corrections have not been made within the time specified; and (4) the property owner or occupant reconnects a clear water discharge line to the city's sanitary sewer system after it has been previously disconnected at the city's or a court's direction. A surcharge will be assessed for every month during which the property is not in compliance or the property owner has not made the sewer line cleanout readily available for the inspection, whether the non-compliance has existed for the entire month or a portion thereof. The monthly surcharge for a re-connection will be charged for each month beginning with the month in which the inspection was completed or a certificate of compliance was filed confirming the previous disconnection through the end of the month in which the reconnection is subsequently disconnected. 
F.  Temporary waiver. The city may grant a temporary waiver from the provisions of this section where strict enforcement would cause a threat of damage or harm to other property, the environment, or public safety because of circumstances unique to the individual property or due to weather conditions. A written request for a temporary waiver must be first submitted to the public works director specifying the reasons for the temporary waiver. If a temporary waiver is granted, the property owner shall pay an additional fee for sewerage service charges based on the number of gallons discharged into the city's (sanitary) sewer system as estimated by the public works director. The additional sewerage service charge fee shall be twice the rate of the base sewage service charge multiplied by the number of estimated gallons of clear water discharge. 
The public works director may set conditions to the temporary waiver. The public works director may terminate the temporary waiver upon a failure to comply with any conditions imposed on the temporary waiver. The public works director must give a five-day written notice of the termination to the property owner and occupant setting forth the reasons for the termination. After expiration or termination of a temporary waiver, the property owner shall comply with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 3.40, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 445, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 9-1-09)  
Secs. 3.41—3.59. - Reserved.  
Sec. 3.60. - Street lighting system. 
Subd. 1.  Purpose. The council has determined that it is in the best interest of the residents of the city to install street lighting systems throughout the city. It is the council's intent to install a network of streetlights throughout the city to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens. 
Subd. 2.  Location. The council, upon a petition by a developer or a petition of at least 50 percent of the property owners in any subdivision or upon its own initiative, shall determine the streets, parks, or other public and private areas on which the city shall install and operate street lighting systems. 
Subd. 3.  Costs. 
A.  Installation costs. The city may pay such portion of the costs of installation of the street lighting systems as the council may determine from general ad valorem tax levies or from other revenues or funds of the city available for that purpose. In the event the council elects not to pay all of the installation costs, the remaining unpaid portion shall be assessed against the benefited property owners as a public improvement following a public hearing and in full accordance with the provisions of Minn. Stat. ch. 429. 
B.  Operating costs. The city clerk shall keep a record of the costs of operation of the street lighting system, including clerical, administrative and incidental costs, and apportion such costs to each lot and parcel of property benefited by the street lighting system, whether or not the property abuts the street or other public or private area in which the system is located. 
Subd. 4.  Procedure. The manner of procedure and assessment, after receipt of a petition, shall be strictly in accordance with Minnesota Statutes. 
(Code 1983, § 3.60, eff. 1-1-83)  
Secs. 3.61—3.69. - Reserved.  
Sec. 3.70. - Fiber optic infrastructure—Advanced communications network. 
Subd. 1. Purpose . The council has determined that it is in the best interest of the city's residents for the city to install, maintain, equip, own and operate an open access advanced communications network via fiber optic infrastructure throughout the city. In furtherance of the health, safety and welfare of the city's residents, it is council's intent to install and construct a fiber optic infrastructure for an advanced communications network (hereinafter "network") to be used for the city's own internal uses, including without limitation, public safety, public works and city operations. It is further the council's intent to install and construct the network and to grant service providers the right to use the network so as to provide a variety of competitive advanced communication retail services. Additionally, it is the council's intent to grant business or other commercial entities within the city the right to use the network for internal advanced communication needs. It is the intent of the council that any user of the network shall be subject to the provisions of this section and the city's network access and use agreements. 
Subd. 2. Definitions . The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
Network means the city's fiber optic infrastructure for advance communication services, including but not limited to telephone, television, data transport, and internet services within the city. Network includes, without limitation, all cables, co-location space, conduits, inner ducts, manholes, nodes, optical fiber strands, patch panels, splices, switches, transmitters, junctions, terminals, internal power sources, access portals, battery backups, fault alarm systems, structures, shelters, poles or pole line attachments, similar equipment, business and operations support systems, and all articles of personal property owned or leased by the city, that are used to provide wholesale services, as any or all of the same may be updated, supplemented, replaced or expanded, from time to time. Demarcation on the network shall be defined as the service provider facing port on the city provider access switch and the retail subscriber facing ports on the access portal installed at the retail subscriber premises. 
Retail services means the services that service provider offers to its retail subscribers over the network. 
Retail subscriber(s) means end-user residential or business customers who are being served by service provider through the city's network. 
Service provider means a private entity which its business is providing and selling any communication services via fiber optics, including but not limited to telecommunication, television or radio, or any other data, at retail to individuals, businesses or other entities. 
Wholesale services means any transport services provided by city through the city's network to a third party. 
Subd. 3. Network infrastructure control. The city shall have the right, in its sole discretion, to determine the design and location of its fiber optic infrastructure and components or facilities thereof within its public streets or other public place, whether as permanent or semi-permanent fixtures, for purposes of the construction, maintenance, equipping and operation of its network. The city shall have the right and the power to regulate and control the use of its network, through all terms, regulations and rules as it may determine from time to time. All users shall be subject to the terms, regulations and rules as a condition of the right to use the network. 
Subd. 4. General conditions for right to use city network . Use of the city's network shall be subject to the following: 
A.  All service providers and other users of the network shall enter into a network access and use agreement or any other access, connection or use agreement, as may be applicable, as approved by council. 
B.  The city administrator or his/her designee shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations governing the access and use of the network. All service providers and users granted the right to access and use the network shall be subject to such duly adopted rules and regulations. 
C.  The use of the network shall be subject to the terms of the network access and use agreement or any other access, connection or use agreements, as may be applicable. 
D.  The use of the network shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
E.  All users of the network shall be subject to co-location within the fiber optic infrastructure and no one service provider or other user shall have any right of exclusive use of or location within the infrastructure. 
F.  All users shall be subject to and obligated to pay all fees and charges required for access and use of the network. 
G.  The city has the right to install, inspect, maintain, repair and replace any network component that is located on the user's property, but connected to the network facilities located in the right-of-way. The costs incurred by the city in connection with the installation, inspection, maintenance, repair and replacement of any component that is located on the user's property but necessary for access to the network shall be paid [by] the owner of the property on which the component is located, unless paid by its service provider. 
Subd. 5. Fees and costs . All fees for connection, availability/access and use of the network shall be determined by city council resolution. The fees for access and use of the network shall be paid by the service provider or other user as determined and set forth in the user's network access and use agreement and any billing invoice issued by the city. A penalty, the rate of which shall be one and one-half percent per month, shall be charged on all delinquent balances. The penalty charges shall be added to and become part of the delinquent balances. The city may disconnect or terminate a service provider or other user's access and use of the network at any time that the charges and fees remain unpaid and delinquent 15 days or more after the due date. 
Subd. 6. Unlawful acts . 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to willfully access and use the network without first obtaining written permission from the city. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly damage, injure, deface, interfere, impede or in any way interfere with the city's network, including any part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 510, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 10-2-2012)  
Secs. 3.71—3.98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 3.99. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. 
(Code 1983, § 3.99, eff. 1-1-83)  
Chapter 4 - CONSTRUCTION LICENSING, PERMITS AND REGULATION, EXCAVATIONS AND MOBILE HOME PARKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Protective inspections department, § 2.35; beer, wine and liquor licensing, ch. 5; other business regulation and licensing, ch. 6; land use regulations, ch. 11; building permit and certificate of occupancy, § 11.10, subd. 11; subdivision regulations, ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 4.01. - Building code adopted. 
The Minnesota State Building Code (SBC)(2015), and any amendments thereto established and adopted from time to time by the Minnesota Commissioner of Labor and Industry, including the following chapters of Minnesota Rules, is hereby adopted by reference as though set forth verbatim herein: 
A.  1300 Administration of the State Building Code Administration; 
B.  1301 Building Official Certification; 
C.  1302 Construction Approvals; 
D.  1303 Minnesota Special Provisions of the State Building Code; 
E.  1305 Adoption of the International Building Code; 
F.  1307 Elevators and Related Devices; 
G.  1309 Adoption of the International Residential Code; 
H.  1311 Adoption of the Guidelines for Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings; 
I.  1315 Adoption of the National Electrical Code; 
J.  1322 Residential Energy Code; 
K.  1323 Commercial Energy Code; 
L.  1325 Solar Energy Systems; 
M.  1341 Minnesota Accessibility Code 
N.  1346 Adoption of the Minnesota Mechanical and Fuel Gas Code; 
O.  1350 Manufactured Homes; 
P.  1360 Prefabricated Buildings; 
Q.  1361 Industrialized/Modular Buildings; 
R.  1370 Storm Shelters (Manufactured Home Parks); 
S.  4715 Minnesota Plumbing Code; and 
T.  1335 Floodproofing Regulations. 
The current edition of Minnesota State Fire Code, and any amendments thereto established and adopted from time to time by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety is hereby adopted by reference as though set forth verbatim herein. One copy of said codes shall be marked CITY OF EAGAN—OFFICIAL COPY and kept on file in the protective inspections department and open to inspection and use by the public. 
(Code 1983, § 4.01, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 111, 2nd series, eff. 2-15-91; Ord. No. 201, 2nd series, eff. 4-27-95; Ord. No. 271, 2nd series, eff. 12-31-98; Ord. No. 289, 2nd series, eff. 4-13-00; Ord. No. 371, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-5-04; Ord. No. 386, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-19-05; Ord. No. 413, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 6-23-07; Ord. No. 449, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 1-19-10; Ord. No. 534, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 1-6-2015)  
Sec. 4.02. - Permit fees. 
Fees for permits and plan reviews under this chapter, which may include a surcharge, shall be determined by the council and fixed by its resolution, in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code, and a copy of which in office of the city clerk-treasurer and uniformly enforced. 
(Code 1983, § 4.02, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 371, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 2-5-04)  
Sec. 4.03. - Building permits required. 
It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any building or structure or any part of portion thereof, including, but not limited to, the plumbing, electrical, ventilating, heating or air conditioning systems therein, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate building or mechanical permit for each such building, structure or mechanical components from the city. A certificate of survey from a registered land surveyor is required for all new construction wherein land is to be occupied by a structure. The expansion of an existing structure does not require a certificate of survey so long as the expansion does not extend onto new property. 
(Code 1983, § 4.03, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 67, 2nd series, eff. 9-30-88; Ord. No. 75, 2nd series, eff. 1-20-89; Ord. No. 303, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-15-01)  
Sec. 4.04. - Subsurface sewage treatment systems. 
A.  Findings and purpose statement. The city council finds that the location, design, installation, use or maintenance of subsurface sewage treatment systems (SSTS) may adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the city residents and the general public by the potential discharge of inadequately treated sewage into ground waters, ground surfaces or surface waters. In the interest of protecting the health, safety and welfare of the public, the city has established the regulations herein. 
B.  Adoption of Water Pollution Control Act and MPCA Regulatory Rules. Minn. Stats., §§ 115.55 and 115.56, comprising as part of the Minnesota Pollution Control Act, as amended through 2014 and any amendments thereto established and adopted hereafter from time to time, and Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080, 7081 and 7082, comprising a part of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Subsurface Sewage Treatment Systems Rules, effective as of January 2014 and any amendments thereto established and adopted thereafter from time to time, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference, except as otherwise provided herein. A copy of the provisions adopted herein shall be on file at the city inspection department. The provisions adopted herein shall be referred to hereinafter as state requirements . 
C.  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the terms and phrases herein shall have the definitions given in Minn. Stats. § 115.55 and Minn. Rules, chapters 7080, 7081, and 7082. 
D.  License required. No person shall design, install, maintain, pump, repair, replace, extend, or provide services to, or inspect an SSTS which is located within the city without a license issued pursuant to Minn. Stats. § 115.56. 
E.  Subsurface sewage treatment system permit and plan. 
1.  Permit required. No person shall newly construct or replace, extend or repair an SSTS without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city. Any new construction or replacement or repair of an SSTS or an upgrade required due to a bedroom addition shall be in compliance with the state requirements adopted herein. No Type IV, Type V or MSTS system or any SSTS system constructed in accordance with approved alternative standards shall serve or be utilized on a property unless an operating permit from the city is in effect. 
2.  Permit application. The application for a permit hereunder shall be in writing and submitted to the city's chief building official on a form as the city shall provide, including the following information: 
(a)  Certified written site evaluation report in accordance with Minn. Rule, Chapters 7080 and 7081 and this section; 
(b)  A certified design report, including drawings, calculations and summary of all of the SSTS components; 
(c)  For any lot created after January 23, 1996, a certified lot survey depicting the location of two soil treatment and dispersal areas on the lot that support the proposed SSTS. 
(d)  For any newly constructed or replacement SSTS, a management plan that shall set forth the frequency of maintenance tasks including solids removal, not to exceed every 3 years, monitoring of maintenance and operation, requirement of owner to notify the city when the SSTS is not in compliance or is abandoned, and requirement of owner to file with the building inspections department all maintenance records or reports. 
3.  Issuance of permit. No permit shall be issued under this section unless the application establishes that the SSTS will be in compliance with the state requirements adopted herein. The permit application, along with all exhibits thereto, shall be reviewed and certified by a licensed compliance inspector authorized by the city that the newly constructed or replaced, repaired or upgraded system will meet the applicable state requirements. The construction, replacement, repair or upgrade of an SSTS may be initiated only upon the issuance of the permit. No newly constructed, repaired, replaced or upgraded SSTS may be used until a certificate of compliance is issued by a compliance inspector in accordance with this section. 
4.  Bedroom addition building permit or variance. The city shall not issue a building permit or a variance for an addition of a bedroom on property served by SSTS except upon receipt of a certificate of compliance. The city may temporarily waive the certificate of compliance requirement for a building permit or variance for an application made during the period of November 1 through April 30, provided that an inspection of the system is performed by the following June 1 and a certificate of compliance is submitted to the city by the following July 1. 
5.  Expiration of permit. A permit issued hereunder shall be valid for a period of 180 days. If no substantial work has commenced within that period, the permit shall terminate. 
6.  Appeals of decisions. An applicant may appeal any decision or determination by the city in connection with any provision of this section pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 11.40 of the City Code. 
7.  Permit fees. Any SSTS permit fee shall be as set forth by a duly adopted city council resolution. 
8.  Certified site evaluation report. It shall be the responsibility of any site evaluator to utilize the proper professional tools, professional methods and judgments, and number of soil observations to verify that the site complies with Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080 for individual SSTS or 7081 for mid-size SSTS standards and requirements for the primary (initial) and reserve (replacement) areas. The primary area shall consist of a minimum of 5,250 square feet per site, unless otherwise directed by the city. The size of the reserve area shall be similar in size as the primary area. No person shall use the primary area as the reserve area unless all requirements under Chapters 7080 or 7081 as applicable and as certified by the licensed designer are met. The site evaluator shall use the Dakota County Soil Survey and Munsell Soil Color Charts in accordance with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080, standards and requirements. A minimum of four soil observations and two percolation test must be completed for each the primary area and the reserve area. 
9.  As-built record. For each newly constructed or replaced, extended, ungraded or repaired SSTS, an "as-built" record shall be properly completed and filed with the city no later than ten days after completion of the new construction, replacement, upgrade or repair of the SSTS. 
10.  Management plan. The owner and occupant of any property on which an SSTS is located shall comply with the management plan submitted with and approved by the city in the permit application process for the SSTS on the property. 
11.  Abandonment of SSTS. The owner and occupant of any property on which an SSTS is located shall notify the city of any SSTS on the property that is no longer in use and shall remove or seal the SSTS or components thereof in accordance with the state requirements within 90 days of the last day of use. 
F.  Subsurface sewage treatment system inspection. 
1.  Compliance inspections required. An inspection to determine whether an SSTS is in compliance with the state requirements adopted herein shall be conducted whenever an SSTS permit is required under this section. Any compliance inspection performed hereunder shall be conducted by a licensed inspector, whose license is independent of the permit applicant, the owner and the installer of the SSTS to be inspected. The manner and timing of the compliance inspection shall be as required by the licensed inspector for purposes of new construction or replacement or upgrade of an SSTS. 
In the event a licensed inspector cannot perform an inspection at the SSTS site, the licensed inspector may conduct the compliance inspection through the use of video, electronic, photographic or other reliable evidence of compliance provided by the licensed installer. 
2.  Certificate of compliance and notice of noncompliance. The licensed inspector shall submit a certificate of compliance or notice of noncompliance to the city and the owner of the SSTS within 15 business days after the compliance inspection. The certificate of compliance or notice of noncompliance must include a certified statement from the licensed inspector that identifies the type of system inspected and indicates whether the SSTS is in compliance with the state requirements adopted herein. In the event the SSTS is not in compliance, the inspector shall specify the basis for noncompliance and whether the SSTS must be upgraded, replaced or its use discontinued. If the SSTS presents an imminent threat to public health or safety, the notice of noncompliance must contain a statement to this effect. 
If a notice of noncompliance is submitted to the city, a second compliance inspection shall be completed upon the upgrade, replacement, repair or discontinued use as required in the notice of noncompliance. 
3.  Bedroom addition building permit or variance. No building permit for the addition of a bedroom on property served by an SSTS shall be issued unless a compliance inspection is performed and a certificate of compliance is submitted to the city. 
4.  Periodically saturated soil discrepancies or disputes. If a documented discrepancy arises as to the depth of the periodically saturated soil between licensed system professionals/business or a licensed business and the city Building Official for purposes of SSTS design or compliance, then the parties, including the property owner, shall participate in a dispute resolution method as set forth in Minn. Rules, Chapter 7082. 
G.  Repair of noncomplying or failing subsurface sewage treatment systems. The owner or occupant of any property on which a noncomplying or failing SSTS is located shall upgrade, repair, replace or discontinue the use of the SSTS in accordance with the requirements of Minn. Rules, Chapter 7080 or 7081 as applicable and the notice of noncompliance. Any noncomplying or failing SSTS from which discharge or sewage can be contained within the property the SSTS serves and is not an imminent threat to public health or safety shall be corrected within 180 days of the date of service of the notice of noncompliance. Any noncomplying or failing SSTS from which discharged sewage cannot be contained within the property the SSTS serves or that poses an imminent threat to the public health and safety, shall be corrected within 30 days of service of the notice of noncompliance unless weather conditions prevent correction within 30 days in which case the owner or occupant shall implement temporary corrective measures (such as regular pumping of the SSTS) and complete permanent corrective measures as soon as physically feasible, but in no case later than 180 days or July 1 immediately following the date of service of the notice of noncompliance, whichever is longer. Upon the repair, upgrade, replacement or discontinuance of the use of the SSTS as directed in the notice of noncompliance, a second compliance inspection must be completed within 30 days of the repair, upgrade, replacement or discontinuance and a certificate of compliance must be filed with the city within 30 days of the inspection. If the owner or occupant fails to comply with this section, the use of the SSTS must be discontinued immediately. 
H.  Minimum soil treatment area. Any property or lot platted after January 23, 1996, and served by an SSTS shall have a minimum of one additional soil treatment and dispersal area which can support a standard soil treatment system. 
I.  Application of other statutes, regulatory rules or local regulations. In addition to all provisions of this section, all federal, state and local statutes, rules and regulations governing the discharge or disposal of sewage or the construction, repair or replacement of any individual sewage treatment system that is newly constructed or replaced or repaired shall apply with which all person shall comply within the city. Any conflict between the provisions of this section and any other state or local statute, regulation or ordinance, shall be resolved in favor of the more restrictive provision. 
J.  Required septic tank sizing. Any septic tank for a new or replacement septic tank for any SSTS shall be sized 50 percent greater than the minimum size requirement provided in Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080 or 7081 as applicable. In the event that a basement toilet which exists or could exist would require a pump, the septic tank capacity shall be sized for both the potential basement toilet and the basement raw sewage pump in accordance with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080 or 7081 as applicable and the following: 
No. Bedrooms 	Minimum Liquid Capacity 	Minimum Liquid Capacity with Garbage Disposal 	Minimum Liquid Capacity with Garbage Disposal and Basement Sewage Lift 
2 	1125 	1125 	1500 
3 or 4 	1500 	1500 	2000 
5 or 6 	2250 	2250 	3000 
7, 8 or 9 	3000 	3000 	4000 
 
K.  Septic tank and lift station requests. No cesspool, seepage pit or dry well shall be used or repaired or modified for use as a septic tank or pump-lift station. No septic tank shall be constructed of concrete blocks. Holding tanks may be used for the following applications only after it can be shown conclusively by the property owner that a SSTS permitted under this chapter cannot be feasibly installed and is permitted under the issued permit: 
1.  As a replacement for an existing failing SSTS; 
2.  For an SSTS that poses an imminent threat to public health or safety; or 
3.  For use with buildings with limited water use. 
L.  Determination of hydraulic loading rate and SSTS sizing . Table IX from Minn. R. 7080.2150, Subp. 3(E) entitled Loading Rates for Determining Bottom Absorption Area for Absorption Ratios Using Detailed Soil Descriptions and Table IXa from Minn. R. Ch. 7080.2150, Subp. 3(E) entitled Loading Rates for Determining Bottom Absorption Area and Absorption Ratios Using Percolation Tests and herein adopted by reference shall both be used to size SSTS infiltration areas using the larger sizing factor of the two for SSTS design. 
M.  Class V injection wells. All owners of new or replacement SSTS that are considered to be Class V injection wells, as defined in the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Part 144, are required to submit SSTS inventory information to the United States Environmental Protection Agency and the MPCA. Owners are also required to identify all Class V injection wells in property transfer disclosures. 
N.  Variance. A property owner may request a variance from the provisions in this section upon filing an application for variance in accordance herein with the city building official. The variance application must provide the following: 
1.  The specific provision in the rule or rules from which the variance is requested; 
2.  The reasons why compliance with the rule(s) cannot be met; 
3.  A detail description of the circumstances that prevent compliance with the rule and why the circumstances make compliance unreasonable, impractical or not feasible; 
4.  The alternative measures that will be taken to ensure a comparable degree of compliance with the intention of the applicable chapter; 
5.  The length of time for which the variance is requested; and 
6.  Other relevant information requested by the chief building official as necessary to properly evaluate the variance request. 
The chief building official may grant a variance only upon a finding that by reason of exceptional circumstances, which were not due to or created by the applicant, the strict enforcement or strict conformity with this chapter would be unreasonable, impractical, or not feasible under the circumstances. The chief building official may permit a variance so long as it is in harmony with the general purpose of this chapter and Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080 and 7081 and the intent of applicable state requirements. 
O.  Suspension or revocation of permit. Upon any violation of any term or condition of a permit issued under this section or any violation of any state requirement adopted herein in connection with the construction, replacement, expansion or repair of a SSTS, the chief building official may suspend or revoke the permit and all work or operation thereunder shall cease. The owner and licensed permit holder shall bring the SSTS into compliance with this chapter as directed by the chief building official. If compliance is not met within the timeframe set by the chief building official, the permit shall be deemed automatically revoked. 
(Ord. No. 271, 2nd series, eff. 12-31-98; Ord. No. 534, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 1-6-2015)  
Sec. 4.05. - Plumbing permit and plan required. 
Subd. 1. It is unlawful for any person to install or construct any new plumbing system or parts thereof, including additions, extensions, alterations and replacements, connected to a water or sewage disposal system owned or operated by or for a municipality, institution, factory, office building, apartment building or other place of business without first obtaining a plumbing permit for each such building, structure or plumbing system from the city. 
Subd. 2. Permits for the installation or construction of a plumbing system shall only be issued to plumbing contractors duly licensed by the state and shall be issued only upon the review and approval of a plumbing plan by the city, provided the Minnesota Commissioner of Health shall review and approve any plumbing plans for the following: 
1.  Hospitals, nursing homes, supervised living facilities and similar health care related facilities regulated by the Minnesota Department of Health; 
2.  Buildings owned by the federal and state government; and 
3.  Projects of a special nature for which the Minnesota Commissioner of Health's review is requested by either the city or the state. 
Subd. 3. Except as provided in this section, Rule 4715 of the Minnesota Plumbing Code shall apply to all plumbing systems subject to this section. 
(Ord. No. 273, 2nd series, eff. 3-25-99)  
Sec. 4.06. - Compliance with Minnesota Electrical Act. 
The installing, altering, repairing, planning or laying out of electrical wiring apparatus or equipment for light, heat, power or other purposes shall be performed in accordance with the standards set forth in the Minnesota electrical act of Minnesota Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 303, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 2-15-01)  
Sec. 4.07. - Completion of exterior work. 
A.  Exterior work authorized by a building permit issued in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code must be completed within the specified days set forth below from the date of issuance of the building permit or within the timeframe set by the city's chief building official at the time the permit is issued, whichever is greater. Exterior work includes work on all exterior parts of a structure or building, including but not limited to: roofs, doors, windows, siding, and stairs, and work on exterior structures, including but not limited to: retaining wall, accessory building (sheds, detached garages), deck, and fence. 
Exterior work authorized by a building permit issued in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code must be completed within the specified days from the date of issuance of the building permit as follows: 
1.  Buildings or structures on residential property including multi-family residential property with up to four units per building: 
• Roofs, siding, replacement doors and windows: 180 days. 
• Accessory structures: 180 days. 
• New construction: 365 days. 
• Additions to primary home: 180 days. 
• Retaining walls: 180 days. 
2.  Buildings or structures on multi-family residential property with more than four units per building, commercial property and industrial property: 
• Building exterior work: As determined by building official. 
• Exterior structures other than primary building: 180 days. 
B.  Upon a showing by the permit holder or property owner that there has been an unavoidable delay in completion of the exterior work, the city's chief building official, in the official's reasonable discretion, may grant one extension for the completion of the exterior work for a period not to exceed 180 days. 
C.  Failure to complete all exterior work authorized by a building permit within the specified timeframe, including any extension granted, is a violation of this section. 
D.  Notwithstanding the completion deadlines, a permit shall expire 180 days from date of issuance if there is no substantial work completed under the permit as provided in the Minnesota State Building Code. If no work has been completed under a building permit as of its expiration date, then the completion deadline for said work under a new permit shall be as set forth above. 
E.  This section shall apply to any exterior work for which a building permit was issued on or after the effective date of this section. Any exterior work for which a building permit was issued prior to the effective date of this section shall be completed by August 1, 2012, unless another time was set by the city's chief building official at or after the time of the issuance of the permit. If exterior work has been completed or in progress without the issuance of a building permit, the completion timeframe dates set forth herein do not apply and the city's chief building official shall have the sole authority to determine a completion and code compliance date. 
(Ord. No. 485, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 8-16-2011)  
Secs. 4.08—4.09. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4.10. - Permits and special requirements for moving buildings. 
Subd. 1.  Definition. Street or streets, as used in this section, means all streets and highways in the city which are not state trunk highways, county state-aid highways, or county roads. 
Subd. 2.  Moving permit required and application. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to move a building on any street without a moving permit from the city. 
B.  The application for a moving permit shall state the approximate size and weight of the structure or building proposed to be moved, together with the places from and to which it is proposed to move the same, and proposed route to be followed, proposed dates and times of moving and parking, and the name and address of the proposed mover. Such application shall also state any municipal utility, street, and public property repairs or alterations that will be required by reason of such movement. 
C.  Permit and fee. The moving permit shall state date or dates of moving, hours, routing and movement. Permits shall be issued only for moving buildings by building movers licensed by the state. Fees to be charged shall be separate for each of the following: (1) a moving permit fee to cover use of streets and route approval, and (2) a fee equal to the anticipated amount required to compensate the city for any municipal utility and public property (other than streets) repairs or alterations occasioned by such movement. The latter shall be paid in advance. 
D.  Exemption. This subdivision shall not apply to the state department of transportation. 
Subd. 3.  The building mover shall: 
A.  Use designated streets. Move the building over those streets, only, which are designated for such use in the permit. 
B.  Notify of revised moving time. Notify the protective inspections department in writing of any desired change in the date or times of moving the building from that indicated in the application and conduct moving operations only on the date and at the times designated in the application or approved in writing by the protective inspections department and notify the police department at least 24 hours prior to commencing movement of the building. 
C.  Notify of damage. Notify the protective inspections department in writing of damage caused to property belonging to the city within 24 hours after the damage or injury has occurred. 
D.  Display lights. Cause warning lights or signals to be displayed during all times on each side of the building, while situated on a public street, in such manner as to warn the public of an obstruction, and at all times erect and maintain barricades across such streets as shall be necessary and in such manner as to protect the public from damage or injury by reason of the presence, movement or removal of the building. 
E.  No parking. Not park the building on any city street at any time during the moving process. 
F.  Comply with governing law. Comply with the building code, the provisions of the City Code and all other laws. 
G.  Pay expense of officer. Pay to the city the expense of any traffic officer ordered by the city administrator to accompany the movement of the building to protect the public from injury. 
Subd. 4.  Owner's permit required and application. 
A.  It is unlawful for any owner of land in the city to or from which a building is to be moved to permit such movement without an owner's permit. 
B.  Application. A person seeking issuance of an owner's permit shall file a written application with city. If no moving permit is required under this section, the application shall also include the address and legal description of the land on which the building is situated, and if within the city, to which it is proposed to be moved; the route, including identification of streets or roads over which it is to be moved; the distance; the proposed date of movement; and such other information as the city shall require for the determination to be made hereunder. The application shall not be accepted for filing unless accompanied by the following: 
1.  Evidence that all real estate taxes and special assessments against the building and land from which it is to be removed are paid in full. 
2.  A written statement, bill of sale or other written evidence that the applicant is entitled to move the building. 
3.  Written evidence of arrangements with all public utility companies whose wires, lamps or poles are required to be removed, for the removal thereof by the applicant. 
4.  A cash deposit from the owner of the lot from which the building is to be moved in the sum of $2,000.00 as an indemnity to ensure completion of the following work: (1) capping the well; (2) abandoning the sewer system as required by the city; and (3) filling all excavations to grade, removing all rubbish, and leaving the premises in a safe and sanitary condition. 
5.  A cash deposit or letter of credit, the amount of which shall be 75 percent of the estimated cost, as determined by the city, to bring the building so moved into the city into conformance with applicable building code requirements. 
6.  Payment of the permit fee. 
7.  If the building is to be located within the city after its movement, a survey by a licensed surveyor of the land to which the building is to be moved, including the location of the building in relation to the boundaries of the land. 
8.  If the building is to be located within the city after its movement, photographs of (1) two or more views of the building to be moved; (2) the lot on which the building is to be located; and (3) the lands, and structures thereon, adjacent to the lot on which the building is to be located. 
C.  Duties of the protective inspections department. Upon receipt of the application accompanied by the fee, deposit, statement and information required, the protective inspections department shall review the application and make such investigation as shall be deemed appropriate. The department shall also obtain the recommendation of the chief of police and city engineer with respect to the streets on which the building may be moved to assure the greatest degree of safety to persons and property and to minimize congestion. Upon completion of the review and investigation, the protective inspections department shall: 
1.  Deny the permit for moving a building to a location other than within the city, stating in writing one or more of the grounds stated in subdivision 13 of this section, or authorize issuance of a permit; or 
2.  In all other instances, make its report to the council. 
D.  Council—Public hearing. 
1.  Where applicant requests the moving of a building to a location within the city, the council shall hold a public hearing on whether a permit shall be issued not later than 60 days after the application has been accepted for filing. Notice, including the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing, shall be given by publication and by mailing to the owners of real property situated within 350 feet of the land to which the building is to be moved at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Notice containing the same information shall be posted on the property to which the building is to be moved, not less than 30 days prior to the date of the hearing. Failure to give mailed notice or any defect in the notice shall not invalidate the hearing or any proceedings taken thereat. 
2.  Not later than five days after conclusion of the hearing the council shall either deny the permit in writing, stating one or more of the grounds stated in subdivision 13 of this section, or authorize issuance of a permit. 
E.  The owner shall: 
1.  Clear premises. Remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to existing grades at the original building site, if within the city, so that the premises are left in a safe, neat and sanitary condition. All foundation structures shall be removed to a depth of 18 inches below the finished grade of the earth. 
2.  Remove service connections. Cause any sewer lines to be plugged, shut off, or removed if the original site is within the city, in such manner as may be required by the city. 
3.  Completion of remodeling. If the building is relocated in the city, complete, within 90 days after removal, all remodeling, additions or repairs as indicated in the application, in any document filed in support thereof, or in any building permit issued in connection therewith. 
4.  Take all reasonable precautions to secure the building and to reduce danger to any member of the public until the building is set on its foundation and any remodeling, additions or repairs, described in the application, have been completed, including but not limited to: (1) locking all doors and windows; (2) providing sufficient support or bracing so as to stabilize the building to prevent it or any part thereof from sliding, slipping, falling or moving; and (3) erecting and maintaining a security fence or wall, the base of which shall be no higher than four inches, and the top of which shall be at least four feet above the surface of the ground and which shall enclose the entire building as well as the excavation for the foundation. 
Subd. 5.  Liability to city. 
A.  Holders of permits liable for amounts exceeding deposit. The holder or holders of a permit shall be liable jointly and severally for any expenses, damages, or costs paid or incurred by the city as a result of the issuance of a permit or the taking or failure to take any action required of the holder or holders of the permit or the city hereunder. 
B.  Retention of cash deposit. The city may take or cause to be taken any of the following actions and may retain so much of the cash deposit necessary to reimburse itself for any costs or expenses incurred as a result thereof: 
1.  If the city in its sole discretion determines that the premises from which or to which the building is to be moved, if within the city, or the movement of the building on streets is unsafe or constitutes any other unsafe condition, the city in its sole discretion may, but shall not be required to, take or cause such action to be taken to eliminate such unsafe condition or conditions as it shall deem appropriate. 
2.  If the premises from which the building has been removed are within the city and such premises are left in an unsafe or unsanitary condition or the provisions of this section with respect to such premises have not been complied with, the city may, but shall not be required, in its sole discretion, to take or cause such action to be taken to remedy such unsafe or unsanitary condition and to place the premises in such condition as to be in compliance with this section. 
Subd. 6.  Fees and deposits. Upon completion of the moving of a building pursuant to a permit, the amount which the applicant has deposited in conjunction with the filing of the application shall be returned to him, less all amounts for which any holder of a permit shall or may become liable to the city and which the city may retain under any provision of this section. The permit fee paid upon filing of the application shall not be returned. 
Subd. 7.  Council review. 
A.  The council may on its own motion elect to review any decision of the protective inspections department denying issuance of a permit. The denial of a permit may be appealed by the applicant as any other administrative decision. 
B.  A hearing on the election to review or appeal shall be heard by the council no later than 30 days after the election to review has been made. The council may affirm, reverse or modify the action. 
Subd. 8.  Moving hours. No person shall move any building on any street at any time other than during the hours of 1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m. 
Subd. 9.  Moving days. Any person moving a building through the city for which a permit shall not be required shall move such building through the City within a period of no more than seven days. 
Subd. 10.  Conditional permits. Any permit granted under the terms of this section may have attached thereto written conditions which shall be strictly adhered to by the permittee. 
Subd. 11.  Building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
A.  Whenever an application is made to move a building which would not, after moving, comply with all then-current building codes or if changes are required or contemplated, contemporaneously with such application a separate building permit shall also be applied for. 
B.  No moved building, whether or not a separate building permit is required under subparagraph A of this subdivision, shall be occupied before the city makes its final inspection. 
Subd. 12.  Building mover endorsement. No permit to move a building shall be granted to the owner unless it is endorsed by a building mover licensed by the state, acknowledging that he knows the contents of this section and agrees to be bound hereby and by all conditions placed upon such permit relating to hours, routing, movement, parking and speed limit. 
Subd. 13.  Denial of a permit. Any permit under this section shall be denied upon a finding of any one of the following: 
A.  Applicant has not complied with any requirement of this section; 
B.  Persons or property in the city would be endangered by moving the building, because of shape, size, route, or for any other reason; 
C.  The building is in such state of deterioration or disrepair or is otherwise so structurally unsafe that it would constitute a danger to persons or property in the city; 
D.  The building is structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose for which moved, if the location to which the building is to be moved is in the city; 
E.  The equipment for moving the building is unsafe and persons and property would be endangered by its use; 
F.  The building or its use would not be in compliance with zoning, building codes or other provisions of the City Code, if the location to which the building is to be moved is in the city; or 
G.  If the location to which the building is to be moved is in the city, the building is in substantial variance with either the established or the expected pattern of building development within the neighborhood to which the building is to be moved. Comparative age, bulk, architectural style and quality of construction of both the building to be moved and the buildings existing in the neighborhood shall be considered in determining whether a building is in substantial variance. If the building to be moved is more than ten years older than the oldest building situated on the lands abutting the land to which the building is to be moved, such fact shall be evidence that the building to be moved is in substantial variance. 
(Code 1983, § 4.10, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 9, 2nd series, eff. 4-27-84) 
State Law reference— Building movers, Minn. Stat. § 221.81.  
Secs. 4.11—4.19. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4.20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 373, 2nd series, § 1, effective Feb. 26, 2004, repealed § 4.20 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to placement, erection of maintenance signs as enacted by Code 1983, § 4.20, effective 1-1-83; as amended.  
Sec. 4.21. - Reserved. 
Repealed by Ord. No. 129, 2nd series, adopted 9-16-91. Ord. No. 142, 2nd series, adopted May 20, 1992, declared a moratorium which expired December 31, 1992.  
Secs. 4.22—4.29. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4.30. - Excavations and fills. 
Subd. 1.  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
A.  Excavation means any pit, hole or depression of earth material artificially made below natural grade level, except those made in pursuance of a building permit issued. 
B.  Earth material means any rock, natural soil or fill and/or any combination thereof. 
C.  Fill means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means. 
Subd. 2. Permit required (unlawful act). 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to remove, store or excavate earth material or to fill or raise existing surface grades without first obtaining a grading permit from the council. 
B.  A permit under this section shall not be required for: 
1.  The excavation, removal or storage of earth material for the purpose of the foundation, cellar or basement of some immediately pending superstructure to be erected, built or placed thereon contemporaneously with or immediately following such excavation, removal or storage, provided that a building permit has been issued. 
2.  Such excavation, removal or storage of earth material or other like material by the state, county or city authorities in connection with the construction or maintenance of roads or highways or utilities, provided such activity is conducted within said road or highway right-of-way. 
3.  Curb cuts, utility hookups or street openings for which another permit is required from the city. Where another permit is not required or obtained, a grading permit shall be required. 
4.  Installation of public utilities or excavation for construction purposes upon platted property within two years after an approved plat has been filed with the county. Where a plat is pending or more than two years has lapsed since the filing of a plat, a grading permit shall be required. 
5.  Excavations or fills of less than 10,000 square feet in area or five feet in depth. 
Subd. 3. Application. 
A.  Application for a grading permit shall be made in writing to the city on such forms and shall include such information as prescribed by the city including the location and plan of removal or fill of earthly deposits from such location. 
B.  Such application shall also include: 
1.  Legal description of the lands upon which it is proposed to remove earthly deposits or make excavation. 
2.  Names and addresses and signatures of applicants and owner of the land. 
3.  Copies of any agreements contemplated or entered into between the owner of such lands and any other person for the opening, operation or maintenance of such excavation, removal of earthly deposits or fill site. 
4.  The estimated time required to complete the work. 
5.  The highways, streets or other public roadways within the city upon or along which the material shall be transported. 
6.  Method and schedule for restoration and measures to control erosion during and after the work in compliance with the city's Stormwater Design Guide. 
7.  A map or plan of any proposed pit, excavation or fill area showing the confines or limits thereof together with the existing and proposed finish elevations at two-foot minimum contours based on sea level readings. 
8.  The following additional information: 
(a)  Landscape plan for setback areas. 
(b)  Location and surface of access roads. 
(c)  Method of controlling dust. 
(d)  Hours of operation. 
(e)  Method of maintaining security on premises. 
(f)  Method of controlling weeds. 
(g)  Information required for a stormwater management permit under this Code not otherwise provided herein. 
C.  The council may refer such application to the planning commission for review and recommendation. 
Subd. 4. Annual license fee. 
A.  A permit fee in an amount adopted by resolution of the council for each grading permit is required. In the event said application for permit is denied, such fee shall be returned to the applicant less reasonable costs incurred by the city for processing and handling the application. 
B.  In addition to the permit fee required as specified in subparagraph A above, each holder of such permit shall apply for a renewal permit annually on or before January 1, commencing in the same year in which the original permit is issued and pay therefor an annual permit fee in the amount fixed by resolution. 
C.  In addition, the petitioner shall pay all reasonable costs incurred by the city for review and inspection, including preparation of reports and review of plans by the city engineer, city attorney, and city planner or other members of the staff, and costs of a similar nature. The payment shall be made by the petitioner upon receipt of an itemized invoice from the city, and said payment shall be in addition to the fee required with the petition or renewal permit and hereinabove provided for. 
Subd. 5.  Regulations and requirements. The following restrictions, where applicable, shall apply to all permits: 
A.  Support. No excavation or digging shall be made closer to any road, right-of-way line, property line or structure on adjoining property as may endanger the support thereof as may be determined by the city engineer. 
B.  Time. No operations shall be conducted prior to 7:00 a.m. nor after 7:00 p.m., nor at any time on Sundays and legal holidays unless otherwise approved by the council. 
C.  Reducing nuisances. All reasonable means shall be employed by applicant to reduce dust, noise and nuisances which shall include, but not exclusively, water spraying in the crushing process. 
D.  Screening. Where necessary to eliminate unsightly view of the excavation and operations, applicant shall plant suitable fast growing screening trees which shall be a minimum of six feet high placed in two rows staggered with trees not more than ten feet apart in each row. 
E.  Slope maximums. During the entire period of operations, all excavations shall be sloped on all sides at a maximum ratio of one to one. 
F.  Manufacturing or processing prohibited, exception. A conditional use permit shall be required for the manufacturing or processing of any material on the site. 
G.  Commencement of operations. Applicant shall commence his operations on an internal portion of the site not less than 1,000 feet from the nearest dwelling and remove all deposits in that area before moving out and closer to a boundary or dwelling. 
H.  Wells. Applicant shall not drill or install any well larger than four inches on a site without first obtaining approval from the council in writing. 
I.  Wastewater. Applicant shall dispose of all wastewater used on the site in a manner which will not adversely affect adjoining property. 
J.  Ceasing operations; regrading. Upon ceasing operations or leaving any particular excavation or area in the site, applicant shall regrade same in a reasonable manner and shall slope same on all sides at a maximum slope of three feet horizontal to one foot vertical. 
K.  Paving access roads. All access roads from any excavation or fill area, which is the subject of this section, to any public paved roadway shall be paved for a distance of at least 75 feet adjacent to the public roadway to eliminate accumulation of material spillage and to minimize dust conditions. Said access roads shall be cleaned as needed to maintain lowest possible dust conditions. Truck hauling routes shall be approved by the city for any permits granted under this section. 
L.  Load limits. Applicant shall adhere to all state, county and city load limits in hauling to and from the site. 
M.  Traffic safety. Applicant shall provide warning signs and flagmen for proper traffic safety during periods of heavy traffic to and from or past the site and at such other times as the director of public works may require. 
N.  Ceasing operations; one year limit. In the event operations cease, or substantially so, on said site for a period of more than one year, or in the event substantially all gravel and sand deposits thereon have been removed, no further operations shall be conducted thereon, and the agreement shall be deemed absolutely void. 
O.  City rules and regulations. The city may, from time to time, adopt reasonable rules and regulations during the course of the agreement pertaining to applicant's operations which applicant shall agree to be bound by. For failure to comply with same or with the agreement or applicable provisions of the City Code, rules and regulations, applicant shall cease operations immediately upon receipt of written notice by the council or its authorized representative unless within the time specified he shall remove such default. 
P.  Other operators. The applicant shall not permit any other person to operate upon said site, haul or otherwise without first obtaining the written consent of the council and an appropriate acknowledgment by such person that he will be bound by the agreement and covered by bond. 
Q.  Restoration. Applicant shall provide topsoil or other approved cover material over all disturbed areas. The excavation plan shall provide detailed information on the type, thickness and schedule of placement of this material. The area shall be reseeded in accordance with an approved plan and time schedule. The applicant shall be liable and responsible for any and all unauthorized and unapproved types of fill consisting of debris, garbage and refuse deposited in the site unbeknownst to the property owner. 
R.  Wetland conservation. Excavation as permitted hereunder shall be in compliance with any and all applicable wetland conservation statutes and regulations and any amendments thereto hereafter. 
Subd. 6.  Granting of permit. The council, as a prerequisite to the granting of a permit or after a permit has been granted, may impose the following requirements in agreement form where applicable upon the applicant or owner of the premises to: 
A.  Properly fence any pit or excavation, maintaining a secured access, if requested by the city, to help restrict unauthorized use by the general public. 
B.  Slope the banks, fill, level off any pit or excavation or otherwise place in such condition at any time so as not to be dangerous because of sliding or caving banks, so as to minimize or stop erosion or dust during or after excavation. 
C.  Properly drain, fill or level off any pit or excavation so as to make the same safe and healthful as the council may determine and in accordance with the terms of this section. 
D.  Reimburse the city for the cost of periodic inspections by the city engineer, protective inspections department or other city employee for the purpose of seeing that the terms under which the permit has been issued are being complied with. 
E.  Post a surety bond in such form and sum as the council may require, running to the city, conditioned to pay the city the cost and expense of repairing any highways, streets, or other public ways within the city made necessary by the special burden resulting from the hauling and transporting thereon by the applicant in the removal or filling of rock, dirt, sand, gravel, clay or other like material, the amount of such cost to be determined by the council; and conditioned further to comply with all the requirements of this section and the particular permit, and to save the city free and harmless from any and all suits or claims for damages resulting from the negligent excavation, removal, storage or filling of rock, sand, gravel, dirt, clay or other like material within the city. 
F.  Post a performance bond on a minimum $500.00 for each acre, or any portion thereof, being disturbed at any time, running to the city, conditioned to pay the city the cost and expense of restoration of an excavated or filled area and expense of grading, providing topsoil and seeding where the applicant or owner shall fail to complete an excavation or restoration within the conditions under which the permit was issued. 
G.  File with the city a liability insurance policy or certificate of such insurance, issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state. The policy shall insure the person performing acts described in this section and the city as an insured, in the sum of at least $100,000.00 for injury to one person, and $300,000.00 for one accident, and at least $100,000.00 property damage or in such other amounts as the council shall determine. The policy shall be kept in effect until the termination of a permit granted pursuant to this section. 
Subd. 7.  Inspections. At least once a year, or more often as necessary, the city administrator shall instruct the staff to inspect all areas where a permit has been issued and report such findings to the council. 
Subd. 8. Duration of permit. The grading permit shall run from January 1 through December 31 of the same year or for a lesser period of time as the council shall specify when the permit is issued. 
Subd. 9.  Combination permits. In the event any applicant shall excavate material at one site within the city and use the same material for fill purposes at a different site within the city, he shall comply with all applicable portions of this section as to each site, including the payment of separate fees for each location. 
Subd. 10.  Conditional use permits. 
A.  Conditional use permits shall be required for all excavation or fill permits required under this section as follows: 
1.  In all areas zoned other than commercial or industrial no matter what amount of fill or excavation is intended to take place. 
2.  In all areas zoned commercial or industrial where the excavation or fill permits are expected to involve more than 100,000 cubic yards of material. 
B.  Applications for permits for operations which are expected to continue for three years or longer shall comply with the conditional use permit procedure provided in the zoning chapter. 
Subd. 11.  Violations. 
A.  Any person who shall fail to obtain a permit as herein required or who shall fail to comply with any of the conditions upon which the same is issued or who fails to complete the filling, excavating or grading within the time prescribed by the permit shall be guilty of violating this section, and may be enjoined from further work under the permit. 
B.  The council hereby reserves the right to revoke such permit upon a violation, and upon revocation the continuance of such work shall be a violation of this section, and if the council shall order any positive act to be done to conform with the work being done with that authorized by the permit, the same shall be completed before any further filling, excavating or grading is done and within ten days after mailing a notice to do said acts to the person to whom the permit was issued. 
(Code 1983, § 4.30, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 27, 2nd series, eff. 2-7-86; Ord. No. 143, 2nd series, eff. 6-12-92; Ord. No. 341, 2nd series, §§ 1—3, eff. 4-25-02; Ord. No. 535, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-17-2015)  
Sec. 4.31. - Construction and equipment use noise regulation. 
No construction or equipment activity shall be conducted in violation of the construction and equipment activity regulations provided in Ch. 10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 280, 2nd series, eff. 9-21-99)  
Sec. 4.32. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 534, 2nd series, § 2, effective Feb. 17, 2015, repealed § 4.32, which pertained to land disturbance and erosion control regulations and derived from Ord. No. 336, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 4-16-02; Ord. No. 414, 2nd series, § 4, eff. 7-28-07; Ord. No. 435, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 11-18-08.  
Sec. 4.33. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 534, 2nd series, § 2, effective Feb. 17, 2015, repealed § 4.33, which pertained to post construction requirements and derived from Ord. No. 430, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 10-21-08.  
Sec. 4.34. - Stormwater management regulations. 
A.  Findings and purpose statement. The city council finds it is in the best interest of the City of Eagan to protect, preserve, and enhance the city's natural resources of its and the region's water bodies, its stormwater system and public and private lands as may be adversely affected by the alteration to and the development of land within the city. Unmanaged stormwater runoff from land disturbing activities and increased development of land within the city have significant adverse impacts upon local and regional water resources diminishing the quality thereof and the public health, safety, and welfare of its residents as follows: 
1.  Increased runoff volumes and peak flood flows and overburdening the city's storm sewers, drainage ways and other storm drainage systems. 
2.  Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish, aquatic life, recreational and water supply uses by increasing pollutant loadings of sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals, toxics, debris, bacteria, pathogens, biological impairments, thermal stress and other pollutants. 
3.  Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank erosion, increasing stream bed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge, diminishing stream base flows and increasing stream temperatures. 
4.  Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the incidence and levels of flooding. 
5.  Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and increasing pollutant loads. 
6.  Impact groundwater by reducing recharge and increasing potential pollutant loading. 
To address these public health, safety and welfare concerns, the purpose of this section is to establish regulations that control and manage stormwater runoff from land that is subject to land disturbing activity and/or development, whether new or redevelopment, that will: 
1.  Meet Minimum Impact Standards (MID) performance goals. 
2.  Assist in meeting NPDES/SDS Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) and Construction Stormwater General Permit requirements. 
3.  Assist in meeting Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) plan wasteload allocations for impaired waters through quantification of load reductions. 
4.  Protect life and property from dangers associated with flooding. 
5.  Protect public and private property and natural resources from damage resulting from stormwater runoff and erosion. 
6.  Ensure the annual stormwater runoff rates and volumes from post development conditions mimic and/or reduce the annual runoff rates and volumes from predevelopment site conditions. 
7.  Ensure site design minimizes the generation of stormwater and maximizes pervious areas for stormwater treatment. 
8.  Provide a single, consistent set of performance goals that apply to all developments. 
9.  Protect water quality from pollutant loadings of sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals, toxics, debris, bacteria, pathogens, biological impairments, thermal stress and other pollutants. 
10.  Promote infiltration and groundwater recharge. 
11.  Provide vegetated corridors (buffers) to protect water resources from development. 
12.  Protect functional values of all types of natural water bodies (e.g., rivers, streams, wetlands, lakes, seasonal ponds). 
13.  Sustain or enhance biodiversity (native plant and animal habitat) and support riparian ecosystems. 
B.  Authorization and Scope. 
1.  Statutory Authorization. This section is adopted pursuant to federal regulations under the Clean Water Act and the Minnesota Rules administered under the stormwater regulatory program by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. 
2.  Scope. This section applies to and a stormwater management permit is required hereunder for any one of the following: 
(a)  New development of any land; 
(b)  Redevelopment of any lot of record; 
(c)  Subdivision of any land on which any new improvements are proposed to be built; 
(d)  Issuance of a building permit where a building is demolished in whole regardless if the new building or improvements create equal to or less than the impervious surface than that existed prior to demolition; 
(e)  Issuance of a building permit where a building is demolished in part, but the new building or improvements on the site create more impervious surface than that existing prior to demolition; 
(f)  Land disturbing activity as defined in this section, including excavations regulated in Chapter 4 of this Code; or 
(g)  Any activity that creates 10,000 square feet or more of new or fully reconstructed impervious surface on an individual lot of record or in aggregate on one or more lots of record if activity is part of a single project. 
When a building or grading permit is issued in connection with a project or a new development, redevelopment, or subdivision project is approved by the city council as required in this Code, the building or grading permit or the new development, redevelopment, or subdivision approval by the city may be in lieu of the stormwater management permit required hereunder, provided the applicant shall comply with all regulations herein and all conditions required under the separate permits or approvals. 
C.  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall be defined as stated: 
Applicant means any person or entity required to submit an application for a permit under this section or is otherwise subject to the regulations of this section. 
Best Management Practices (BMPs) means a practice, or combination of practices, that is determined to be an effective and practicable (including technological, economic, and institutional considerations) means of preventing, controlling or managing soil erosion, sedimentation and water quality of water bodies, including rivers and streams, from runoff. BMPs include avoidance of impacts, construction-phasing, minimizing the length of time soil areas are exposed, prohibited activity, and other management practices published by the state or designated area-wide planning agencies. The MIDS Credit Calculator includes post-construction stormwater BMPs that may be considered under this section. 
City of Eagan Stormwater Design Guide means the city's most current publication of its city-accepted design standards, design plates and references for compliance with the city's stormwater management requirements. The Stormwater Design Guide is available in the City of Eagan Engineering Division of the Public Works Department. 
Clean Water Act means the federal law and regulations regulating discharges of pollutants into the waters of the United States and regulating quality standards for surface waters set forth in 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. (1972 and as subsequently amended thereafter and hereafter). 
Common plan of development means a contiguous area where separate and distinct land disturbing activities may be taking place at different times on different, but adjacent, or on different schedules, but under one proposed plan, including but not limited to mass site grading, utility installation, street construction and home or building construction. This item is broadly defined to include design, permit application, advertisement or physical demarcation indicating that land disturbing activities may occur. 
Compacted soil means surface compaction, often affecting the upper 12 inches of depth of disturbed soil, in which there is a loss of soil aggregates, destroyed aeration pore spaces, crushed or collapsed pore spaces, and extensive resorting and packing of soil particles, which significantly increases bulk density, prohibiting root growth and water infiltration, resulting in an increased volume and rate of surface runoff. 
Critical root zone of a tree (CRZ) means an imaginary circle surrounding the tree trunk with a radius distance of one foot per one inch of tree diameter, e.g., a 20-inch diameter tree has a CRZ with a radius of 20 feet. 
Dewatering means the removal of water for construction activity. Dewatering can be a discharge of appropriated surface water or groundwater to dry and/or solidify a construction site. Dewatering may also include a more permanent condition where the discharge of surface water is required for the integrity of a permanent structure. 
Discharge means the release, conveyance, channeling, runoff, or drainage of water that is from dewatering or runoff. 
Erosion means the process by which the surface of the earth (such as soil, dirt, and rock) wears away as a result of the movement of wind, water and/or ice. 
Erosion control means methods employed to prevent temporary and permanent erosion, such as soil stabilization practices, horizontal slope grading, temporary or permanent ground cover, and construction phasing. 
Final stabilization means that all soil disturbing activities on the site or common plan of development have been completed, and that a uniform (evenly distributed, e.g., without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with a density of at least 80 percent of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures has been established, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures have been employed, and that all temporary erosion control devices are removed, including silt fence, temporary sedimentation basins, and temporary standpipes. Simply sowing grass seed and/or mulch is not considered final stabilization. Final stabilization of a common plan of development includes completion of building or home construction along with final restoration of all yards and adjacent drainage ways. 
Fully reconstructed impervious surface means impervious surfaces have been removed and the underlying soils are exposed and new impervious surfaces installed. Installation of impervious surfaces as a result of structure renovation, pavement mill and overlay projects, and pavement rehabilitation projects that do not expose or alter underlying soil material are not considered fully reconstructed impervious surfaces. In addition, other maintenance activities, such as catch basin and pipe replacements, shall not be considered fully reconstructed impervious surfaces. Reusing an existing building foundation or re-roofing of an existing building is not considered a fully reconstructed impervious surface. 
Groundwater (underground waters) means water contained below the surface of the earth in the saturated zone including, without limitation, all waters whether confined, unconfined, or perched conditions, in near surface unconsolidated sediment or regolith, or in rock formations deeper underground. The term groundwater shall be synonymous with underground water. 
High Water Level (HWL) means the calculated peak pond or stormwater storage elevation for a one percent probability rainfall storm or snowmelt event as defined in the city Stormwater Management Plan. 
Impervious surface means a surface that has been compacted, or covered with a layer of non-porous material (including buildings/structures), or is likely to become compacted from expected use, so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water and to cause water to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow than pervious surfaces. Impervious surfaces shall include, but not be limited to, rooftops; sidewalks; patios; driveways; parking lots; storage areas; concrete, asphalt, or gravel roads; sport courts; swimming pools; covered decks and other structures; compacted Class 5 gravel areas. An area of land that would be normally considered pervious may be considered impervious if it has been or will be compacted from any activity on the land area, such as heavy equipment movement, stockpiling of earth material, etc. 
Infiltration means the process of water percolating or penetrating into the earth's subsoil. 
Land or parcel of land or subject property means an entire lot or parcel, as defined by the zoning regulations of this Code, on or within the boundaries of which a project subject to the requirements of this section is occurring, has occurred or is to occur. 
Land disturbing activity means any excavating, grading, clearing, filling, or other earth change which may result in: 
1.  The movement of more than 10,000 square feet of earth; or 
2.  Any activity that changes the existing or natural contour of the land which changes drainage. 
For purposes of this section, excavation or grading for agricultural purposes on agriculturally zoned property shall not constitute land disturbing activity provided such activity is no closer to an edge or delineated boundary of any water body than as set forth in the wetlands protection and management regulations in this Code. 
Land disturbance plan (LDP) means the plan as required to be submitted with a permit application under this section consisting of the information and supporting documentation as set forth herein. 
Linear Project means construction or reconstruction of roads, trails, sidewalks, alleys, and rail lines that are not part of a common plan of development. Mill, overlay, reclaiming and other resurfacing projects are not considered to be reconstruction. 
MIDS means the Minimum Impact Design Standards published by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and for purposes of this section, those provisions pertaining to stormwater volume reduction requirements. 
MIDS Calculator means the Minimum Impact Design Standards (MIDS) best management practice (BMP) calculator for determining conformance with the MIDS/City of Eagan Stormwater Volume Reduction Performance Goals. 
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) means the state agency charged with overseeing and enforcing the federal Clean Water Act. 
Minnesota Stormwater Manual means the most current version of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's Minnesota Stormwater Manual. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) means the federal program pursuant to the Clean Water Act that regulates the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state through the issuance, regulation and enforcement of NPDES permits under the Clean Water Act. 
NPDES Construction Stormwater Permit means the permit issued by the MPCA which is officially called General Permit Authorization to Discharge Storm Water Associated with Construction Activity under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System/State Disposal System Permit Program (NPDES). 
New building construction means the construction of any principal building or structure upon a parcel of land or platted lot that is not existing or otherwise being enlarged or improved. 
New development means the process whereby land that has less than 15 percent impervious surface is or proposed to be improved with buildings and uses in one continuous process or in more than one distinct phase, including but not limited to the following activities: initial site grading; installation of utilities; construction of public streets; construction or grading of drainage ways; other grading or filling of any area within the site; grading of building pad areas; utility hookups; construction of buildings, parking lots, driveways, storage areas, recreation areas, or private streets; and any other construction or land disturbing activity within the subject property or site. Land that was previously developed, but now razed and vacant, will not be considered new development and will constitute redevelopment. 
Ordinary High Water Level (OHWL) means an elevation associated with a water body determined by the DNR, and used to determine DNR jurisdiction. In general, it is the elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape. The ordinary high water level is commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the OHW is typically the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel. The OHW does not correlate to a one percent probability storm event (100-year), two percent storm event (50-year), ten percent storm event (10-year), or any other flood level. 
Owner means the person or entity that is the fee owner of record of the land on which the construction activities will occur; or if the construction activity is for a lease, easement, or mineral rights license holder, the party or individual identified as the lease, easement or mineral rights license holder; or the contracting government agency responsible for the construction activity. 
Permanent erosion control means long-term method(s) employed and maintained to prevent erosion and sedimentation. Examples of permanent controls are turf reinforcement mats, swales, ponds, sediment basins, infiltration basins, catch basin sumps, storm sewer systems, and riprap. 
Permanent cover means final stabilization . Examples include perennial grass, gravel, asphalt, and concrete. See also the definition of final stabilization . Permanent cover does not include the practices under temporary erosion protection. 
Pre-development means land conditions prior to the creation of any impervious surface on the property. 
Project manager means the applicant or the applicant's duly authorized representative who has been conferred the duties by the applicant to implement, complete and manage the project to which the approved land disturbance and erosion control plan applies under this section. 
Redevelopment means the process of subdividing and adding additional uses on a lot or site that was previously developed and/or the razing and replacement of existing building and/or changes in uses on a lot or site that was previously developed. Land that was previously developed, then razed and left vacant before new building construction occurs is deemed redevelopment. 
Runoff means rainfall, snowmelt, dewatering or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface. 
Sediment means the product of an erosion process; solid material both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved by water, wind, or ice, and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above or below water level. 
Sedimentation means the process or action of depositing sediment. 
Sediment control means the methods employed to prevent sediment from leaving a site. Examples of sediment control practices are silt fences, sediment traps, earth dikes, drainage swales, check dams, subsurface drains, pipe slope drains, storm drain inlet protection, and temporary or permanent sedimentation basins. 
Significant tree means any of the following type of trees, as each is defined herein: 
Coniferous/Evergreen tree shall mean a woody plant which, at maturity, is at least 12 feet or more in height, having foliage on the outermost portion of the branches year-round. 
Deciduous tree shall mean a woody plant which, at maturity, is at least 15 feet or more in height, having a defined crown, and which sheds leaves annually. 
Significant tree shall mean a healthy tree measuring a minimum of six inches in diameter for hardwood deciduous trees, defined herein, or a minimum of 12 inches in diameter for softwood deciduous trees as defined herein; or a minimum of 12 feet in height for coniferous/evergreen trees. 
Hardwood deciduous tree shall include: Ironwood, Catalpa, Oak, Maple (hard), Walnut, Ash, Hickory, Birch, Black Cherry, Hackberry, Locust and Basswood. 
Softwood deciduous tree shall include: Cottonwood, Poplars/Aspen, Box Elder, Willow, Silver Maple and Elm. 
Specimen tree shall mean a healthy hardwood deciduous tree measuring equal to or greater than 30 inches diameter and/or a coniferous tree measuring 50 feet or greater in height. 
Significant woodland means a group or cluster of coniferous and/or deciduous trees with contiguous crown cover, occupying 500 or more square feet of property, which are comprised of deciduous trees between four inches and 12 inches in diameter or coniferous trees between four feet and 12 feet in height. 
Site means any lot or parcel of land, or contiguous lots or parcels of land, where land disturbing activity is proposed to or permitted to be occurring. 
Slope means an inclined ground surface the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. 
Soil means the unconsolidated mineral or organic material on the immediate surface of the earth. For the purposes of this section, temporary stockpiles of clean sand, gravel, aggregate, concrete or bituminous materials are not considered soil. 
Soil management strategies means a site-specific integrated plan for protecting soils from disturbance and procedures to remediate soil compaction and improve organic matter content on disturbed soils, to preserve/improve soil quality and to provide effective stormwater infiltration as approved by the city Engineer in accordance with the City of Eagan's Stormwater Design Guide. 
Stabilized means the exposed ground surface has been covered by appropriate materials such as mulch, staked sod, riprap, erosion control blanket, mats or other material that prevents erosion from occurring. Applying mulch, hydromulch, tackifier, polyacrylamide or similar erosion prevention practices is not acceptable stabilization in temporary or permanent drainage ditches or areas where concentrated overland flow occurs. Grass seeding is not stabilization. 
Steep slopes mean the topography on the site has an average slope over 12 percent, as measured over horizontal distances of 50 feet or more. 
Stormwater means precipitation runoff, stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and any other surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater management plan means a set of drawings and other documents submitted as part of a land disturbance plan, as a prerequisite to obtaining permit approval hereunder, which shall contain all of the information and specifications pertaining to land disturbance erosion prevention and control management and post-construction stormwater management in conformance with this section. 
Stormwater pollution prevention program (SWPPP) means a plan for stormwater discharge that includes all required content in conformance with this section and which describes erosion prevention BMPs, sediment control BMPs, construction site/waste control BMPs and Permanent Stormwater Management Systems that, when implemented, will decrease soil erosion on a parcel of land and decrease off-site nonpoint pollution. 
Structural control elevation (SCE) means the elevation of the outlet structure, pump controls or surface overflow for a water body at which water will initially discharge from the water body. This elevation would correspond to the elevation of the water surface at the time of initial discharge. 
Surface water or waters means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, wetlands, reservoirs, springs, rivers, drainage systems, waterways, watercourses, and irrigation systems whether natural or artificial, public or private. 
Water body (bodies) means any natural or man-made wetland, drainage or stormwater area, stream, or lake. 
Water quality volume means runoff from the new impervious surfaces created by a project and is the volume of water to be treated in the permanent stormwater management system. 
Wetlands shall have the meaning as defined in Minnesota Rules 7050.0130, subpart F, and includes those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Constructed wetlands designed for wastewater treatment are not waters of the state. Wetlands must have the following attributes: 
1.  A predominance of hydric soils; 
2.  Inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in a saturated soil condition; and 
3.  Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such vegetation. 
Wetland buffer has the meaning as provided in the wetlands protection and management regulations set forth in the land use regulations of this Code. 
D.  Permit application and plan. 
1.  Permit application. An application for the permit required hereunder shall be made in writing to the city on such form as the city may, from time to time, designate and shall include such information as the city shall require. If the project is for a subdivision, new development, redevelopment, or other project that requires approval by the city council under this Code, then the application for such project may be in lieu of a permit application under this section, provided the applicant provides all information and complies with all regulations required hereunder. 
2.  Permit application submittals. Any application for a permit required hereunder shall be submitted to the city, along with all required application fees and a land disturbance plan (LDP) prior to the city's consideration of the application. The LDP shall comply with the following requirements, in addition to those LDP requirements set forth elsewhere in this section: 
a.  A detailed description, along with a grading plan if applicable, of the land disturbing activity for which the permit is sought. 
b.  The plan shall be prepared by a certified plan preparer or inspector as approved by the city. 
c.  The plan shall be consistent with any previously approved subdivision grading plan. 
d.  The plan shall comply with the requirements for erosion and sediment controls and construction debris/waste controls within the NPDES Construction Stormwater Permit issued by the MPCA. 
e.  The plan shall depict the proposed permanent/post-construction stormwater management methods/facilities and shall comply with the city's post-construction stormwater management regulations set forth herein and shall be consistent with the city's overall stormwater management plan and water quality and wetland management plans. 
f.  The plan shall not adversely impact neighboring properties. 
g.  The plan shall minimize any irreparable adverse impacts to natural resources upon the subject property or directly adjacent thereto, as well as any city facilities or stormwater system. 
h.  The plan shall meet all requirements of this section. 
i.  The plan shall provide for and include any of the following temporary erosion and sediment control requirements if the city determines that the project mandates all, or a combination thereof, for the protection of public safety, health and welfare: 
(1)  Properly fence any slope of 3:1 or greater that is adjacent to a project property line and which is deemed hazardous or dangerous by the city; 
(2)  Slope the banks, fill, level off any depression or mound or otherwise place in such condition at any time so as not to be dangerous because of sliding or caving banks; and so as to minimize or stop erosion or dust during or after the grading operation; and 
(3)  Properly drain, fill, or level off any graded or ungraded area so as to make the same safe and healthful, unless otherwise approved by the city. 
3.  Review and approval of permit application. Projects of less than five acres on platted lots of record and that are not required to be approved by city council, such as a subdivision or new development, may be approved administratively by city staff, unless city staff presents it to the city council for its review and approval. Upon a finding that the proposed project plan meets the requirements under this section and after city's approval of the land disturbance plan, the city will issue a permit in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
4.  Expiration of permit and plan. Any permit issued pursuant to the requirements of this section, including any grading permit issued in lieu thereof, shall expire two years from the date of issuance if significant progress of the work covered by the permit is not satisfactorily accomplished as determined by the city, unless an extension of the permit is requested by the applicant prior to expiration and approved by the city. 
5.  Revocation of permit. Failure to comply with the approved terms and conditions of the permit or the land disturbance plan approved therewith shall be grounds for revocation of the permit, or any other permit or approval by the city council issued in lieu thereof, following a public hearing. Written notification of the public hearing shall be mailed to the current holder of the permit at least ten days prior to said hearing. 
E.  Land disturbance plan. 
1.  No permit shall be issued unless a land disturbance plan is submitted to and approved by the city. All land disturbance plans shall include the following: 
a.  General information. 
(1)  Delineation of the subject property, including all public and private easements thereon; the location of existing and proposed buildings, structures and impervious surfaces on the subject property, including quantities of impervious surface for both pre- and post-construction/activity, and the building bench elevations for all existing and proposed buildings; 
(2)  Description of the construction or land disturbing activity to be performed on subject property, including the area and volume of earth material to be moved, and proposed project schedule; 
(3)  Identification of all water bodies located on and within 100 feet of the subject property's boundaries, including identification of any off-site receiving waters for the permit site's runoff, including the structural control elevation (SCE), high water level (HWL), and ordinary high water level (OHWL) elevations and if an existing water body is intended to be used for water quality treatment, then identification of the dead storage volume and area of the SCE; 
(4)  Identification of all wetland buffers as set forth in the wetlands protection and management regulations in this Code; 
(5)  Identification of existing and proposed subwatersheds/site drainage areas, including any contributing runoff from off-site, and show drainage patterns using arrows depicting direction of flow; 
(6)  Topographical data, including existing (dashed) and proposed (solid) contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet, except that contour lines shall be no more than 100 feet apart; 
(7)  Temporary benchmarks shall be established within the boundaries of the project area. Descriptions, reference ties and elevations of the benchmarks shall be furnished to the city. All elevations, topography and vertical control data shall be tied to sea level datum, 1929 general adjustments; and 
(8)  The location and size of all existing and proposed sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water supply, and other utility service facilities. 
b.  Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP): 
(1)  Delineation of all areas to be graded or excavated, and the limits of land disturbing activities. 
(2)  All erosion and sediment control, construction debris/waste control and stormwater management shall conform to City Code and the current requirements of the NPDES Construction Stormwater Permit issued by the MPCA. 
(3)  The SWPPP shall be prepared by an individual who has received training by an accredited governmental agency, professional organization, or educational institution for and has working knowledge and experience in erosion prevention, sediment control, permanent stormwater management and the MN NPDES/SDS Construction Stormwater Permit. This individual shall sign the SWPPP with a certification statement that the individual meets the requirement of this clause. 
(4)  The following general criteria shall be incorporated in site design for erosion and sediment control and construction site construction debris/waste control in the stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP): 
(i)  Minimize disturbance of natural soil cover and vegetation; 
(ii)  Minimize, in area and duration, exposed soil and unstable soil conditions; 
(iii)  Protect receiving water bodies, wetlands and storm sewer inlets; 
(iv)  Protect adjacent properties from sediment deposition; 
(v)  Minimize work in and adjacent to waterbodies and wetlands; 
(vi)  Minimize off-site sediment transport on trucks and equipment; 
(vii)  Maintain stable slopes; 
(viii)  Avoid steep slopes and the need for high cuts and fills; 
(ix)  Minimize disturbance to the surrounding soils, root systems and trunks of trees adjacent to site activity that are intended to be left standing; and 
(x)  Minimize the compaction of site soils. 
(5)  Identification and use of specific BMPs for erosion and sedimentation control and construction debris/waste control to minimize erosion and the discharge of sediment and other pollutants within and from the property, during construction activity and for final stabilization as recommended by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency in its online Minnesota Stormwater Manual, the publication Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas, (2000), or as amended, including but not limited to: 
(i)  Perimeter erosion control devices; 
(ii)  Phased grading; 
(iii)  Temporary seeding; 
(iv)  Storm drain inlet protection devices; 
(v)  Rock construction entrance; 
(vi)  Critical root zone perimeter protection for trees; 
(vii)  Construction site management direction, such as removal of all construction debris/waste, dirt and soil from impervious ground surfaces (sweeping schedule, etc.), including abutting public or private roadways and sidewalks, etc., in connection with the subject property, to be properly disposed of and not allowed to be carried by runoff into a receiving channel of the stormwater system; 
(viii)  Identification of soil storage/stock pile protection measures, including phasing of stockpile from temporary to permanent BMPs; 
(ix)  Identification of flow diversions and temporary sediment basins (including drainage area and sizing); 
(x)  Dust control measures; 
(xi)  Identification of BMPs for dewatering activities, including any specific chemicals or chemical treatment systems that may be used for removing sediment from dewatering on the site, including discharge details to prevent erosion and any adverse effect on natural or off-site receiving waters and/or downstream properties. The appropriation of these BMPs and discharge may require additional local, state or federal permits; 
(xii)  Identification and description of all permanent BMPs to be utilized, including the use of perennial vegetative cover, on all exposed soils or other equivalent means and a completion schedule from pre-grading through final stabilization; 
(xiii)  Identification of all permanent/post-construction stormwater management BMPs to be utilized to protect water bodies and wetland buffers, and described in the Stormwater Management Plan; 
(xiv)  Any other erosion and sedimentation control and construction debris/waste control device or practice as deemed necessary by the city. 
(6)  Supporting information including designs, calculations/quantification and narrative pertaining to BMPs for erosion and sediment control, construction debris/waste control, temporary and permanent/post-construction stormwater management. 
(7)  Applicant shall identify the responsible party for SWPPP implementation, maintenance, inspection during land disturbing activity. 
(8)  Identification of responsible party for long-term operation and maintenance of the permanent stormwater management system. 
(9)  Description of BMP inspection schedule by responsible party, including but not limited to: 
(i)  Once every 7 days on exposed soil areas; 
(ii)  Within 24 hours after a one half inch rain event over 24 hours; 
(iii)  Once every 30 days on stabilized areas; 
(iv)  As soon as runoff occurs or prior to resuming construction on frozen ground. 
(10)  Description of BMP maintenance schedule by responsible party, including but not limited to: 
(i)  When sediment reaches 1/3 the height of the BMP on perimeter control devices, sediment must be removed within 24 hours. 
(ii)  If the perimeter control device is not functional it must be repaired or replaced within 24 hours. 
(iii)  Temporary sediment basins shall be maintained when sediment reaches ½ the outlet height or ½ the basin storage volume. Basin must be drained or sediment removed within 72 hours. 
(iv)  Sediment tracked from construction site vehicle entrance and exit locations must be removed from paved surfaces within 24 hours of discovery. 
(11)  NPDES construction stormwater permit. In addition to all other plan requirements in this section, the applicant shall submit to the city prior to the issuance of a permit hereunder, a copy of the applicant's NPDES construction stormwater permit issued by the MPCA and any other supporting documentation, if a NPDES construction stormwater permit is applicable. 
c.  Tree Preservation Plan. 
(1)  An accurate inventory of all individual significant trees on the subject property, including identification of the size, species, condition and location of each significant tree. On large wooded sites, forest measuring methods may be used to determine the total square footage of significant woodland. For woodland inventories provide a brief description of tree species and average tree diameters. 
(2)  Identification of all individual significant trees or significant woodlands on the subject property proposed to be removed as a result of the land disturbing activity; 
(3)  Identification of measures to be utilized to protect and preserve the significant trees or significant woodlands proposed to be preserved, defined as the following: 
(i)  Protective fencing shall be placed at the outer edge of the critical root zone of all significant trees or significant woodlands. No grade change, trenching, stockpiling, soil compaction or any other construction activity shall occur within this protected zone; and 
(ii)  To prevent oak wilt infection, a non-toxic tree wound sealant shall be applied immediately to any damaged tree trunk, branch, or root of any oak tree between and including April 15 and July 1. 
F.  Post-construction stormwater management requirements. In connection with any project for which a permit is required under this section that results in the addition of 10,000 square feet or more of impervious surface on the site, the following post-construction/activity stormwater management requirements shall be met on the site: 
1.  Stormwater volume control. 
a.  New, nonlinear developments. For a new, nonlinear development that creates 10,000 square feet or more of new impervious surface on sites without infiltration restrictions, stormwater runoff volumes shall be controlled and the post-construction runoff volume shall be retained on the site for 1.1 inches of runoff from impervious surfaces, (i.e., the volume retained shall be 1.1 inches times the impervious surface without any abstractions/losses). 
b.  Redevelopment/reconstruction projects. Nonlinear redevelopment projects on sites without infiltration restrictions that create 10,000 square feet or more of new and/or fully reconstructed impervious surfaces shall capture and retain on site 1.1 inches of runoff from new and/or fully reconstructed impervious surfaces. 
c.  Linear Projects. Linear projects (roadways, sidewalks, and trails) without infiltration restrictions and not part of another project that creates 10,000 square feet or more of new and/or fully reconstructed impervious surfaces shall capture and retain the larger of the following: 
(1)  0.55 inches of runoff from the new and/or fully reconstructed impervious surfaces; or 
(2)  1.1 inches of runoff from the net increase in impervious area. 
For linear projects where the lack of right-of-way precludes the installation of volume control practices that meet the conditions for post-construction stormwater management in this section, and a reasonable attempt has been made to obtain right-of-way during the project planning process, the applicant shall follow the flexible treatment options schedule. 
d.  Pretreatment shall be provided for all volume control BMPs. 
e.  No areas of constructed wet ponds or wetlands shall be accepted as an infiltration practice. 
f.  Impervious surface area for calculating post-construction volume control requirement shall include all disturbed/graded soil areas that are proposed to be revegetated pervious surfaces, due to soil compaction impacts from land disturbance. Identification of soil management strategies to be utilized, within a stormwater management plan and site plans, may provide exclusion to this disturbed pervious provision for areas shown to protect and restore soil permeability to non-compacted soil conditions, if approved by the city engineer. 
g.  Acceptable credit calculator and/or modeling. Final site design and choice of stormwater treatment practices shall be based on outcomes of the MIDS calculator, or other water quality modeling as accepted by the city, to demonstrate compliance with the volume control performance goals, as part of a stormwater management plan. 
h.  Reference design guide. All volume control for water quality and quantity and site design specifications shall conform to the current versions of the MPCA Minnesota Stormwater Manual and the City of Eagan stormwater design guide. 
2.  Permissible alternative stormwater volume control designs. 
a.  The city may consider and permit alternative stormwater management designs if the city, in its sole conclusion, determines that the applicant cannot fully meet the requirements as set forth in this section, due to infiltration restrictions. Before the city will consider any alternative design, the applicant shall demonstrate that it cannot fully comply with the standards herein. The city will consider the merits of relocating project elements to address varying soil conditions and other constraints across the site. 
Applicant shall document the alternative design options sequence starting with Alternative #1. If Alternative #1 cannot be met, then Alternative #2 shall be analyzed. Applicant must document the specific reasons why Alternative #1 cannot be met based on the infiltration restriction factors listed below. If Alternative #2 cannot be met then Alternative #3 shall be met. Applicant must document the specific reasons why Alternative #2 cannot be met based on the infiltration restriction factors listed below. When all of the conditions are fulfilled within an alternative, this sequence is completed. 
Volume reduction techniques considered in determining alternative designs shall include infiltration, reuse and rainwater harvesting, and/or additional techniques included in the MIDS calculator, the Minnesota Stormwater Manual, or the City of Eagan stormwater design guide. Higher priority shall be given to BMPs that include volume reduction. Secondary preference is to employ filtration techniques, followed by rate control BMPs. 
b.  The use of infiltration as a stormwater management method is prohibited when the infiltration device will be constructed in any of the following areas: 
(1)  Where industrial facilities are not authorized to infiltrate industrial stormwater under an NPDES/SDS industrial stormwater permit issued by the MPCA. 
(2)  Where vehicle fueling and maintenance occur. 
(3)  With less than three feet of separation distance from the bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of the seasonally saturated soils or to the top of bedrock. 
(4)  Where high levels of contaminants in soil or groundwater will be mobilized by the infiltrating stormwater. 
c.  The use of infiltration as a stormwater management method is restricted for post-construction stormwater management, without higher engineering review sufficient to provide a functioning treatment system and prevent adverse impacts to groundwater, when the infiltration device will be constructed in any of the following areas: 
(1)  With predominately Hydrologic Soil Group D (clay) soils. 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet up-gradient, or 100 feet down-gradient of active karst features. 
(3)  Within a Drinking Water Supply Management Area (DWSMA). 
(4)  Where soil infiltration rates are more than 8.3 inches per hour. 
The restrictions above do not prohibit the applicant from infiltrating stormwater; instead, the restrictions require that a higher level of design and review are required. 
d.  The alternative stormwater management design options sequence is as follows: 
Alternative #1: Applicant must first attempt to design the site to achieve retention of at least 0.55 inches of runoff from the proposed impervious surfaces and remove 75 percent of the annual total phosphorus load leaving all points of the site. Options considered and presented shall examine the merits of relocating project elements to address varying soil conditions and other constraints across the site. 
Alternative #2: If the Applicant cannot achieve the standards listed in Alternative #1, the project shall achieve volume reduction to the maximum extent practicable and remove 60 percent of the annual total phosphorus load leaving all points on the site. Options considered and presented shall examine the merits of relocating project elements to address varying soil conditions and other constraints across the site. 
Alternative #3: Off-site treatment. Mitigation equivalent to the performance of 1.1 inches of volume reduction for new development or redevelopment as described in this section performed off-site to protect the receiving water body may be considered/accepted by the city (including payment to be used on public stormwater volume reduction projects) on a case-by-case basis. Off-site treatment shall be achieved in areas selected, and if approved by the city, in the following order of preference: 
(1)  Locations that yield benefits to the same receiving water that receives runoff from the original construction activity. 
(2)  Locations within the same city small sub basin as the original construction activity. 
(3)  Locations within the same city water quality major drainage basin. 
(4)  Locations anywhere within the city. 
3.  Runoff rate control. All on-site rate-control stormwater facilities required under this section shall be designed, installed, and maintained to accomplish the following: 
a.  Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the 50 percent probability, 24-hour storm event. 
b.  Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the ten percent probability, 24-hour storm event. At a minimum, the storm sewer system shall be designed for the ten percent, 24-hour storm event. Low areas must have an acceptable overland drainage route with the required transfer capacity when the event is exceeded. 
c.  Maintain predevelopment peak runoff rates for the one percent probability, 24-hour storm event. 
d.  Where the city's stormwater management plan and its updates show lower rates for the 50 percent, ten percent, or one percent events, this lower rate shall supersede the predevelopment rate control criteria. 
All storm events calculations shall be modeled according to the most current version of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) National Weather Service Atlas 14, using rainfall events applicable to the city. All runoff calculations shall be according to the methodology described in the Natural Resources Conservation Service's Technical Release 55, "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds" (commonly referred to as TR-55). Other methodology may be used with prior approval by the city. Curve numbers for each land use shall be chosen based on TR-55, except that under no circumstances shall predevelopment pre-project conditions exceed a curve number of 72. The city retains the right to review the appropriateness of the curve number applied to a property. 
For post-construction Rate Control modeling a minimum curve number of 84 shall be used on all disturbed/graded soil areas that are proposed to be revegetated pervious surfaces, due to soil compaction impacts from land disturbance. Identification of soil management strategies to be utilized, within a stormwater management plan and site plans, may provide justification for use of a lower curve number for pervious areas if shown to protect or restore soil permeability to non-compacted soil conditions, if approved by the city Engineer. 
All rate control practice designs shall conform to the current versions of the MPCA Minnesota Stormwater Manual and the City of Eagan stormwater design guide (e.g., pond design standards including maximum side slopes, maintenance bench, safety bench, unobstructed equipment access, etc.). 
On-site rate control practices may not be needed if the applicant is able to clearly demonstrate that off-site (regional) constructed facilities can detain/retain the project site's runoff rates to pre-development conditions and in accordance with the rates established in this Code. In this case, the applicant shall submit a technical evaluation completed by a qualified engineer or hydrologist which must be reviewed and approved by the city engineer. 
4.  Flood and erosion control. No land shall be developed or no use shall be permitted that results in water runoff causing flooding (drainage in excess of the natural drainage anticipated by the city stormwater management plan) or erosion or sedimentation on adjacent property. 
5.  Use of natural topography and better site design techniques. The applicant shall reduce the need for stormwater management infrastructure/facilities, public or private, by utilizing natural topography and land cover such as swales and depressions that exist before development to the degree they can accommodate the additional flow of water without compromising the integrity or quality of a receiving water body. Development or redevelopment shall minimize impact to significant natural features. Projects shall be designed using the Better Site Design Techniques of the current version of the Minnesota Stormwater Manual. Better Site Design involves techniques applied early in the design process to preserve natural areas, reduce impervious cover, distribute runoff and use pervious areas to more effectively treat stormwater runoff. Site design should address open space protection, impervious cover minimization, runoff distribution and minimization, and runoff utilization. 
G.  Oil and grease control. The first 0.5 inches of runoff shall be treated using effective oil and grease removal technology. Site must provide oil and grease control when the site has 40 or more parking stalls, has high traffic areas (such as drive thru windows/lanes), or commercial/business activities will take place that have the potential for oil and/or grease pollution (e.g., gas/service stations). 
H.  Outlets. Stormwater discharges from new construction project sites shall have a stable outlet capable of carrying stormwater flow at a non-erosive velocity. The outlet shall be designed considering flow capacity and flow duration. The outlet design requirement applies to both the discharge outlet from the construction site, as well as the discharge outlet into the municipal storm sewer system or water body. 
I.  Maintenance of private stormwater facilities. Property owners shall maintain all private stormwater facilities that have been installed in accordance with this section in proper and operational condition consistent with the performance standards under which they were originally designed and pursuant to the terms of the city's approval of the facility(s), in addition to the following: 
1.  On an annual basis, unless the city requires more frequency, the property owners shall: (a) have the private stormwater facility(s) inspected by a qualified person with demonstrated experience in construction and maintenance of stormwater infiltration practices, to determine the facility is properly maintained and in operational condition consistent with the performance standards for which it was originally designed and approved by the city; and (b) inspect and remove and properly dispose of all settled materials, including all settled solids, from sumps, grit chambers, and other devices within all private stormwater facilities, in accordance with federal, state, and local regulations. The city may grant one- to five-year waivers from this requirement after the property owner presents evidence that a facility has the capacity to store settled solids in accordance with the original design capacity. 
2.  When requested by the city, property owners shall provide a maintenance plan that defines who will conduct the maintenance, the type of maintenance that will be conducted, and the maintenance intervals of a private stormwater facility. 
3.  All private stormwater facilities shall be designed to minimize the need for maintenance and to provide easy vehicle and personnel access for maintenance purposes, and shall be structurally sound, as determined by the city. Prior to city approval, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain any necessary easements or other property interests to allow access to the facilities for inspection or maintenance. 
4.  The city shall have the right to request and review inspection and maintenance records and shall have the right to perform an inspection of private stormwater facilities at any time if the city has probable cause to believe that the facilities are not being properly maintained or inspected., to ensure continued operation of the facilities in accordance with the design and maintenance plans. 
5.  If the site is subject to subsequent land disturbing activity or building construction or stormwater treatment facilities change, causing decreased effectiveness of the stormwater treatment, new or modified structural stormwater BMPs must be implemented to achieve compliance with the performance standards and requirements of this section. 
6.  Prior to the issuance of a permit hereunder, the property owner shall execute a stormwater management system agreement governing the implementation, inspection and maintenance of the stormwater management facilities required and approved by the city under this section. The fully executed agreement shall be recorded with the Dakota County recorder's office, at the property owner's sole expense, within 30 days of the issuance of the permit. 
J.  Enforcement. 
1.  Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a provision or failed to meet a requirement of this section, the city may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. 
2.  If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property are required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such abatement and/or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to abate or restore the property within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a third party contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
3.  If the violator fails to pay for said services within 30 days of the notice of the amount due, the city may draw the amount owed for the services from any financial guarantees the city may hold with regard to the affected property. On or before the first day of September of each year, the city clerk shall list the total unpaid charges for abatement and/or restoration services against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this article. 
4.  Every person violates a requirement, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this section when he fails to perform an act as required hereunder, or performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and sentenced in accordance therewith except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. 
K.  Appeals of decisions. The applicant may appeal any requirement, decision or determination by the city in connection with any provision of this section pursuant to the procedures as set forth in the zoning regulations regarding board of appeals and adjustments. 
L.  Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
1.  Emergency work necessary to protect life, limb, or property. 
2.  Routine agricultural activity such as tilling, planting, harvesting, and associated activities. Other agricultural activities are not exempt including activities such as feedlots, storage sheds, and construction of structures. 
3.  Silvicultural activity. 
4.  Public utility and right-of-way installation and maintenance projects, which are regulated elsewhere in the City Code; 
5.  Stockpiles: 1) clean aggregate stockpiles, 2) sand stockpiles, 3) constructed base components of roads, parking lots, 4) demolition concrete. Stockpiles must still be compliant with sediment control practices. 
M.  Compliance with plan. 
1.  Compliance required. The applicant shall implement and comply with the land disturbance plan (LDP) prior to and during any construction or land disturbing activity under the grading permit to which this section applies. All erosion and sedimentation control and tree preservation measures required under the plan shall be properly installed and remain in place until all grading and construction activity is completed and final stabilization has occurred or until a written request for removal of the protection measures is made to and approved by the city. Permanent erosion control and stormwater management shall remain in place after construction, and shall be under a long-term maintenance agreement which must be signed by the applicant before a grading permit is issued. The applicant/owner shall be responsible for inspections and maintenance of temporary and permanent BMPs on the site. No construction or land disturbing activity to which this section applies or removal of any significant trees may occur until the LDP is approved by the city and except in accordance with the approved LDP. Failure to comply with the approved terms and conditions of an LDP shall constitute a violation of this Code. To remain in compliance the applicant must amend the SWPPP as necessary to include additional or modified BMPs designed to correct problems identified or address erosion, sedimentation and/or construction debris/waste control issues, and shall keep all site plans (and Stormwater Management Plan documentation) up to date with regard to stormwater runoff controls, which shall be provided to the city. 
2.  Determination of compliance. The city shall have the right to enter and inspect the subject property in order to determine compliance with the approved LDP. The city shall have the right to order the suspension of any grading or construction activity on the subject property until compliance with the LDP has occurred. 
3.  Finding of noncompliance. Upon a finding of noncompliance, the city shall use the following procedure with respect to notification and corrective measures: 
(a)  The city shall personally serve upon the project manager and/or operator, or other responsible person, and by electronic mail (or certified U.S. mail) upon the applicant/property owner, if different than the project manager and/or operator, a written notification of the violation of the approved LDP. 
(b)  If remedial work is not completed and compliance with the LDP has not occurred within 48 hours of service of the violation notification, the city may complete remedial or corrective work and any costs incurred in connection with taking remedial action or installing corrective measures may be recovered from the applicant as allowed by law. In the alternative, the city may choose to issue a stop work order, withhold the scheduling of inspections, and/or the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, or revoke any construction-related permit and order the termination of all construction activity on the subject property until the subject site is in compliance with the LDP. 
N.  Emergency corrective actions. In the event circumstances exist such that noncompliance poses an immediate danger to the public health, safety and welfare, as determined by the city, the city may take emergency corrective action to prevent any such danger. The city shall take reasonable action to contact and direct the owner of the subject property to take any necessary action. Any costs incurred by the city in connection with any emergency action may be assessed to the property as allowed by Minn. Stats. § 429.101. 
O.  Conflict with other laws. If the requirements of this section are in conflict with any other federal, state or local law, the stricter requirements shall be enforced. 
P.  Final "as-built" grade plan. Upon completion of final stabilization, under a permit or other approvals issued under this section, an "as-built" grading plan shall be required. This paragraph shall not apply to any single lot building permit project on a R-1, R-2 and Estate zoned property not in connection with a new development and not resulting in the addition of 10,000 square feet or more of new impervious surface on the site. The "as-built" grading plan shall depict the actual field grade conditions of the subject property, lot drainage patterns and locations and elevations of all surface and subsurface stormwater facilities and other utilities, and depict any changes from the original land disturbance plan submitted to and approved by the city hereunder. If building permits are requested prior to completion of the "as-built" grading plan, "as-built" grading plans shall be required for the individual lots associated with those building permits. All "as-built" grading plans shall be signed by a professional engineer licensed by the State of Minnesota, certifying the "as built" plan complies with the city approved plans under the permit issued hereunder and submitted to the city in a format as required by the city. 
Q.  Tree preservation requirements. Removal or loss of significant trees shall be in accordance with the city approved LDP and the tree preservation regulations in chapter 11 of this Code. 
R.  Fees. Fees associated with this section shall be set by a duly adopted resolution by city council. 
S.  Performance security. 
1.  The applicant shall provide security for the performance of its obligations under this section. The security shall be in a form as determined and required by the city, including cash or escrow deposit or letter of credit. The security, running to the city, shall be conditioned to pay the city for any cost or expense incurred by the city to bring the site into compliance with the stormwater management permit or other approvals issued in lieu thereof under this section, including any engineering, legal or administrative expenses. The security is required to secure completion of grading, site stabilization, restoration, and initial maintenance of any stormwater management facilities in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan required within City Code. 
2.  The security required hereunder shall be in the amount duly adopted by resolution of the city council. 
3.  The security shall cover the completion of site grading, stabilization, and restoration if the site is being graded, or two full calendar years subsequent to the completion of the stormwater management facilities as provided in the approved stormwater management plan if stormwater management facilities are constructed. The security will be released only upon inspection and written notice of conformance by the city. 
T.  Wetland conservation regulations. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Statutes and regulations (commonly referred to collectively as the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act), as amended through Laws 2001, are hereby incorporated herein and adopted by reference, including the penalty provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 535, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 2-17-2015)  
Secs. 4.35—4.39. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4.40. - Construction and maintenance of trailer coach parks. 
Subd. 1.  Purpose, construction and definitions. 
A.  Purpose. This section is enacted pursuant to Minn. Stats. § 412.221 and other applicable laws of the state for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, order, convenience and general welfare of the city by regulating the establishment, maintenance and occupancy of trailers and trailer coach parks and requiring special permits therefor. 
B.  Construction. This section shall be construed as setting forth minimum requirements for the establishment, maintenance and occupancy of trailers and trailer coach parks. Any other law containing greater requirements than herein contained shall be controlling to the extent only of such greater requirements. 
C.  Definitions. Whenever used in this section, the following definitions shall prevail unless a different meaning appears in context: 
1.  Trailer means any vehicle or structure accommodating office or living quarters so designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on highways or streets, propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power, except unoccupied camper-type trailers or vehicles or sports trailers. 
2.  Trailer coach park means any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which two or more trailer coaches are located. 
Subd. 2.  Storing of trailers. No person shall park or occupy any trailer on the premises of any occupied dwelling or in or on any lot which is not a part of the premises of any occupied dwelling, either of which is situated outside an approved trailer coach park, except the parking of only one unoccupied trailer in an accessory private garage building or to the rear of the front building line is permitted providing no living quarters shall be maintained or any business practiced in said trailer while said trailer is so parked or stored. 
Subd. 3.  Trailer coach park permits. 
A.  Prohibitions. No person shall hereinafter construct or establish a trailer coach park except after obtaining the special permit therefor as hereafter provided, unless at the time of passage of this section such trailer coach park was duly authorized and licensed by the state department of health. 
B.  Special permit. A special permit to construct and establish a trailer coach park, to be licensed by the state department of health, may be issued when approved by the council after a finding by the board that such trailer coach park when constructed or established complies with the standards, regulations and requirements applicable thereto as established by the department of health, and such further laws, standards and regulations applicable thereto enacted and required by the city and not in conflict with state law. 
C.  Considerations. The council in making its determination shall take into consideration the public health, safety and morals of the city, overall community planning, aesthetics and economic factors involving persons and property situated in the city. 
D.  Application and fees. Application for such permit shall be made to the council on forms supplied by the city and accompanied by a fee adopted by resolution of the council. 
E.  Annual compliance. After the original permit is issued and after the applicant is duly licensed with respect to such trailer coach park by the state, no license therefor shall be required by the city and no further license fee shall be due or collectible by the city, except as may be provided by state law. However, each year, for the purposes of demonstrating local compliance with the state law and the regulations of the department of health, the operator of such trailer coach park shall apply for and obtain from the city a certificate of continued operation to be issued to the operator without charge upon proof and display of a current and validly existing license for such trailer coach park issued by the state. Such certificate shall expire and be renewable in each year on February 15. 
F.  Noncompliance. Failure to obtain such certificate of continued operation is prima facie evidence of noncompliance with state law. 
Subd. 4.  Trailer coach park construction, design and operation requirements. 
A.  Building codes. The construction of a trailer coach park shall comply with the provisions of all applicable building codes. 
B.  Well-drained site. The trailer coach park shall be located on a well-drained site, and each trailer lot shall be graded so as to prevent the accumulation of stormwaters or other waters. All stormwater ponding or pooling areas shall be controlled by the operator by whatever means necessary to prevent the breeding of insects. 
C.  Water and sewer systems. The trailer coach park shall be serviced by the city water system and a sanitary sewer system connected to the city sanitary sewer system. The design and specifications of such systems must meet the approval of the city engineer. Hookup charges shall be determined upon issuance of the permit. 
D.  Other utilities. Other utilities such as electricity, natural gas and telephone shall be installed underground in an approved method. Such methods shall be under the requirements of the state and the city. 
E.  Lot area and setback lines. Each lot of a trailer coach park shall have a minimum gross area of not less than 5,000 square feet, with the lot width at the mobile home front facing the street of not less than 50 feet; a twin 10 or twin 12 trailer shall require a front of 60 feet. Each trailer placed upon a lot shall be placed with the following minimum setbacks: 
1.  Front: 15 feet from the sidewalk. 
2.  Rear: 15 feet from the lot line. 
3.  Sides: No trailer may be located less than 20 feet from the adjacent mobile home and/or structure attached to such mobile home. 
4.  Corner lot: A corner lot shall be the same as two front setbacks. 
F.  Curbs and gutters. All streets and roadways located within the trailer coach park shall have curb and gutter and shall be hard surfaced under specifications set forth by the city engineer. Minimum width between curb faces shall be 32 feet for collector streets and 28 feet for minor streets, unless projected traffic patterns and density shall determine a greater width, at which time the greater width shall be determined by the city engineer. Roadways shall have unobstructed access to a public street, road or alley. 
G.  Sidewalks. A concrete sidewalk not less than 30 inches wide shall be constructed adjacent to the street. A variance can be granted for lots located within areas such as culs-de-sac where, in the opinion of the planning commission, sidewalks shall serve no useful purpose. The variance shall require the council approval. 
H.  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided for at least two spaces per mobile home lot. Parking on streets and roadways shall be prohibited, and approved street signs prohibiting such shall be provided by the owner and installed under the direction of the city engineer. 
I.  Speed limit within park. The streets and roadways shall be designed in accordance with a 15-mile-per-hour speed limit. It is unlawful for any vehicle to travel in excess of 15 miles per hour within the limits of the trailer coach park. 
J.  Utility buildings. All trailer coach parks shall have utility buildings as are required by state law. 
K.  Recreation areas. All trailer coach parks shall have a recreation or park area or areas to be established and maintained within the trailer coach site of not less than 15 percent of the total trailer coach park area. Such plans for a recreation area shall be of an approved design. 
L.  Setback lines from property boundaries. Every trailer coach park shall provide for a minimum setback of at least 50 feet on all property boundaries. Such setbacks will be planted with a dense combination of trees, shrubs and bushes so as to form a buffer to adjoining property and state, county and city roadways. Plans for planting shall be approved by the planning commission. 
M.  Tiedowns. Each trailer coach lot shall be provided with tiedowns at the four corners of the trailer. Placement and design of such shall be presented to the planning commission for approval prior to construction. 
N.  Rubbish and garbage. A plan for rubbish and garbage disposal shall be presented to the council for approval before such trailer coach park begins operation. This plan shall be reviewed each year on or before December 1, and such changes as recommended by the city engineer will be considered by the council for approval. 
O.  Fire extinguishers. Each trailer home in a licensed trailer coach park shall be equipped with a fire-marshal-approved type fire extinguisher in usable condition. The occupant of the mobile home shall be responsible for providing such extinguisher for his trailer home. 
P.  Occupant density. No trailer home shall be inhabited by a greater number of occupants than for which it was designed. 
Q.  Vehicle storage. No boats, boat trailers, utility trailers, travel trailers or other vehicles than the personal automobile(s) of the occupants or their guests shall be parked on the trailer coach lot, and there shall be provided by the operator a separate area upon which these boats, trailers or other vehicles shall be parked or held. This area is to be located away from any public street and shall be densely screened in an approved manner. 
R.  Registration. Every person operating a trailer coach park shall provide and keep thereat a suitable guest register for the registration of all persons provided with accommodations thereat, and each person shall register therein as provided by state law. This register shall contain the following: (1) name and lot address of each occupant; (2) name and address of the owner of the trailer home; (3) make, model, year and license of each trailer home; (4) date of arrival and departure of each trailer home. This information shall be kept for at least three years after the date the occupant leaves the trailer coach park and shall be available at all times to law enforcement officers, health authorities and all other officials whose duties necessitate the acquisition of information contained in the register. 
S.  Running gear. The wheels and running gear shall be left on the trailer home located within the trailer coach park. 
T.  Lot landscaping. Except for the areas used for the trailer home, patio, sidewalk, or hard-surfaced off-street parking, the entire lot shall be sodded and maintained with grass. 
U.  Maintenance of trailer coach park areas. Trailer coach parks shall be maintained in an attractive state by the owner or operator so as not to become unsightly with respect to containers, junk, trash or any other unsightly or unsanitary conditions. No painting, washing or repairing of automobiles or any other vehicles shall be allowed on the streets or roadways of the trailer coach park. Any trailer home lot that is unoccupied and/or becomes in disrepair because of neglect by the occupant shall be the responsibility of the trailer coach park operator, who shall maintain and/or upgrade the lot to its original permit condition. 
Subd. 5.  Suspension. Violation of any state law, regulation or standard applicable to any such trailer park or as further provided in the City Code and as is not in conflict with state law shall subject the operator of such park to having his certificate of continued operation suspended while such violation exists. Further, such violation will authorize the city to move the state department of health to suspend, revoke or thereafter deny the state license then in existence or effect. The operation of a trailer coach park without a valid existing state license or contrary to this section is a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2, eff. 1-30-69; Code 1983, § 4.40, eff. 1-1-83) 
State Law reference— Manufactured home parks and camping areas, Minn. Stat. § 327.14 et seq.  
Secs. 4.41—4.49. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4.50. - Reserved. 
Codifier's note— Ord. No. 232, 2nd series, § 1, effective May 6, 1997, amended the Code by repealing former § 4.50 in its entirety. Former § 4.50 pertained to placement, erection and maintenance of wind energy conversion systems and radio and TV towers, and derived from the Code of 1983, § 4.50, effective January 1, 1983.  
Secs. 4.51—4.59. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4.60. - Construction headquarters and material storage areas. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of the City Code, a construction headquarters temporary structure or area shall be allowed in any residential plat then being developed. Such structure and/or storage materials shall be removed within 30 days after final city inspection of 85 percent of the total number of dwelling units in such plat. It is unlawful for any person to fail to timely remove any such structure or materials. 
(Ord. No. 9, 2nd series, eff. 4-27-84)  
Secs. 4.61—4.69. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4.70. - Outdoor swimming pools. 
Subd. 1.  Definition. For purposes of this section, an outdoor swimming pool is defined as any structure, basin, chamber or tank containing an artificial body of water for swimming, diving or recreational bathing used in connection with a single-family dwelling and having the depth of more than 24 inches at any point and a surface area exceeding 150 square feet. 
Subd. 2.  Fencing required around outdoor swimming pools. 
A.  All outdoor swimming pools existing and hereafter constructed shall be completely enclosed by a security fence or wall at least four but not more than six feet high and located at least four feet from the edge of the pool. The bottom of the fence or wall shall be no higher than four inches above the surface of the ground. Fence openings or points of entry to the pool area shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching lockable gates. 
B.  The security fence or wall shall be of the nonclimbing type so as to be impenetrable by toddlers and shall afford no external handholds or footholds. 
Subd. 3.  Exceptions. This section does not apply to aboveground outdoor swimming pools having at least four-foot high vertical or outward inclined sidewalls, provided that the pool has a self-closing and self-latching lockable gate or sole access is by means of a removable ladder, ramp or stairs, which must be removed when the pool is not in use. 
Subd. 4.  Existing regulations. The provisions of this section are in addition to and not in replacement of the provisions of the City Code relating to building and land use. 
(Ord. No. 70, 2nd series, eff. 11-25-88)  
Secs. 4.71—4.98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4.99. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful or performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure is prohibited or declared unlawful by a code adopted by reference by this chapter and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. 
(Code 1983, § 4.99, eff. 1-1-83)  
Chapter 5 - BEER, WINE AND LIQUOR LICENSING AND REGULATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Construction licensing and permits, ch. 4; other business regulation and licensing, ch. 6. 
State Law reference— Liquor Act, Minn. Stat. ch. 340A. 
 
Sec. 5.01. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, unless otherwise stated in specific sections, the following words and terms shall have the meanings stated: 
Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, beer, wine, and liquor as defined in this section. 
Applicant means any person making an application for a license under this chapter. 
Application means a form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in and completed by the applicant as his request for a license, furnished by the city and uniformly required as a prerequisite to the consideration of the issuance of a license for a business. 
Beer means malt liquor containing not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume nor more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight. This definition includes so-called "malt coolers" with the alcoholic content limits stated herein. 
Brewer means a person or entity who manufactures malt liquor for sale. 
Brewery means a place or operation where malt liquor is manufactured for sale. 
Brewpub means a restaurant establishment holding an on-sale intoxicating liquor license in which malt liquor is brewed or manufactured solely for sale and consumption on tap on the licensed premises that shall be owned by the brewer. 
Brewer taproom means an area on the premises of a brewery or on premises adjacent to a brewery owned by the brewer in which the brewer sells or otherwise provides exclusively malt liquor produced by the brewer for consumption within the brewer taproom. 
Casual restaurant shall have the meaning as the term is defined in the zoning regulations of chapter 11 of this Code. 
Church means a building which is principally used as a place where persons of the same faith regularly assemble for the public worship of God. 
Club means an incorporated organization organized under the laws of the state for civic, fraternal, social, or business purposes, for intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports, or a congressionally chartered veterans' organization, which: (1) has more than 50 members; (2) has owned or rented a building or space in a building for more than one year that is suitable and adequate for the accommodation of its members; (3) is directed by a board of directors, executive committee, or other similar body chosen by the members at a meeting held for that purpose. No member, officer, agent, or employee shall receive any profit from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club or their guests, beyond a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each year by the governing body. Such club or congressionally chartered veterans' organization must have been in existence for at least three years. 
Cocktail room means an area on the premises of a microdistillery or on premises adjacent to a microdistillery and owned by the distiller in which the distiller sells or otherwise provides exclusively distilled spirits produced by the distiller for consumption within the cocktail room. 
Commissioner means the state commissioner of public safety. 
Confection containing alcohol means any confection that contains or bears not more than five percent alcohol by volume where the alcohol is in a nonliquid form by reason of being mixed with other substances in the manufacture of the confection. 
Distilled spirits means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, and other distilled spirits, including all dilutions and mixtures thereof, for nonindustrial use. 
Farm winery means is a winery operated by the owner of a Minnesota farm and producing table, sparkling, or fortified wines from grapes, grape juice, other fruit bases, or honey with a majority of the ingredients grown or produced in Minnesota. 
Full-service restaurant shall have the meaning as the term is defined in the zoning regulations of chapter 11 of this Code. 
General food store means a business, including convenience stores/marts, primarily engaged in selling food and grocery supplies to the public for off premises consumption. 
Hotel means an establishment where food and lodging are regularly furnished to transients and which has: 
(1)  A dining room serving the general public at tables and having facilities for seating at least 30 guests at one time; and 
(2)  A minimum of 25 guest rooms. 
License means a document, issued by the city, to an applicant permitting him to carry on and transact the business stated therein. 
License fee means the money paid to the city pursuant to an application and prior to issuance of a license to transact and carry on the business stated therein. 
Licensed premises means the premises described in the issued license. In the case of a restaurant or a club licensed for on-sales of alcoholic beverages and located on a golf course, "licensed premises" means the entire golf course except for areas where motor vehicles are regularly parked or operated. 
Licensee means an applicant who, pursuant to his approved application, holds a valid, current, unexpired license, which has neither been revoked nor is then under suspension, from the city for carrying on the business stated therein. 
Liqueur-filled candy means any confectionery containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume in liquid form that is intended for or capable of beverage use. 
Liquor means ethyl alcohol and distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous and malt beverages containing in excess of 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight. This definition includes so-called "wine coolers" and "malt coolers" with the alcoholic content limits stated herein. 
Liquor store means an establishment used exclusively for off-sale of liquor except for the incidental sale of ice, tobacco, beer, beverages for mixing with liquor, soft drinks, cork extraction devices, and books and videos on the use of alcoholic beverages in the preparation of food. 
Malt liquor means any beer, ale, or other beverage made from malt by fermentation and containing not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume. 
Manufacturer means every person who, by any process of manufacture, fermenting, brewing, distilling, refining, rectifying, blending, or by the combination of different materials, prepares or produces alcoholic beverages for sale. 
Microdistillery means a distillery operated within the state producing premium, distilled spirits in total quantity not to exceed 40,000 proof gallons in a calendar year. 
Minor means any natural person who has not attained the age of 21 years. 
Off-sale means the sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for consumption off the licensed premises only. 
On-sale means the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed premises only. 
Package and original package mean any container or receptacle holding alcoholic beverages, which container or receptacle is corked, capped or sealed by a manufacturer or wholesaler. 
Proof gallon means one liquid gallon of distilled spirits that is 50 percent alcohol at 60 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Restaurant means an establishment located at a permanent location, other than a hotel, under the control of a single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the premises and served at tables to the general public, and that holds a valid food and beverage service establishment license, as a small, medium, or large establishment, issued by the Minnesota Department of Health. 
Sale, sell and sold mean all barters and all manners or means of furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons, including such furnishing in violation or evasion of law. 
Self-serve draught malt liquor dispenser means a system of automation or electronics that enables a patron of an establishment to draw, pour or serve malt liquor beverage from a draught tap system. 
Wholesaler means any person engaged in the business of selling alcoholic beverages to a licensee from a stock maintained in a warehouse. 
Wine means the product made from the normal alcoholic fermentation of grapes, including still wine, sparkling and carbonated wine, made from condensed grape must, wine made from other agricultural products than sound, ripe grapes, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider, perry and sake, in each instance containing not less than one-half of one percent nor more than 24 percent alcohol by volume for nonindustrial use. Wine does not include distilled spirits, as defined in Minn. Stat. § 340A.101, subd. 9. 
(Code 1983, § 5.01, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 31, 2nd series, eff. 6-6-86; Ord. No. 80, 2nd series, eff. 6-30-89; Ord. No. 103, 2nd series, eff. 7-27-90; Ord. No. 162, 2nd series, eff. 4-30-93; Ord. No. 357, 2nd series, eff. 4-17-03; Ord. No. 392, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 8-20-05; Ord. No. 501, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 5-1-2012; Ord. No. 530, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 6-3-2014; Ord. No. 546, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 8-3-2015; Ord. No. 556, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2 eff. 12-20-2016; Ord. No. 562, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 565, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 8-4-2017)  
Sec. 5.02. - Applications and licenses under this chapter—Procedure and administration. 
Subd. 1. Application. All applications shall be made at the office of the city clerk-treasurer upon forms prescribed by the city or, if by the state, then together with such additional information as the council may desire. Information required may vary with the type of business organization making application. All questions asked or information required by the application forms shall be answered fully and completely by the applicant. All applications shall be subject to a criminal background investigation. 
Subd. 2.  False statements. It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false statement or omission upon any application form. Any false statement in such application or any willful omission to state any information called for on such application form shall, upon discovery of such falsehood, work an automatic refusal of license or, if already issued, shall render any license issued pursuant thereto void and of no effect to protect the applicant from prosecution for violation of this chapter or any part thereof. 
Subd. 3.  Application and investigation fees. At the time of the initial application, an applicant for an on-sale liquor, wine or beer license or off-sale liquor or beer license shall pay to the city the sum of $500.00 as a non-refundable base application and investigation fee. An additional fee of $200.00 for each person or entity beyond five having an interest in the proposed licensed establishment shall be required. An escrow of $1,000.00 for applicants residing outside of the state shall be required to reimburse the city for out-of-pocket investigative costs and the escrow shall be released upon payment in full of actual investigation costs. A non-refundable investigation fee of $300.00 shall be paid to the city for all changes in managers. No such fee shall be required of an applicant for a temporary liquor or beer license. 
Subd. 4.  Action. 
A.  Granting. The council may approve any application for the period of the remainder of the then-current license year or for the entire ensuing license year. All applications including proposed license periods must be consistent with this chapter. Prior to consideration of any application for a license, the applicant shall pay the license fee and, if applicable, pay the investigation fee. Upon rejection of any application for a license or upon withdrawal of an application before approval of the issuance by the council, the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. Failure to pay any portion of a fee when due shall be cause for revocation. 
B.  Issuing. If an application is approved, the city clerk-treasurer shall forthwith issue a license pursuant thereto in the form prescribed by the city or the proper department of the state, as the case may be, and upon payment of the license fee. All licenses shall be on a calendar-year basis unless otherwise specified herein. For licenses issued and which are to become effective other than on the first day of the license year, the fee to be paid with the application shall be a pro rata share of the annual license fee. Licenses shall be valid only at one location and on the premises therein described. 
C.  License refund in certain cases. A pro rata share of an annual license fee for a license to sell liquor or beer, either on-sale or off-sale, shall be refunded to the licensee or to his estate, if: (1) the business ceases to operate because of destruction or damage; (2) the licensee dies; (3) the business ceases to be lawful for a reason other than a license revocation or suspension; or (4) the licensee ceases to carry on the licensed business under the license. 
D.  Transfer. No license shall be transferable between persons or to a different location. Any change in individual ownership or substitution of partners is a transfer. However, a change in corporate name of a beer licensee shall not be considered a transfer if at least 90 percent of the issued and outstanding shares are in the same ownership as at the time of original application and section 5.05 has not been violated. It is unlawful to make any transfer in violation of this subparagraph. 
E.  Refusal and termination. The council may, in its sole discretion and for any reasonable cause, refuse to grant any application. No license shall be granted to a person of questionable moral character or business reputation. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or revocation. 
F.  Violation. For this section, a violation shall be defined as any failure to comply with a statute, regulation or provision of the City Code relating to alcoholic beverages. An officer of the police department or an agent of the state liquor control commission who becomes aware of a violation, regardless of whether any action is taken to issue an oral or written warning, a citation or a complaint, shall prepare a written report of the violation. One copy of the report shall be given to the chief of police, the licensee, and the city clerk, respectively. A violation by an officer, employee or agent of the licensee shall be deemed to be a violation by the licensee. 
G.  Penalty. Upon a finding that the licensee has sold alcoholic beverages to another retail licensee for the purpose of resale; purchased alcoholic beverages from another retail licensee for the purposes of resale; conducted or permitted the conduct of gambling on the licensed premises in violation of the law; failed to remove or dispose of alcoholic beverages when ordered by the commissioner to do so under Minnesota Statutes; or failed to comply with any other applicable state statute or rule, or Code provision herein relating to alcoholic beverages, a civil penalty of $500.00 for the first violation, $1,000.00 for the second violation within a 24-month period, $1,500.00 and a seven-day suspension of license for a third violation within a 24-month period, and $2,000.00 and a 30-day suspension of license for a fourth or more violation within a 36-month period shall be imposed upon the licensee who shall pay the civil penalty within 30 days of the date of a notice from the city. No suspension of a license or civil penalty imposed hereunder shall take effect until the licensee has been given an opportunity for a hearing before a hearing officer duly appointed by the city administrator as provided in this section. 
Any licensee found to have a fourth or more violation within a 36-month period shall appear for a hearing before the city council for consideration of revocation or additional days of suspension of the licensee's license. The city clerk shall set the date and time of the council's hearing for any regular council meeting. 
H.  [Failure to pay.] If the licensee fails to pay the civil penalty within 30 days of notice, the licensee's license shall be suspended until the civil penalty, plus any surcharge or interest for late payment, is paid in full. A licensee subject to suspension under this paragraph shall first have a right to a hearing before the hearing officer in accordance with the hearing provisions set forth herein, provided the exclusive issue for hearing is the suspension of license for nonpayment of the civil penalty. 
I.  Hearing. A hearing before the hearing officer shall be pursuant to the Minnesota Administrative Procedure Act. If the licensee files a request for hearing with the city clerk within ten business days of the date of the notice of the license action or civil penalty, the city clerk shall schedule a hearing before a hearing officer. In the event that the licensee fails to timely request a hearing or fails to appear at a scheduled hearing, the licensee shall be deemed to have waived his/her right to a hearing and shall be subject to the license action or civil penalties imposed hereunder. 
If the licensee timely requests a hearing, the hearing shall be held before the hearing officer within 14 days of the date the licensee files a request for hearing with the city clerk. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue written findings of fact and conclusions as to whether a violation has occurred and the penalty imposed as authorized herein. Any hearing before the city council for consideration of additional penalties as prescribed herein shall be in addition and subsequent to any hearing before the hearing officer. 
Any appeal of the hearing officer's or city council's decision under this section shall be pursuant to a petition for writ of certiorari to the Minnesota Court of Appeals in accordance with Minnesota Statutes governing administrative procedures and the Minnesota Rules of Civil Appellate Procedure. 
J.  Additional restrictions. As additional restrictions or regulations on licensees under this chapter, and in addition to grounds for revocation or suspension stated in the City Code or statute, the following shall also be grounds for such action: (1) that the licensee suffered or permitted illegal acts upon licensed premises unrelated to the sale of beer, wine or liquor; (2) that the licensee had knowledge of such illegal acts upon licensed premises, but failed to report the same to police; (3) that the licensee failed or refused to cooperate fully with police in investigating such alleged illegal acts upon licensed premises; or (4) that the activities of the licensee created a serious danger to public health, safety, or welfare. 
K.  Corporate applicants and licensees. A corporate applicant, at the time of application, shall furnish the city with a list of all persons that have an interest in such corporation and the extent of such interest. The list shall name all shareholders and show the number of shares held by each, either individually or beneficially for others. It is the duty of each corporate licensee to notify the city clerk-treasurer in writing of any change in legal ownership or beneficial interest in such corporation or in such shares. Any change in the ownership or beneficial interest in the shares entitled to be voted at a meeting of the shareholders of a corporate licensee, which results in the change of voting control of the corporation by the persons owning the shares therein, shall be deemed equivalent to a transfer of the license issued to the corporation, and any such license shall be revoked 30 days after any such change in ownership or beneficial interest of shares unless the council has been notified of the change in writing and has approved it by appropriate action. The council or any officer of the city designated by it may at any reasonable time examine the stock transfer records and minute books of any corporate licensee in order to verify and identify the shareholders, and the council or its designated officer may examine the business records of any other licensee to the extent necessary to disclose the interest which persons other than the licensee have in the licensed business. The council may revoke any license issued upon its determination that a change of ownership of shares in a corporate licensee or any change of ownership of any interest in the business of any other licensee has actually resulted in the change of control of the licensed business so as materially to affect the integrity and character of its management and its operation, but no such action shall be taken until after a hearing by the council on notice to the licensee. 
Subd. 5.  Duplicate licenses. Duplicates of all original licenses under this chapter may be issued by the city clerk-treasurer without action by the council, upon licensee's affidavit that the original has been lost, and upon payment of a fee of $2.00 for issuance of the duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked "Duplicate." 
Subd. 6.  Posting. All licensees shall conspicuously post their licenses in their places of business. 
Subd. 7.  Resident manager or agent. Before a license is issued under this chapter to an individual who is a nonresident of the state, to more than one individual whether or not they are residents of the state, or to a corporation, partnership, or association, the applicant or applicants shall appoint in writing a natural person who is a resident of the state as its manager or agent. Such resident manager or agent shall, by the terms of his written consent (1) take full responsibility for the conduct of the licensed premises, and (2) serve as agent for service of notices and other process relating to the license. Such manager or agent must be a person who, by reason of age, character, reputation, and other attributes, could qualify individually as a licensee. If such manager or agent ceases to be a resident of the state or ceases to act in such capacity for the licensee without appointment of a successor, the license issued pursuant to such appointment shall be subject to revocation or suspension. 
Subd. 8.  Persons disqualified. 
A.  No license under this chapter may be issued to: (1) a person not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien; (2) a person who within five years of the license application has been convicted of a willful violation of a federal or state law or local ordinance governing the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession for sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages; (3) a person who has had an alcoholic beverage license revoked within five years of the license application, or to any person who at the time of the violation owns any interest, whether as a holder of more than five percent of the capital stock of a corporate licensee, as a partner or otherwise, in the premises or in the business conducted thereon, or to a corporation, partnership, association, enterprise, business, or firm in which any such person is in any manner interested; (4) a person under the age of 21 years; or (5) a person not of good moral character and repute. 
B.  No person holding a license from the commissioner as a manufacturer, brewer or wholesaler may have a direct or indirect interest, in whole or in part, in a business holding an alcoholic beverage license from the city, except a license may be issued to a brewer or manufacturer in connection only with the operation of a brewpub, brewer taproom, or microdistillery cocktail room subject to the regulations provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 5.02, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 5, 2nd series, eff. 11-8-83; Ord. No. 31, 2nd series, eff. 6-6-86; Ord. No. 39, 2nd series, eff. 4-17-87; Ord. No. 58, 2nd series, eff. 6-24-88; Ord. No. 63, 2nd series, eff. 6-24-88; Ord. No. 65, 2nd series, eff. 8-26-88; Ord. No. 80, 2nd series, eff. 6-30-89; Ord. No. 139, 2nd series, eff. 5-15-92; Ord. No. 327, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 1-17-02; Ord. No. 345, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 6-13-02; Ord. No. 368, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 11-27-03; Ord. No. 392, 2nd series, § 3, eff. 8-20-05; Ord. No. 447, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 11-17-09; Ord. No. 518, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 546, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 8-3-2015) 
Cross reference— Administration and general government, ch. 2.  
Sec. 5.03. - Renewal of licenses. 
Applications for renewal of all licenses under this chapter shall be made at least 60 days prior to the date of expiration of the license and shall contain such information as is required by the city. This time requirement may be waived by the council for good and sufficient cause. 
(Code 1983, § 5.03, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 31, 2nd series, eff. 6-6-86)  
Sec. 5.04. - Delinquent taxes and charges. 
No license under this chapter shall be granted for operation on any premises upon which taxes, assessments, or installments thereof, or other financial claims of the city, are owed by the applicant and are delinquent and unpaid. For the purpose of this section, "applicant" includes persons and related persons, (1) owning at least a 50 percent beneficial interest in the proposed license or in the entity making the application, and (2) at least an undivided one-half interest in the premises proposed to be licensed, or at least a 50 percent beneficial interest in the entity owning such premises. 
(Code 1983, § 5.04, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 5.05. - Limitation on ownership. 
No person shall be granted an off-sale liquor license at more than one location. For the purpose of this section, any person owning an interest of five percent, or more, of the entity to which the license is issued, or if such ownership is by a member of any immediate family living in the same household, as the licensee, that person shall be deemed to be a licensee. 
(Ord. No. 103, 2nd series, eff. 7-27-90; Ord. No. 233, 2nd series, eff. 6-3-97)  
Sec. 5.06. - Conditional licenses. 
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the council may, upon a finding of the necessity therefor, place such special conditions and restrictions, in addition to those stated in this chapter, upon any license as it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and justified. 
(Code 1983, § 5.06, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 5.07. - Premises licensed. 
A license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid only for the licensed premises, and all transactions relating to a sale under the license must take place on the licensed premises as described on the license. 
For purposes of this section, "licensed premises" shall consist of the building or portion of a building and any outdoor seating area that is compact, contiguous and attached to the building or portion of the building to which the license applies, provided the outdoor seating area is separated and delineated by a permanent wall or fence with ingress thereto only from the licensed building. Upon application, the city council may, by resolution, temporarily extend the licensed premises to include any outdoor area located on the property of the licensed premises subject to the provisions of chapters 10 and 11 of this Code and provided that the following terms and conditions are met: 
1.  The outdoor area proposed for inclusion into the licensed premises is contiguous with the licensed premises; 
2.  The outdoor area serves the licensed premises; 
3.  If the outdoor area proposed for inclusion into the licensed premises is a parking lot, the required number of parking spaces for the property still remain available for parking use; 
4.  The outdoor area where alcoholic beverages are served is set off by a temporary barrier from the remainder of the outdoor area where beverages are not served; 
5.  All persons who are 21 years of age or older shall be identified by a colored wristband within the delineated area of the outdoor area where alcoholic beverages are served; 
6.  Admittance to the delineated outdoor area where alcoholic beverages are served shall be controlled by the licensee or their delegate who is at least 18 years of age, ensuring that all those persons who are 21 years of age or older are identified by a colored wristband; 
7.  The licensee shall provide the city with proof of liability insurance as required by Minn. Stat. ch. 340A. The proof of liability insurance shall specifically set forth that the premises insured includes the portion of the outdoor area where alcoholic beverages are served; 
8.  Any outdoor use of electronic sound system or audio equipment shall be in accordance with chapter 10 of this Code if the use of such equipment will occur after 10:00 p.m.; 
9.  The licensee shall comply with all provisions of this chapter, the City Code, and state laws in connection with the sale of alcoholic beverages within the temporary extended licensed premises area; and 
10.  Such other and further provisions as the city council determines are necessary to ensure the health and welfare of citizens and property. 
(Code 1983, § 5.07, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 444, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 7-21-09)  
Sec. 5.08. - Unlawful acts. 
Subd. 1.  Consumption. It is unlawful for any person to consume, or any licensee to permit consumption of, beer, wine or liquor on licensed premises more than 20 minutes after the hour when a sale thereof can legally be made. 
Subd. 2.  Removal of containers. It is unlawful for any on-sale licensee to permit any glass, bottle or other container, containing beer, wine or liquor in any quantity, to remain upon any table, bar, stool or other place where customers are served, more than 20 minutes after the hour when a sale thereof can legally be made. 
Subd. 3.  Closing. It is unlawful for any person, other than an on-sale licensee's bona fide employee actually engaged in the performance of his duties, to be on premises licensed under this chapter more than 30 minutes after the legal time for making licensed sales. 
Subd. 4.  Storage of alcohol on licensed premises. No alcohol on an on-sale licensed premises shall be stored in any area of the licensed premises that is open and accessible to the public or in any manner which a person may have access to alcohol without the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee. All alcohol provided or made available to patrons of the licensed premises shall require the actual physical exchange of the alcohol from the licensee or licensee's employee to the patron. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, malt liquor may be provided to and directly accessible by patrons at an on-sale intoxicating liquor licensed premises through a self-serve draught malt liquor dispenser, provided the use of the dispenser meets all the requirements and regulations thereof set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 5.08, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 546, 2nd series, § 8, eff. 8-3-2015; Ord. No. 556, 2nd series, § 3, eff. 12-20-2016)  
Sec. 5.09. - Conduct on licensed premises. 
Except as herein provided, every licensee under this chapter shall be responsible for the conduct of his place of business and shall maintain conditions of sobriety and order therein. 
(Code 1983, § 5.09, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 5.10. - Sale by employee. 
Any sale of an alcoholic beverage in or from any premises licensed under this chapter by any employee authorized to make such sale in or from such place is the act of the employer as well as of the person actually making the sale; and every such employer is liable to all of the penalties, except criminal penalties, provided by law for such sale, equally with the person actually making the sale. 
(Ord. No. 65, 2nd series, eff. 8-26-88)  
Sec. 5.11. - License condition and unlawful act. 
Subd. 1.  All premises licensed under this chapter shall at all times be open to inspection by any police officer to determine whether or not this chapter and all other laws are being observed. All persons, as a condition to being issued such license, consent to such inspection by such officers and without a warrant for searches or seizures. 
Subd. 2.  It is unlawful for any licensee, or agent or employee of a licensee, to hinder or prevent a police officer from making such inspection. 
(Code 1983, § 5.11, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 5.12. - Minors as defined in section 5.01—Unlawful acts. 
Subd. 1.  Consumption. It is unlawful for any: 
A.  Licensee to permit any minor to consume alcoholic beverages on licensed premises. 
B.  Minor to consume alcoholic beverages except in the household of the minor's parent or guardian, and then only with the consent of such parent or guardian. 
Subd. 2.  Purchasing. It is unlawful for any: 
A.  Person to sell, barter, furnish, or give alcoholic beverages to a minor unless such person is the parent or guardian of the minor, and then only for consumption in the household of such parent or guardian. 
B.  Minor to purchase or attempt to purchase any alcoholic beverage. 
C.  Person to induce a minor to purchase or procure any alcoholic beverage. 
Subd. 3.  Possession. It is unlawful for a minor to possess any alcoholic beverage with the intent to consume it at a place other than the household of the minor's parent or guardian. Possession of an alcoholic beverage by a minor at a place other than the household of the parent or guardian is prima facie evidence of intent to consume it at a place other than the household of his parent or guardian. 
Subd. 4.  Entering licensed premises. It is unlawful for any minor, as defined in this chapter, to enter licensed premises for the purpose of purchasing or consuming any alcoholic beverage. It is not unlawful for any person who has attained the age of 18 years to enter licensed premises for the following purposes: (1) to perform work for the establishment, including the serving of alcoholic beverages, unless otherwise prohibited by statute; (2) to consume meals; and (3) to attend social functions that are held in a portion of the establishment where liquor is not sold. It is unlawful for a licensee to permit a person under the age of 18 years to enter licensed premises unless attending a social event at which alcoholic beverages are not served or in the company of a parent or guardian. 
Subd. 5.  Misrepresentation of age. It is unlawful for a minor to misrepresent his age for the purpose of purchasing an alcoholic beverage. 
Subd. 6.  Proof of age. Proof of age for purchasing or consuming alcoholic beverages may be established only by a valid driver's license or identification card issued by this state, another state, or a province of Canada, and including the photograph and date of birth of the licensed person, or by a valid military identification card issued by the United States Department of Defense or, in the case of a foreign national, from a nation other than Canada, by a valid passport. 
(Code 1983, § 5.12, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 31, 2nd series, eff. 6-6-86; Ord. No. 48, 2nd series, eff. 6-12-87; Ord. No. 181, 2nd series, eff. 6-24-94)  
Sec. 5.13. - Financial responsibility of licensees. 
Subd. 1.  Proof. No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued or renewed unless and until the applicant has provided proof of financial responsibility imposed by statutes, by filing with the city a certificate that there is in effect an insurance policy or pool providing minimum coverage's of (1) $50,000.00 because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence and, subject to the limit for one person, in the amount of $100,000.00 because of bodily injury to two or more persons in any one occurrence and in the amount of $10,000.00 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one occurrence; and (2) $50,000.00 for loss of means of support of any one person in any one occurrence, and, subject to the limit for one person, $100,000.00 for loss of means of support of two or more persons in any one occurrence; and $50,000.00 for other pecuniary loss of any one person in any one occurrence, and $100,000.00 for other pecuniary loss of two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
Subd. 2.  Exception . This section does not apply to on-sale beer licensees with sales of beer of less than $25,000.00 for the preceding year nor to off-sale beer licensees with sales of beer of less than $50,000.00 for the preceding year nor does it apply to holders of on-sale wine licenses with sales of wine of less than $25,000.00 for the preceding year. An affidavit of the licensee shall be required to establish the exemption under this subdivision. 
Subd. 3.  Documents submitted to commissioner. All proofs of financial responsibility and exemption affidavits filed with the city under this section shall be submitted by the city to the state commissioner of public safety. 
(Code 1983, § 5.13, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 31, 2nd series, eff. 6-6-86; Ord. No. 461, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 9-21-10; Ord. No. 495, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 5.14. - Insurance certificate requirements. 
Whenever an insurance certificate is required by this chapter, the applicant shall file with the city clerk a certificate of insurance showing (1) that the limits are at least as high as required in this chapter; (2) that coverage is effective for at least the license term approved; and (3) that the insurer shall provide 60 days' written notice of policy cancellation to the city, unless policy cancellation is for nonpayment of premium in which case the insurer shall provide ten days' written notice of policy cancellation to the city. Cancellation or termination of such coverage shall be grounds for license revocation. 
(Code 1983, § 5.14, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 11, 2nd series, eff. 4-27-84; Ord. No. 461, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 9-21-10)  
Sec. 5.15. - Gambling prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any licensee to keep, possess, or operate or permit the keeping, possession, or operation on licensed premises of dice or any other gambling device or permit raffles to be conducted, except as are licensed by the state gambling control board and then only except as it complies with the established policy of the city. Pull-tab sales by a nonprofit organization may be conducted in an area leased by said organization separate from the bar or service area. Pull-tab sales shall be made by a member or employee of the licensed organization only. Liquor sales and individuals less than the minimum age for consumption of intoxicating liquor shall not be allowed in the pull-tab area. 
(Code 1983, § 5.15, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 40, 2nd series, eff. 11-7-86)  
Sec. 5.16. - Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages on streets, public property, and private parking lots to which the public has access. 
It is unlawful for any person to consume or possess in an unsealed container any alcoholic beverage, except as provided herein, on any (1) city park, (2) street, (3) public property, or (4) private parking lot to which the public has access, except on such premises when and where permission has been specifically granted or licensed by the council. Beer and malt liquor in nonglass containers are allowed in park or recreational areas. However, it is unlawful for any person to bring or possess beer or malt liquor into such an area in keg, barrel or case lot (24 cans) quantity. This section shall not apply to the possession of an unsealed container in a motor vehicle when the container is kept in the trunk of such vehicle, if it is equipped with a trunk, or kept in some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if the motor vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. For the purpose of this section, a utility or glove compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver or passengers. 
(Code 1983, § 5.16, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 59, 2nd series, eff. 6-24-88) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks generally, ch. 7.  
Sec. 5.17. - Alcoholic beverages in certain buildings and grounds. 
It is unlawful for any person to introduce upon or have in his possession upon or in any public elementary or secondary school ground or any public elementary or secondary school building any alcoholic beverage, except for experiments in laboratories and except for those organizations who have been issued temporary licenses to sell alcoholic beverages, and for any person to possess alcoholic beverages as a result of a purchase from those organizations holding temporary licenses. 
(Ord. No. 139, 2nd series, eff. 5-15-92)  
Sec. 5.18. - Workers' compensation. 
No license to operate a business shall be issued by the city until the applicant presents his employer's tax identification number and acceptable evidence of compliance with the workers' compensation insurance coverage requirements of Minnesota Statutes by providing the name of the insurance company, the policy number, and dates of coverage, or the permit to self insure. 
(Ord. No. 116, 2nd series, eff. 6-14-91)  
Sec. 5.19. - Confections containing alcohol. 
It is unlawful for any person to sell a confection containing alcohol to any person under the age of 21 years. For purposes of this section, "confection containing alcohol" does not include "liqueur-filled candy" as herein defined. 
(Ord. No. 162, 2nd series, eff. 4-30-93)  
Secs. 5.20—5.29. - Reserved.  
Sec. 5.30. - Beer license required. 
It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any pretense or by any device, to sell, barter, keep for sale, or otherwise dispose of beer, as part of a commercial transaction, without a license therefor from the city. This section shall not apply to sales by manufacturers to wholesalers or to sales by wholesalers to persons holding beer licenses from the city. Any person licensed to sell liquor at on-sale shall not be required to obtain an on-sale beer license, and may sell beer on-sale without an additional license. Any person licensed to sell liquor off-sale shall not be required to obtain an off-sale beer license, and may sell beer off-sale without an additional license. 
(Code 1983, § 5.30, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 31, 2nd series, eff. 6-6-86)  
Sec. 5.31. - Beer license fees. 
Subd. 1.  The annual on-sale beer license fee is $450.00. 
Subd. 2.  The annual off-sale beer license fee is $100.00. 
Subd. 3.  The daily temporary on-sale beer license fee is $25.00. 
(Code 1983, § 5.31, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 28, 2nd series, eff. 2-7-86; Ord. No. 109, 2nd series, eff. 12-28-90; Ord. No. 368, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 11-27-03) 
Codifier's note— Minn. Stat. § 340A.408 requires a 30-day notice mailed to all affected licensees of an increase in license fees, and a hearing held.  
Sec. 5.32. - Temporary beer license. 
Subd. 1.  Applicant. A club or charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization, having its registered office or principal place of activity within the city, shall qualify for a temporary on-sale beer license, for serving beer on and off school grounds, and in and out of school buildings. 
Subd. 2.  Conditions. 
A.  An application for a temporary license shall state the exact dates and place of proposed temporary sale. 
B.  No applicant shall qualify for a temporary license for more than a total of four days in any calendar year. 
C.  The application for and issuance of a temporary on-sale beer license shall be subject to the regulations for temporary on-sale beer and liquor licenses as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
Subd. 3.  Insurance required. The council may, but at no time shall it be under any obligation whatsoever to, grant a temporary beer license on premises owned or controlled by the city. Any such license may be conditioned, qualified, or restricted as the council sees fit. If the premises to be licensed are owned or under the control of the city, the applicant shall file with the city, prior to the issuance of the license, a certificate of liability insurance coverage in at least the sum of $300,000.00 for injury to any one person, $600,000.00 for injury to more than one person and $25,000.00 for property damage, naming the city as an insured during the license period. 
(Code 1983, § 5.32, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 359, 2nd series, eff. 7-10-02; Ord. No. 372, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-12-04)  
Sec. 5.33. - Beer license restrictions and regulations. 
Subd. 1.  Reserved. 
Subd. 2.  No licensee shall, during the effective period of such license, be the owner or holder of a federal retail liquor dealer's tax stamp for the sale of intoxicating liquor, unless such owner or holder also holds a liquor license from the city, and ownership or holding thereof shall be grounds for immediate revocation, without a hearing. 
Subd. 3.  No license shall be granted to a wholesaler or manufacturer of beer or to anyone holding a financial interest in such manufacture or wholesaling, except a license may be issued to a brewer or manufacturer in connection solely with the operation of a brewpub subject to the regulations provided in this chapter. 
Subd. 4.  No person who has not attained the age of 18 years shall be employed to sell or serve beer in any on-sale establishment. 
Subd. 5.  No license shall be granted for a proposed licensed premise that does not meet the special use setback, as defined in the zoning regulations of this Code, from any nursery, elementary or secondary school structure; or church structure, except as provided herein. A license may be granted for a proposed licensed premise not meeting the special use setback, as defined in the zoning regulations of this Code, from any of the above listed uses when the proposed licensed premises and listed uses are located within the same zoning district and planned commercial development, or the proposed license is for off-sale exclusively. 
Subd. 6.  On-sale licenses shall be granted only to bona fide clubs, restaurants, golf courses/clubs, and hotels. Off-sale licenses may be granted to liquor stores, brewpubs operated in connection with a restaurant establishment, and general food stores. 
Subd. 7.  Every license shall be granted subject to the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable provisions of the City Code and other laws relating to the operation of licensee's business. 
(Code 1983, § 5.33, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 31, 2nd series, adopted 5-6-86; Ord. No. 48, 2nd series, eff. 6-12-87; Ord. No. 103, 2nd series, eff. 7-27-90; Ord. No. 313, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 7-19-01; Ord. No. 357, 2nd series, eff. 4-17-03; Ord. No. 392, 2nd series, §§ 2, 4, eff. 8-20-05; Ord. No. 417, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 12-8-07; Ord. No. 431, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 11-6-08; Ord. No. 501, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 5-1-2012; Ord. No. 552, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 6-7-2016; Ord. No. 565, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 8-4-2017)  
Sec. 5.34. - Hours and days of beer sales. 
No on-sale or off-sale of beer shall be made between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through Saturday, nor between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday. 
(Code 1983, § 5.34, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 65, 2nd series, eff. 8-26-88; Ord. No. 372, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 2-12-04)  
Sec. 5.35. - Unlawful acts (beer). 
It is unlawful for any: 
Subd. 1.  Person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal sale or purchase of beer. 
Subd. 2.  Licensee to sell or serve beer to any person who is obviously intoxicated. 
Subd. 3.  Licensee to sell beer on any day or during any hour when such sales are not permitted by law. 
Subd. 4.  Licensee to allow consumption of beer on licensed premises on any day when sales of beer are not permitted by law. 
Subd. 5.  Person to purchase beer on any day or during any hour when sales of beer are not permitted by law. 
(Code 1983, § 5.35, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 31, 2nd series, eff. 6-6-86)  
Secs. 5.36—5.49. - Reserved.  
Sec. 5.50. - Liquor license required. 
It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any pretense or by any device, to sell, barter, keep for sale, or otherwise dispose of liquor, as part of a commercial transaction, without a license therefor from the city. This section shall not apply (1) to such potable liquors as are intended for therapeutic purposes and not as a beverage, (2) to industrial alcohol and its compounds not prepared or used for beverage purposes, (3) to wine in the possession of a person duly licensed under this chapter as an on-sale wine licensee, (4) to sales by manufacturers to wholesalers duly licensed as such by the commissioner, or (5) to sales by wholesalers to persons holding liquor licenses from the city. Any person licensed to sell liquor at on-sale shall not be required to obtain an on-sale beer license, and may sell beer on-sale without an additional license. Any person licensed to sell liquor off-sale shall not be required to obtain an off-sale beer license, and may sell beer off-sale without an additional license. 
(Code 1983, § 5.50, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 31, 2nd series, eff. 6-6-86)  
Sec. 5.51. - Liquor license fees. 
Subd. 1.  The annual on-sale liquor license fee shall be in an amount as set forth below, to be determined based upon the licensee's total gross liquor sales, on which a licensee is required to pay liquor tax as shown on the licensee's Minnesota sales and use tax returns for the most recent preceding 12-month period beginning September 1 and ending August 31: 
Liquor sales under $275,000.00 	$5,300.00 
Liquor sales $275,001.00—$550,000.00 	$6,300.00 
Liquor sales over $550,000.00 	$7,300.00 
 
The licensee shall provide legible copies of the licensee's Minnesota Sales and Use Tax Returns, as verified by a certified public accountant, and a statement, certified by the licensee and a certified public accountant, setting forth the total gross sales and total food sales of the licensed establishment for the preceding 12-month period beginning September 1 through August 31. 
Subd. 2.  The annual off-sale liquor license fee is $200.00. 
Subd. 3.  The annual Sunday liquor license fee is $200.00. 
Subd. 4.  The annual club on-sale liquor license fee is $300.00 for a club with a membership of 200 or less; $500.00 for a club with a membership of between 201 and 500; $650.00 for a club with a membership of between 501 and 1,000; $800.00 for a club with a membership of between 1,001 and 2,000; $1,000.00 for a club with a membership of between 2,001 and 4,000; $2,000.00 for a club with a membership of between 4,001 and 6,000; and $3,000.00 for a club with a membership of more than 6,000. 
Subd. 5.  The daily sports or convention facilities liquor license fee is $50.00. The annual sports or convention facilities liquor license fee is $600.00. 
Subd. 6.  The temporary liquor license fee is $150.00. 
(Code 1983, § 5.51, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 99, 2nd series, eff. 6-15-90; Ord. No. 103, 2nd series, eff. 7-27-90; Ord. No. 109, 2nd series, eff. 12-28-90; Ord. No. 330, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-28-02; Ord. No. 368, 2nd series, § 3, eff. 11-27-03) 
Codifier's note— Minn. Stat. § 340A.408 requires a 30-day notice mailed to all affected licensees of an increase in license fees, and a hearing held.  
Sec. 5.52. - Liquor license restrictions and regulations. 
Subd. 1.  Reserved. 
Subd. 2.  Reserved. 
Subd. 3.  No license shall be effective until a permit shall be issued to a licensee under the laws of the United States, if such permit be required under such laws or the state. 
Subd. 4.  Reserved. 
Subd. 5.  No person under 18 years of age may serve or sell intoxicating liquor in a retail intoxicating liquor establishment. 
Subd. 6.  No licensee shall sell, offer for sale, or keep for sale liquor in any original package which has been refilled or partly refilled. 
Subd. 7.  No licensee shall display liquor to the public during hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited. 
Subd. 8.  No license shall be granted for a proposed licensed premise that does not meet the special use setback, as defined in the zoning regulations of this Code, from any nursery, elementary or secondary school structure; or church structure, except as provided herein. A license may be granted for a proposed licensed premise not meeting the special use setback, as defined in the zoning regulations of this Code, from any of the above listed uses when the proposed licensed premises and listed uses are located within the same zoning district and planned commercial development. 
Subd. 9.  Reserved. 
Subd. 10.  On-sale licenses shall be granted only to hotels, restaurants and clubs. 
Subd. 11.  All on-sale licenses shall be for premises situated in a commercial or industrial use district under a conditional use permit or terms of planned development approval. 
A.  Off-sale license applications will be reviewed by the police department. If an off-sale license is not issued within nine months after council approval, the approval shall automatically lapse. 
B.  Each applicant shall display to the city's satisfaction that it has at least an option on a specific site for the location of an off-sale store and such other information as the city may require. The council reserves the right to determine specific compliance with this subdivision. 
C.  All off-sale licenses shall run from the date of issuance until December 31 of that year. Fees shall be prorated if any off-sale license is issued for less than a full calendar year. 
Subd. 13.  Every license shall be granted subject to the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable provisions of the City Code and other laws relating to the operation of the licensed business. 
Subd. 14.  It is lawful for an off-sale licensee to provide samples of wine, liqueurs, and cordials which the licensee currently has in stock and is offering for sale to the general public without obtaining an additional license, provided the wine, liqueur, and cordial samples are dispensed at no charge and consumed on the licensed premises during the permitted hours of off-sale in a quantity less than 50 milliliters of wine per variety per customer and 25 milliliters of liqueur or cordial per variety per customer. 
Subd. 15.  Coin-operated amusement devices may not be located on premises licensed for off-sale of liquor. 
(Code 1983, § 5.52, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 11, 2nd series, eff. 4-27-84; Ord. No. 31, 2nd series, eff. 5-6-86; Ord. No. 65, 2nd series, eff. 8-26-88; Ord. No. 103, 2nd series, eff. 7-27-90; Ord. No. 139, 2nd series, eff. 5-5-92; Ord. No. 162, 2nd series, eff. 4-20-93; Ord. No. 173, 2nd series, eff. 1-14-94; Ord. No. 174, 2nd series, eff. 1-14-94; Ord. No. 228, 2nd series, eff. 12-4-96; Ord. No. 233, 2nd series, eff. 6-3-97; Ord. No. 260, 2nd series, eff. 6-25-98; Ord. No. 313, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 7-19-01; Ord. No. 331, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-28-02; Ord. No. 357, 2nd series, eff. 4-17-03; Ord. No. 417, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 12-8-07; Ord. No. 495, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 501, 2nd series, § 3, eff. 5-1-2012; Ord. No. 525, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 552, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 6-7-2016; Ord. No. 556, 2nd series, § 4, eff. 12-20-2016; Ord. No. 565, 2nd series, § 3, eff. 8-4-2017)  
Sec. 5.53. - Hours and days of liquor sales. 
Except as otherwise provided in section 5.54, no on-sale liquor sales shall be made after 2:00 a.m. on Sunday, nor between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday. 
No off-sale liquor sales shall be made except on those days and at those times as permitted by Minnesota state law. 
(Code 1983, § 5.53, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 89, 2nd series, eff. 10-13-89; Ord. No. 363, 2nd series, eff. 7-24-03; Ord. No. 372, 2nd series, § 3, eff. 2-12-04; Ord. No. 509, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 7-3-2012; Ord. No. 560, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 5-16-2017)  
Sec. 5.54. - Sunday sales. 
The electorate of the city having heretofore authorized the same, a Sunday on-sale liquor license may be issued to hotels, restaurants, or clubs, as defined in this chapter, which have on-sale licenses and which also have facilities for serving not less than 30 guests at one time. The permitted hours of such sales are from 8:00 a.m. on Sunday to 2:00 a.m. on Monday in conjunction with the serving of food, provided that the licensed establishment is in conformance with the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act. 
(Code 1983, § 5.54, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 89, 2nd series, eff. 10-13-89; Ord. No. 357, 2nd series, eff. 4-17-03; Ord. No. 363, 2nd series, eff. 7-24-03; Ord. No. 501, 2nd series, § 4, eff. 5-1-2012; Ord. No. 546, 2nd series, § 3, eff. 8-3-2015; Ord. No. 565, 2nd series, § 4, eff. 8-4-2017)  
Sec. 5.55. - Unlawful acts (liquor). 
It is unlawful for any: 
Subd. 1.  Person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal sale or purchase of liquor. 
Subd. 2.  Licensee to sell liquor on any day or during any hour when sales of liquor are not permitted by law. 
Subd. 3.  Person to purchase liquor on any day or during any hour when sales of liquor are not permitted by law. 
Subd. 4.  Licensee to sell or serve liquor to any person who is obviously intoxicated. 
(Code 1983, § 5.55, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 31, 2nd series, eff. 6-6-86)  
Sec. 5.56. - Sports or convention facility license. 
The council may authorize any holder of an on-sale liquor license issued by the city or by an adjacent municipality to sell liquor at any convention, banquet, conference, meeting or social affair conducted on the premises of a sports or convention facility owned by the city or instrumentality thereof having independent policy-making and appropriating authority and located within the city. The licensee must be engaged to sell liquor at such an event by the person or organization permitted to use the premises and may sell liquor only to persons attending the event. The licensee shall not sell liquor to any person attending or participating in any amateur athletic event. Such sales may be limited to designated areas of the facility. All such sales shall be subject to all laws relating thereto. 
(Code 1983, § 5.56, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 5.57. - Temporary liquor license. 
Subd. 1.  License authorized. Notwithstanding any provision of the City Code to the contrary, the council may issue a license for the temporary on-sale of liquor in connection with a social event sponsored by the licensee. Such license may provide that the licensee may contract with the holder of a full-year on-sale license, issued by the city, for liquor catering services. 
Subd. 2. Applicant. The applicant for a license under this section must be: (1) a club or charitable, religious, or other nonprofit organization in existence for at least three years; or (2) brewer who manufactures fewer than 3500 barrels of malt liquor in a year or a microdistillery in connection with a social event sponsored by the brewer or microdistillery. 
Subd. 3.  Terms and conditions of license. 
A.  No license is valid until approved by the commissioner. 
B.  No license shall be issued for more than three consecutive days. 
C.  All licenses and licensees are subject to all provisions of statutes and the City Code relating to liquor sale and licensing. The licensee shall provide proof of financial responsibility coverage and, in the case of catering by a full-year on-sale licensee, such caterer shall provide proof of the extension of such coverage to the licensed premises. 
D.  Licenses may authorize sales on premises other than those owned or permanently occupied by the licensee. 
E.  The application for and issuance of a temporary on-sale liquor license shall be subject to the regulations for temporary on-sale beer and liquor licenses as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
Subd. 4.  Insurance required. The council may, but at no time shall it be under any obligation whatsoever to, grant a temporary liquor license on premises owned or controlled by the city. Any such license may be conditioned, qualified or restricted as the council sees fit. If the premises to be licensed are owned or under the control of the city, the applicant shall file with the city, prior to issuance of the license, a certificate of liability insurance coverage in at least the sum of $300,000.00 for injury to any one person, $600,000.00 for injury to more than one person, and $25,000.00 for property damage, naming the city as an insured during the license period. 
(Ord. No. 80, 2nd series, eff. 6-30-89; Ord. No. 359, 2nd series, eff. 7-10-03; Ord. No. 372, 2nd series, § 4, eff. 2-12-04; Ord. No. 546, 2nd series, § 6, eff. 8-3-2015)  
Secs. 5.58, 5.59. - Reserved.  
Sec. 5.60. - Temporary on-sale beer and liquor license regulations. 
Subd. 1.  Application and scope. This section shall apply to any event for which a temporary on-sale beer license or temporary on-sale liquor license has been sought and issued in accordance with this chapter. Any applicant for or licensee of a temporary on-sale beer or liquor license shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
Subd. 2.  Regulations. Any temporary on-sale beer and liquor license applied for and issued under this chapter shall be subject to the following restrictions and requirements: 
1.  The application for a temporary license issued under this chapter shall contain complete information as required on form prescribed by the city clerk and shall be filed, along with the license fee, with the city clerk at least 30 days prior to the first date for which the license is sought. 
2.  The application shall include the street address of the property on which the licensed activity shall occur. 
3.  The application shall include a detailed site plan (a) delineating the property or area of the property on which the licensee's event is to be located; and (b) delineating the location of the area in which the licensed alcoholic beverages are to be sold and consumed, if such area is intended to be within only a portion of the entire event area. 
4.  The application shall identify all measures and methods to be utilized to partition any area within the entire event area for sale and consumption of the licensed alcoholic beverages, and shall state in detail its security plan setting forth the licensee's plan to enforce alcohol beverage sale and consumption laws, crowd control and public safety and how the licensee will check the ages and identification of attendees. The applicant's security plan shall be subject to the review, revision and approval of the chief of police or his/her designee. 
5.  The licensee shall comply with and implement all security personnel, measures and methods as ordered by the chief of police. 
6.  No alcohol shall be sold, served, and consumed outside the licensed area, which is the area specifically delineated by the licensee on the site plan filed with the application for license. 
7.  No person under the age of 21 shall be sold or served or otherwise permitted to consume alcoholic beverages of the licensee on the licensed event premises. If the licensee has a designated licensed area, representing a portion of the entire event area, no person under 21 years of age, unless with a parent or legal guardian, shall be permitted within the licensed area, except persons ages 18, 19 or 20 may be within the designated area, provided they are performing work, including serving alcoholic beverages, for the licensee. 
8.  All persons who consume, purchase or possess an alcoholic beverage in the licensed area shall be issued and required to wear a wristband approved by the police chief and no alcoholic beverage shall be sold or otherwise provided to a person who does not have a wristband as required by this subdivision. 
9.  All persons who are issued a wristband in accordance with these requirements shall be identified with a valid photograph identification as otherwise required under this chapter. 
10.  No person working for the licensee within the licensed area shall be intoxicated or consume alcoholic beverages during his/her work shift. 
11.  The licensee shall post signs at all entrances to the licensed area notifying the public that sales to and consumption of alcoholic beverages by persons under the age of 21 or to persons intoxicated is prohibited. 
12.  The licensee shall provide paid or volunteer private security to monitor the licensed area and the licensee shall be subject to any order by the Eagan Police Chief as to required security measures and personnel, including the required security personnel numbers, permitted or required entrances and exits from the designated area, as a condition of the license. 
13.  The licensee shall pay to the city all fees incurred by the city for any on-duty Eagan Police Officer assigned to patrol the licensed area as ordered by the Eagan Police Chief for necessary security and public safety and the fee for each officer shall be as set forth in the city's duly adopted fee schedule. 
14.  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or consumed except during the following hours: 
• Monday through Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.; and 
• Sunday from 12:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m. 
15.  No persons shall be within the licensed area, if such area is a designated partitioned area from the entire event area, more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale is permitted. 
16.  The licensee shall designate an on-site manager of the licensed area who shall be within the licensed designated area at all times during the hours of sale. The on-site manager shall complete training in alcohol beverage service and shall train any server and security personnel of the same. 
It is unlawful for the licensee, any paid employee of or volunteer for the licensee or any attendee of the licensee's event to violate any of the foregoing restrictions and regulations. Upon a violation of any of the foregoing restrictions and regulations which may result in eminent danger to public safety, the licensee's temporary license may be immediately revoked and upon order of a police officer, the licensee shall immediately cease from selling or serving any alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 359, 2nd series, eff. 7-10-03)  
Sec. 5.61 - Brewpub license and regulations. 
Subd. 1. It is unlawful for any person or entity, directly or indirectly, to operate a brewpub without the appropriate license issued by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 340A, or to sell, barter, keep for sale or otherwise dispose of malt liquor on or from the premises on which the malt liquor is manufactured or brewed without an on-sale or off-sale license therefor from the city. A brewer who holds a brewer license issued by the minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety for the operation of a brewpub shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, all other applicable provisions of the City Code, and other state and local laws relating to the operation of the licensee's business. 
Subd. 2. A licensed brewpub shall be subject to the following regulations: 
A.  The brewpub shall be operated in and as a part of a restaurant establishment for which an on-sale intoxicating liquor or beer license may be, and has been, issued. 
B.  An off-sale license may be issued for solely the malt liquor produced and packaged on the licensed premises and only upon approval of the license by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety. 
C.  The off-sale of malt liquor from the licensed premises shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale at liquor stores and shall be removed from the premises before the off-sale closing time requirements, except off-sale of malt liquor on Sundays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. may occur provided the licensee has a valid Sunday sale permit from the city and only growlers of malt liquor that was manufactured and brewed on the licensed premises may be sold. Malt liquor sold off-sale shall be packaged as required by state law set forth in Minn. Stat. ch. 340A. 
D.  Only malt liquor may be brewed or manufactured at the licensed premises and no more than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a calendar year may be brewed or manufactured at the licensed premises. 
E.  The entire production of malt liquor is solely for consumption on tap on the licensed premises or for off-sale for personal consumption from the licensed premises. No wholesale sale or sale for re-sale of the malt liquor shall be conducted. 
F.  The malt liquor manufactured or brewed on the licensed premises shall be packaged in 64-ounce containers, commonly known as "growlers," with a twist-type closure, cork, stopper or plug. 
G.  At the time of the sale, a paper or plastic adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall be applied to the container and extend over the top of the twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or plug forming a seal that must be broken upon opening of the container. 
H.  The container shall be identified as malt liquor, contain the name of the malt liquor, bear the name and address of the brewer selling the malt liquor and shall be considered intoxicating liquors unless the alcohol content is labeled as otherwise in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rules. 
I.  The brewpub's total retail sales at on- or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per calendar year, provided that off-sales may not total more than 500 barrels. 
J.  A brewer operating a brewpub may hold or have an interest in other retail on-sale licenses, but may not have an ownership interest in whole or in part, or be an officer, director, agent or employee of, any other manufacturer, brewer, importer, or wholesaler or be an affiliate thereof, whether the affiliation is corporate or by management, direction or control. Notwithstanding this prohibition, a brewer licensed under this provision may be an affiliate or subsidiary company of a brewer licensed in Minnesota or elsewhere if that brewer's only manufacture of malt liquor is: 
(1)  As a brewpub as defined herein and limited to the regulations of a brewpub by this chapter; 
(2)  Manufactured in another state for consumption exclusively in a restaurant located in the place of manufacture or brewing; or 
(3)  Manufactured in another state for consumption primarily in a restaurant located in or immediately adjacent to the place of manufacture, if the brewer was licensed subject to the regulations herein on January 1, 1995. 
K.  A brewpub holding an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or on-sale beer license shall be subject to all of the provisions and regulations for such license. A brewpub holding an off-sale license for the sale of malt liquor brewed on the premises shall be subject to all of the provisions and regulations for off-sale licenses set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 392, 2nd series, § 5, eff. 8-20-05; Ord. No. 546, 2nd series, § 4, eff. 8-3-2015)  
Sec. 5.62. - Brewer taproom on-sale license. 
Subd. 1 . It is unlawful for any person or entity, directly or indirectly, to operate a brewer taproom or to sell, barter, keep for sale or otherwise dispose of malt liquor on or from the premises on which the malt liquor is manufactured or brewed without an on-sale brewer taproom license or an off-sale malt liquor license from the city. This section does not apply to the disposal of home brewed or manufactured of malt liquor which is defined as brewed malt liquor in quantities of ten gallons or less. 
Subd. 2 . An on-sale brewer taproom license may be issued only to a brewer who holds a brewer license issued by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety under Minn. Stat. § 340A.301, subdivision 6, clause (c), (i) or (j). An on-sale brewer taproom license shall be subject to the following requirements: 
A.  Only malt liquor produced by the brewer on the licensed premises may be sold or consumed on the licensed premises, except as may be permitted in accordance with a valid consumption and display permit issued for the licensed premises by the city and the Minnesota Department of Public Safety. 
B.  The financial responsibilities required under this chapter for on-sale intoxicating licenses shall apply to an on-sale brewer taproom license issued under this section. 
C.  All provisions of this chapter that apply to an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall apply to an on-sale brewer taproom license issued under this section unless the provision is explicitly inconsistent with this section. 
D.  An on-sale brewer taproom licensee may only have one taproom license under this section. 
E.  An on-sale brewer taproom licensee may not have an ownership interest in a brewpub brewery licensed under Minn. Stat. § 340A.301, subdivision 6, clause (d). 
F.  No on-sale brewer taproom license shall be issued to a brewer if the brewer seeking the license, or any person having an economic interest in the brewer seeking the license or exercising control over the brewer seeking the license, is a brewer that brews more than 250,000 barrels of malt liquor annually or a winery that produces more than 250,000 gallons of wine annually. 
G.  The license hereunder shall be subject to the payment of an annual on-sale brewer taproom license fee of $600.00. 
(Ord. No. 530, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 6-3-2014; Ord. No. 583, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-26-2019)  
Sec. 5.63. - Brewer off-sale malt liquor license. 
Subd. 1 . It is unlawful for any person or entity to sell, barter, keep for sale or otherwise dispose of malt liquor, directly or indirectly, on or from the premises on which the malt liquor is manufactured or brewed for off-site consumption without an off-sale malt liquor license from the city. This section does not apply to the disposal of home brewed or manufactured malt liquor which is defined as brewed malt liquor in quantities of ten gallons or less. 
Subd. 2 . An off-sale malt liquor license may be issued only to a brewer who holds a brewer license issued by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety under Minn. Stat. § 340A.301, subdivision 6, clause (c), (i) or (j). An off-sale malt liquor license shall be subject to the following requirements: 
A.  An off-sale malt liquor license shall be issued exclusively for the premises on which the malt liquor is brewed and packaged. 
B.  Only malt liquor brewed and packaged by the brewer on the licensed premises may be sold from the licensed premises. 
C.  The off-sale malt liquor license issued by the city must be approved by the commissioner to be valid and effective. 
D.  The amount of malt liquor sold at off-sale may not exceed 500 barrels annually. Commencing with a license renewal immediately following the year in which the license was initially issued, the licensee shall submit to the city clerk a certified statement declaring the number of barrels of malt liquor sold off-sale for the most recent preceding 12-month period beginning September 1 the preceding year and ending August 31 of the current license year. 
E.  Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the hours of sale permitted for off-sale liquor licenses issued by the city, except off-sale of malt liquor on Sundays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. may occur provided the licensee has a valid Sunday sale permit from the city and only growlers of malt liquor that was manufactured and brewed on the licensed premises may be sold. Malt liquor sold off-sale shall be packaged as required by state law set forth in Minn. Stat. ch. 340A. 
F.  The malt liquor sold off-sale under the off-sale malt liquor license shall be packed in 64-ounce containers commonly known as growlers or in 750 milliliter bottles. The containers or bottles shall bear a twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or plug. At the time of the sale, a paper or plastic adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall be applied to the container or bottle and extended over the top of the twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or plug forming a seal that must be broken upon opening of the container or bottle. The adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall bear the name and address of the brewer. The containers or bottles shall be identified as malt liquor, contain the name of the malt liquor, bear the name and address of the brewer selling the malt liquor, and shall be considered intoxicating liquor unless the alcoholic content is labeled as otherwise in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rules, part 7515.1100. 
G.  A brewer may only have one license under this section. 
H.  No off-sale malt liquor license may be issued to a brewer if the brewer seeking the license, or any person having an economic interest in the brewer seeking the license or exercising control over the brewer seeking the license, is a brewer that brews more than 20,000 barrels of its own brands of malt liquor annually or a winery that produces more than 250,000 gallons of wine annually. 
I.  The license hereunder is subject to the payment of an annual off-sale malt liquor license fee of $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 530, 2nd series, § 3, eff. 6-3-2014; Ord. No. 546, 2nd series, § 7, eff. 8-3-2015)  
Sec. 5.64. - Microdistilleries. 
Subd. 1. It is unlawful for any person or entity, directly or indirectly, to sell, barter, keep for sale or otherwise dispose of distilled spirits on or from the premises on which the distilled spirits are manufactured or produced without a microdistillery license from the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety and a license issued by the city as provided herein. It is unlawful for any licensed microdistillery to provide samples of distilled spirits manufactured on its premises in an amount exceeding 15 milliliters per variety per person or 45 milliliters per person per day. 
Subd. 2 .  An on-sale cocktail room license may be issued only to a distiller who holds a microdistillery license issued by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety under Minn. Stat. ch. 340A. An on-sale cocktail room license shall be subject to the following requirements: 
A.  Only distilled spirits produced by the distiller on the licensed premises may be sold or consumed on the licensed premises. 
B.  The financial responsibilities required under this chapter for on-sale intoxicating licenses shall apply to an on-sale cocktail room license issued under this section. 
C.  All provisions of this chapter that apply to on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses shall apply to an on-sale cocktail room license issued under this section unless the provision is explicitly inconsistent with this section. 
D.  An on-sale cocktail room licensee may only have one on-sale cocktail room license under this section. 
E.  An on-sale cocktail room licensee may not have an ownership interest in a distillery licensed under Minn. Stat. §340A.301, subdivision 6, paragraph (a). 
F.  No on-sale cocktail room license shall be issued to a distiller if the distiller seeking the license, or any person having an economic interest in the distiller seeking the license or exercising control over the distiller seeking the license, is a distiller that produces more than 40,000 proof gallons of distilled spirits in a calendar year. 
G.  No single entity may hold both an on-sale cocktail room and on-sale brewer taproom license, and a cocktail room and brewer taproom shall not be co-located. 
H.  The license hereunder shall be subject to the payment of an annual on-sale cocktail room license fee of $600.00. 
Subd. 3 .  An off-sale distilled spirits licenses may be granted to microdistilleries, subject to the limitations of this chapter and the additional limitations as follows: 
A.  The microdistillery may sell only one 375 milliliter bottle per customer per day of product manufactured on-site; 
B.  Off-sale hours of sale shall conform to hours of sale for retail off-sale licensees; 
C.  No brand may be sold at the microdistillery unless it is also available for distribution by wholesalers; and 
D.  The license hereunder shall be subject to the payment of an annual off-sale microdistillery license fee of $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 530, 2nd series, § 4, eff. 6-3-2014; Ord. No. 546, 2nd series, § 5, eff. 8-3-2015)  
Sec. 5.65. - Farm winery. 
No farm winery within the city may sell any alcoholic beverage at retail on-sale or off-sale or by wholesale lots, unless it holds and is in accordance with a farm winery license issued by the commissioner and all requirements of Minnesota Statutes and Minnesota Rules governing farm wineries. 
(Ord. No. 530, 2nd series, § 5, eff. 6-3-2014)  
Sec. 5.66. - Self-serve draught malt liquor dispenser. 
An establishment holding an on-sale intoxicating liquor license may provide and make a self-serve draught malt liquor dispenser available to a patron for service of malt liquor, provided the following requirements are met: 
Subd. 1.  Only malt liquor may be dispensed from the self-serve draught malt liquor dispenser; no other liquor may be dispensed. 
Subd. 2.  All malt liquor dispensed must be consumed in the licensed premises. 
Subd. 3.  The self-serve draught malt liquor dispenser shall require access controlled by the licensee as to the method and amount of the malt liquor accessible to the patron. Controlled access may be by any technology or device so long as the malt liquor cannot be drawn or obtained by a patron without being first approved for access to the dispenser by the licensee (or its designated employees) and each approved access restricts the amount of malt liquor that may be dispensed by the patron as required under this section. Each access transaction provided by the licensee to the patron shall be deemed as and constitutes a sale or the service of liquor to the patron as is otherwise regulated in this chapter. 
Subd. 4.  Each access transaction for a patron to the self-serve draught malt liquor dispenser shall limit the patron access to no more than 32 fluid ounces of malt liquor. No patron shall have or be provided at any one time access to more than the restricted amount stated herein. 
Subd. 5.  Prior to approving or "re-loading" any dispenser transaction, the patron's age shall be verified to ensure the patron is age 21 or older. 
Subd. 6.  No person under the age of 21 shall be provided access to the self-serve draught malt liquor dispenser. 
Subd. 7.  No person under the age of 21 shall consume or possess a malt liquor beverage dispensed from the self-serve draught malt liquor dispenser. 
Subd. 8.  All access transaction authorizations shall terminate or be disabled prior to the patron leaving the licensed premises. 
Subd. 9.  No patron shall transfer any access transaction device or passcode to another person or remove the access device from the licensed premises. 
Any violation of the foregoing requirements is unlawful and shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and any license issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 556, 2nd series, § 5, eff. 12-20-2016)  
Sec. 5.67. - Minnesota Vikings Headquarters Complex. 
Subd. 1.  Scope of application. This section applies to the on-sale of alcoholic beverages on property, as specifically defined herein, located within the development known as the "Viking Lakes Complex." On-sale of alcohol beverages pursuant to a license issued under this section is restricted exclusively to property within the Viking Lakes complex, legally described as lots 1 and 2, block 1, Viking Lakes or as may be described hereafter due to subdivision or re-platting. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of an on-sale alcoholic beverage license to an establishment within the Viking Lakes complex that is otherwise eligible for an on-sale alcoholic beverage license under other provisions of this chapter, (e.g., hotel, restaurant). 
Subd. 2.  License required. It is unlawful for any person or entity, directly or indirectly, to sell, barter, keep for sale or otherwise dispose of alcoholic beverages as part of a commercial transaction within the Viking Lakes complex without a license therefor from the city in accordance with this section. 
Subd. 3.  Eligible. On-sale licenses under this section shall be granted only to the following: 
A.  The owner of a National Football League sports facility located on lot 1, block 1, Viking Lakes; 
B.  A concessionaire operator under contract with the owner identified in subdivision 1 above; and 
C.  A third-party vendor under contract with the owner identified in subdivision 1 above. 
No license shall be issued hereunder except for the sale of alcoholic beverages to persons attending event(s) occurring on lot 1, block 1, Viking Lakes and to persons attending event(s) occurring on lot 2, block 1, Viking Lakes that are in conjunction with activities/events on lot 1. 
Subd. 4.  Restrictions and regulations. A license issued under this section may be an annual on-sale liquor license or a short-term on-sale liquor license. An annual on-sale liquor license shall be subject to the application and license procedures and administration regulations as provided elsewhere in this chapter for all other licenses. Annual on-sale liquor licenses and short-term on-sale liquor licenses are subject to the following restrictions and regulations: 
A.  The application shall include a detailed site plan delineating the area of the property on which the licensee is to be located from which the licensed alcoholic beverages are to be sold. 
B.  No alcohol shall be sold or served outside the licensed area, which is the area specifically delineated by the licensee on the site plan filed with the application for license. 
C.  The license issued hereunder shall be conspicuously posted for public view at the location specifically delineated on the license as the licensed area at all times that alcohol beverages are being sold or dispensed by the licensee. 
D.  No person working for the licensee within the licensed area shall be intoxicated or consume alcoholic beverages during his/her work shift. 
E.  A license issued hereunder allows only for the sale of alcoholic beverages to persons attending event(s) occurring on lot 1, block 1, Viking Lakes and to persons attending event(s) occurring on lot 2, block 1, Viking Lakes that are in conjunction with activities/events on lot 1. 
F.  No license shall be transferable between persons or entities or to a different location. 
G.  The financial responsibilities required under this chapter for on-sale liquor licenses shall apply to an annual on-sale license issued under this section. The financial responsibilities required under this chapter for on-sale temporary liquor licenses shall apply to a short-term on-sale license issued under this section. 
H.  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or consumed except on the days and during the hours as allowed for on-sale liquor licenses under this chapter. A licensee hereunder may obtain a Sunday sales permit upon application and payment of permit fee. 
I.  All provisions and regulations of this chapter that apply to an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall apply to a license issued under this section unless the provision is explicitly inconsistent with this section. 
J.  No person under the age of 21 shall be sold or served or otherwise permitted to consume alcoholic beverages of the licensee on the licensed premises. 
Subd. 5.  Additional short-term license restrictions and regulations. In addition to the restrictions and regulations set forth in this section, a short-term on-sale liquor license application and issuance shall be subject to the following: 
A.  The license may be approved and issued by the city clerk. 
B.  The application for a short-term license issued under this section shall contain complete information as required on form prescribed by the city clerk and shall be filed, along with the license fee, with the city clerk at least 14 days prior to the first date for which the license is sought. 
C.  The duration of a short-term license may be up to 30 consecutive days. The application and license shall specify the dates for which the license is sought and approved. 
D.  The licensee shall designate an on-site manager of the licensed area who shall be responsible for the operations within the licensed area at all times during the hours of sale. The on-site manager shall complete training in alcohol beverage service and shall train any server and security personnel of the same. 
E.  It is unlawful for the licensee or any employee of the licensee to violate any restrictions and regulations under this chapter related to the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages. Upon a violation of any restrictions and regulations, the licensee's license may be immediately revoked by the city clerk or suspended upon order of police chief or designee. The licensee shall immediately cease from selling or serving any alcoholic beverages. 
Subd. 6.  Registration of caterers providing alcoholic beverages under on-sale liquor caterer's permit. For any event on the property that has an anticipated attendance of more than 500 people and for which food and alcoholic beverage service will be provided by an on-sale liquor license holder with a caterer's permit issued by the state, the licensee/caterer's permit holder shall register with the city not less than 14 days before the scheduled event. Registration shall be deemed complete upon filing a fully completed and executed registration form prescribed by the city and payment of the registration fee of $25.00. An on-sale liquor license holder with a caterer's permit that has been found to be in violation of this chapter or state laws related to the sale of alcohol within one year immediately preceding the date of a registration application shall not be authorized to sell or dispense any alcoholic beverages on the property under this section. 
Subd. 7.  License fees. 
A.  The annual on-sale liquor license fee under this section shall be in an amount as set forth below, to be determined based upon the licensee's total gross liquor sales, on which the licensee is required to pay liquor tax as shown on the licensee's Minnesota sales and use tax returns for the most recent preceding 12-month period beginning September 1 and ending August 31: 
Liquor sales less than $275,000.00 	$5,300.00 
Liquor sales $275,000.00—$550,000.00 	6,300.00 
Liquor sales over $550,000.00 	7,300.00 
Sunday license 	200.00 
 
The licensee shall provide legible copies of the licensee's Minnesota Sales and Use Tax Returns, as verified by a certified public accountant, or a statement certified by the licensee and a certified public accountant setting forth the total gross sales for the preceding 12-month period beginning September 1 through August 31. 
B.  The short-term on-sale liquor license fee under this section shall be $250.00 for each license issued. 
(Ord. No. 575, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 1-26-2018)  
Secs. 5.68, 5.69. - Reserved.  
Sec. 5.70. - On-sale wine. 
Subd. 1.  On-sale wine license required. It is unlawful for any person to sell or keep or offer for sale any wine without a license therefor from the city. This section shall not apply (1) to possession or handling for sale or otherwise of sacramental wine or any representative of any religious order or for use in connection with a legitimate religious ceremony, (2) to sales by manufacturers to wholesalers duly licensed as such by the state, (3) to sales by wholesalers to persons holding on-sale or off-sale liquor licenses from the city, or (4) to sales by wholesalers to persons holding on-sale wine licenses from the city. 
Subd. 2.  On-sale wine license fee. 
A.  The annual on-sale wine license fee is $1,900.00. 
B.  The annual Sunday on-sale wine license fee is $100.00. 
Codifier's note— Minn. Stat. § 340A.408 requires a 30-day notice mailed to all affected licensees of an increase in license fees, and a hearing held. 
Subd. 3.  On-sale wine license restrictions and regulations. 
A.  Reserved. 
B.  Reserved. 
C.  No license shall be effective until a permit shall be issued to a licensee under the laws of the United States, if such permit be required under such laws or the state. 
D.  Reserved. 
E.  No person under 18 years of age may be employed in a place where liquor is sold for consumption on the premises, except persons under 18 years of age may be employed as musicians or in bussing or washing dishes in a restaurant or hotel that is licensed to sell liquor and may be employed as waiters or waitresses at a restaurant or hotel where only wine is sold, provided that the person under the age of 18 may not serve or sell any wine. 
F.  No licensee shall display wine to the public on days or during hours when the sale of wine is prohibited. 
G.  No license shall be granted for a proposed licensed premise that does not meet the special use setback, as defined in the zoning regulations of this Code, from any nursery, elementary or secondary school structure; or church structure, except as provided herein. A license may be granted for a proposed licensed premise not meeting the special use setback, as defined in the zoning regulations of this Code, from any of the above listed uses when the proposed licensed premises and listed uses are located within the same zoning district and planned commercial development. 
H.  On-sale wine licenses shall be granted only to a restaurant with seating capacity for 25 or more guests at one time. 
I.  Every license shall be granted subject to the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable provisions of the City Code and other laws relating to the operation of the licensed business. 
J.  Persons who hold both an on-sale wine license and an on-sale beer license may sell intoxicating malt liquor (strong beer) at on-sale without an additional license. 
Subd. 4.  Wine festival. 
A.  Subject to the approval of the commissioner of public safety, a bona fide association of owners and operators of wineries sponsoring an annual festival to showcase wines produced by members of the association shall qualify for a temporary wine festival license. The license issued under this subdivision authorizes the sale of table, sparkling or fortified wines produced by wineries at on-sale by the glass, provided that no more than two glasses per customer may be sold, and the dispensing of free samples of the wines offered for sale within designated premises of the festival. A license issued under this subdivision is subject to all laws and ordinances governing the sale, possession, and consumption of table, sparkling, or fortified wines. 
B.  The license fee shall be in an amount set forth by council resolution. 
C.  The council may, but at no time shall it be under any obligation whatsoever to, grant a wine festival license on premises owned or controlled by the city. Any such license may be conditioned, qualified, or restricted as the council sees fit. If the premises to be licensed are owned or under control of the city, the applicant shall file with the city, prior to the issuance of the license, a certificate of liability insurance coverage in at least the sum of $300,000.00 for injury to any one person, $600,000.00 for injury to more than one person and $25,000.00 for property damage, naming the city as an insured during the license period. 
D.  For purposes of this subdivision, a "bona fide association of owners and operators of wineries" means an association of more than ten wineries that has been in existence for more than two years at the time of application for the temporary license. 
(Code 1983, § 5.70, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 31, 2nd series, eff. 5-6-86; Ord. No. 48, 2nd series, eff. 6-12-87; Ord. No. 103, 2nd series, eff. 7-27-90; Ord. No. 109, 2nd series, eff. 12-28-90; Ord. No. 139, 2nd series, eff. 5-5-92; Ord. No. 162, 2nd series, eff. 4-20-93; Ord. No. 233, 2nd series, eff. 6-3-97; Ord. No. 260, 2nd series, eff. 6-16-98; Ord. No. 313, 2nd series, § 3, eff. 7-19-01; Ord. No. 357, 2nd series, eff. 4-17-03; Ord. No. 368, 2nd series, § 4, eff. 11-27-03; Ord. No. 417, 2nd series, § 3, eff. 12-8-07; Ord. No. 495, 2nd series, § 3, eff. 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 501, 2nd series, § 5, eff. 5-1-2012; Ord. No. 552, 2nd series, § 3, eff. 6-7-2016; Ord. No. 565, 2nd series, § 5, eff. 8-4-2017)  
Sec. 5.71. - Hours and days of sales by on-sale wine licensees. 
No on-sale of wine shall be made between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sunday nor between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday nor between the hours of 8:00 p.m. on December 24 and 8:00 a.m. on December 25. Provided, however, that the sale of wine shall be made between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on Mondays, only if the licensee establishment is in conformance with the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act. 
(Code 1983, § 5.71, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 89, 2nd series, eff. 10-13-89; Ord. No. 363, 2nd series, eff. 7-24-03)  
Sec. 5.72. - Unlawful acts (wine). 
It is unlawful for any: 
Subd. 1.  Person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal sale or purchase of wine. 
Subd. 2.  Licensee to sell wine on any day or during any hour when sales of wine are not permitted by law. 
Subd. 3.  Person to purchase wine on any day or during any hour when sales of wine are not permitted by law. 
Subd. 4.  Licensee to sell or serve wine to any person who is obviously intoxicated. 
Subd. 5.  Licensee to sell wine except in conjunction with the sale of food. 
(Code 1983, § 5.72, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 31, 2nd series, eff. 6-6-86)  
Secs. 5.73—5.79. - Reserved.  
Sec. 5.80. - Consumption and display—One-day license. 
Subd. 1.  Prohibition. Reserved. 
Subd. 2.  License required. Any nonprofit organization desiring to serve liquids for the purpose of mixing with liquor and permitting the consumption and display of liquor in conjunction with a social activity sponsored by it shall first obtain a license therefor from the city. It is unlawful for any such organization to fail to obtain such license. 
Subd. 3.  Term. The term of such license shall be one day only. 
Subd. 4.  Limitation on number. No more than ten licenses shall be issued in any calendar year. 
Subd. 5.  License fee. The fee for such one-day license is $25.00. 
Subd. 6.  Approval. In addition to council approval, such license must be approved by the commissioner of public safety. 
(Code 1983, § 5.80, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 11, 2nd series, eff. 2-21-84)  
Sec. 5.81. - Consumption and display. 
Subd. 1.  Consumption and display license required. It is unlawful for any club or business establishment which does not hold an on-sale liquor license to directly or indirectly allow the consumption or display of liquor or the serving of any liquid for the purpose of mixing with liquor, without a license therefor from the city. 
Subd. 2.  Consumption and display license and license fee. The annual consumption and display license fee is $300.00. The term of the annual license shall be effective from April 1 through March 31 of the following year. 
Subd. 3.  Consumption and display restrictions and regulations. 
A.  Lockers. A business establishment or club to which a license is issued under this section may allow members to bring and keep a personal supply of liquor in lockers on the establishment's premises. Every bottle, container or other receptacle containing liquor stored by such member shall attach to it a label signed by the member, shall be kept in a locker designated to the use of such member, and no other liquor shall be on the premises. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to be assigned a locker for the storage of liquor or to consume or display or keep a supply of liquor on the establishment's premises. 
C.  No licensee may permit a person to consume or display liquor or no person may consume or display liquor between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Sunday through Saturday. 
D.  The city may issue a license under this section only to: 
1.  An applicant who has not, within five years prior to the application, been convicted of a felony or of violating any provision of Minn. Stats. ch. 340A or of violating any provision of this chapter; 
2.  A restaurant; 
3.  A hotel; 
4.  An establishment holding a beer license or brewer taproom on-sale license issued under this chapter; 
5.  A resort as defined by Minnesota Statutes; and 
6.  A club, as defined by Minn. Stats. ch. 340A, or an unincorporated club otherwise meeting the definition of club, provided the club does not hold an on-sale liquor license. 
E.  It is unlawful to sell liquor on premises licensed under this section. 
F.  No consumption and display license may be issued by the city unless the business establishment or club seeking a license hereunder holds a consumption and display permit from the commissioner. It is unlawful for any person, business establishment or club, directly or indirectly, to allow the consumption or display of liquor or the serving of any liquid for the purpose of mixing with liquor, without first having obtained a permit therefor from the commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 161, 2nd series, eff. 4-30-93; Ord. No. 346, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 6-13-02; Ord. No. 363, 2nd series, eff. 7-15-03; Ord. No. 583, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 3-26-2019)  
Secs. 5.82—5.89. - Reserved.  
Sec. 5.90. - Nudity or obscenity prohibited. 
Subd. 1.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings stated: 
A.  Nudity means uncovered or less than opaquely covered post-pubertal human genitals, pubic areas, the post-pubertal human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this definition, a female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the areola only are covered. 
B.  Obscene performance means a play, motion picture, dance, show or other presentation, whether pictured, animated or live, performed before an audience and which in whole or in part depicts or reveals nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse or which includes obscenities or explicit verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual conduct. 
C.  Obscenities means those slang words, currently generally rejected for regular use in mixed society, that are used to refer to genitals, female breasts, sexual conduct or excretory functions or products, either that have no other meaning or that in context are clearly used for their bodily, sexual or excretory meaning. 
D.  Sadomasochistic abuse means flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed. 
E.  Sexual conduct means human masturbation, sexual intercourse or any touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification. 
F.  Sexual excitement means the condition of human male or female genitals or the breasts of the female when in a state of sexual stimulation, or the sensual experiences of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct or nudity. 
Subd. 2.  Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person issued a license provided for in this chapter to permit upon licensed premises any nudity, obscene performance or continued use of obscenities by any agent, employee, patron or other person. 
(Code 1983, § 5.90, eff. 1-1-83) 
State Law reference— Obscenity, Minn. Stat. § 617.23 et seq.  
Secs. 5.91—5.98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 5.99. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. 
(Code 1983, § 5.99, eff. 1-1-83)  
Chapter 6 - OTHER BUSINESS REGULATION AND LICENSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Construction licensing and permits, ch. 4; beer, wine and liquor licensing and regulation, ch. 5. 
 
Sec. 6.01. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings stated: 
Applicant means any natural person or legal entity making an application for a license under this chapter. 
Application means a form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in and completed by the applicant as his request for a license, furnished by the city and uniformly required as a prerequisite to the consideration of the issuance of a license for a business. 
Automated pawn system (APS) means a multiple jurisdiction computerized/automated pawn database, which its centralized operations are within the Minneapolis Police Department. The purpose of the automated pawn system is to collect pawn transaction data from pawn shops in numerous jurisdictions and provide and disseminate the pawn transaction data to participating law enforcement agencies, providing metro-wide sharing of pawn related information to enhance the identification of stolen property and suspects. 
Bond means a corporate surety document in the form and with the provisions acceptable and specifically approved by the city attorney. 
Business means any activity, occupation, sale of goods or services, or transaction that is either licensed or regulated or both licensed and regulated by the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
Chief of police or police officer means city police chief, police officer or designee. 
Investigation or background investigation or criminal background investigation or criminal background check means an examination or probe utilizing the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension's Computerized Criminal History System, retrieving the Minnesota Department of Public Service's driver's license data, reviewing court records, conducting personal interviews, or engaging in any other methods or means to examine or inquire into an applicant's application data or eligibility for the license or permit sought. 
Lawful gambling means the operation, conduct or sale of bingo, raffles, paddlewheels, tipboards and pull-tabs, including conduct of gambling exempt from licensing under Minnesota Statutes. 
License or permit means a document issued by the city to an applicant permitting him to carry on and transact a business or activity. The use of the term license in this chapter shall mean or include the term "permit," as applicable. 
License fee means the money paid to the city pursuant to an application and prior to issuance of a license to transact and carry on a business. 
Licensee means the person to whom a license is issued under this chapter, including any agents or employees of the person. 
Minor means any natural person under the age of 18 years. 
Pawnbroker means a person who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property or other valuable things or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable things on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price or who loans money secured by security interest on personal property or any part thereof. 
Sale, sell and sold mean all forms of barter and all manner or means of furnishing merchandise to persons. 
(Code 1983, § 6.01, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 112, 2nd series, eff. 3-15-91; Ord. No. 265, 2nd series, eff. 8-27-98; Ord. No. 410, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-31-07; Ord. No. 498, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 519, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-19-2013)  
Sec. 6.02. - Applications. 
All applications shall be made as follows: 
Subd. 1.  All applications shall be made at the office of the city clerk-treasurer upon forms that have been furnished by the city for such purposes. 
Subd. 2.  Reserved. 
Subd. 3.  All such applications must be subscribed, sworn to, and include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Applicant's name, age and citizenship. 
B.  Applicant's present address and length of time he has lived at that address. 
C.  Applicant's occupation and length of time so engaged. 
D.  Applicant's addresses and occupations for the three years last preceding the date of application. 
E.  Names and addresses of applicant's employers, if any, for the three years last preceding the date of application. 
F.  Whether or not applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor, including violation of a municipal ordinance but excluding traffic violations, and, if so, the date and place of conviction and the nature of the offense. 
G.  Type of license and location of premises for which application is made. 
H.  At least four character references if applicant has not resided in the city for two years last preceding the date of application. 
I.  Such other information as the council shall deem necessary considering the nature of the business for which license application is made. 
Subd. 4.  It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false statement or omission upon any application form. Any false statement in such application or any willful omission to state any information called for on such application form shall, upon discovery of such falsehood, work an automatic refusal of license or, if already issued, shall render any license or permit issued pursuant thereto void and of no effect to protect the applicant from prosecution for violation of this chapter or any part hereof. 
Subd. 5.  The city clerk shall, upon receipt of each application completed in accordance herewith, forthwith investigate the truth of statements made therein and the moral character and business reputation of each applicant for a license to such extent as the city clerk deems necessary. For such investigation the city clerk may enlist the aid of the chief of police. An application shall not be considered or acted upon until such investigation has been completed. 
Subd. 6.  Applications for renewal licenses may be made in such abbreviated form as the city may adopt. 
(Code 1983, § 6.02, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 117, 2nd series, eff. 6-4-91; Ord. No. 498, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 6.03. - Action on application, transfer, termination and duplicate license. 
Subd. 1.  Granting . A license or permit may be granted for the period of the remainder of the then-current calendar year or for part or all of the ensuing license year. All applications, including proposed license periods, must be consistent with this chapter. 
Subd. 2.  Issuing. If an application is approved, the city clerk-treasurer shall forthwith issue a license pursuant thereto in the form prescribed by the council upon proof of ownership, payment of the appropriate license fee, and approval of the bond or insurance as to form and surety or carrier, if required. All licenses shall be on a calendar-year basis unless otherwise specified herein as to particular businesses. Unless otherwise herein specified, license fees shall be prorated on the basis of 1/12 for each calendar month or part thereof remaining in the then-current license year. Provided that for licenses where the fee is less than $100.00, a minimum license fee equal to one-half of the annual license fee shall be charged. Except as to licenses which are specifically citywide, licenses shall be valid only at one location and on the premises therein described. 
Subd. 3.  Transfer . A license may be transferable between persons only upon consent of the city and payment of the investigation fee. No license shall be transferable to a different location without prior consent of the city and upon payment of the fee for a duplicate license. It is unlawful to make any transfer in violation of this subdivision. 
Subd. 4.  Termination. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or revocation. 
Subd. 5.  Refusal and revocation . The council may, for any reasonable cause, refuse to grant any application before it or suspend or revoke any license or permit. No license shall be granted to a person of questionable moral character or business reputation as related to the business or activity for which the license/permit is sought. Before revocation of any license, the council shall give notice to the licensee and grant such licensee opportunity to be heard. Notice to be given and the exact time of hearing shall be stated in the resolution calling for such hearing. 
Subd. 6.  Duplicate license. Duplicates of all original licenses may be issued by the city clerk-treasurer, without action by the council, upon licensee's affidavit that the original has been lost and upon payment of a fee in an amount adopted by resolution of the council for issuance of the duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked "Duplicate." 
(Code 1983, § 6.03, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 110, 2nd series, eff. 1-25-91; Ord. No. 117, 2nd series, eff. 6-14-91; Ord. No. 498, 2nd series, § 3, eff. 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 6.04. - Fixing license fees. 
Except as otherwise herein provided, all fees for licenses under this chapter shall be fixed and determined by the council, adopted by resolution, and uniformly enforced. Such license fees may, from time to time, be amended by the council by resolution. A copy of the resolution setting forth currently effective license fees shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk-treasurer and open to inspection during regular business hours. For the purpose of fixing such fees, the council may subdivide and categorize licenses under a specific license requirement, provided, that any such subdivision or categorization shall be included in the resolution authorized by this section. 
(Code 1983, § 6.04, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 6.05. - Carrying or posting. 
Every solicitor shall at all times when so engaged carry his license on his person. All other licensees shall post their licenses in their places of business near the licensed activity. Provided, however, that in the case of machine or other device licensing, the city may provide a sticker for the current license year which shall be affixed to each machine or device requiring such sticker. All licensees shall display their licenses upon demand by any officer or citizen. 
(Code 1983, § 6.05, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 6.06. - Penalty for property owner. 
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any real property owned or controlled by him to be used, without a license, for any business for which a license is required by this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 6.06, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 6.07. - Responsibility of licensee. 
The conduct of agents or employees of a licensee, while engaged in performance of their duties for their principal or employer under such license, except as to criminal liability therefor, shall be deemed the conduct of the licensee. 
(Code 1983, § 6.07, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 6.08. - Conditional licenses. 
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the council may, upon a finding of the necessity therefor, place such conditions and restrictions upon a license as it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and justified. 
(Code 1983, § 6.08, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 6.09. - Renewal of licenses. 
Application for renewal of an existing license shall be made at least 30 days prior to the date of expiration of the license and shall contain such information as is required by the city. This time requirement may be waived by the council for good and sufficient cause. 
(Code 1983, § 6.09, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 6.10. - Insurance requirements. 
Whenever insurance is required by a section of this chapter, after approval by the council, but before the license shall issue, the applicant shall file with the city clerk-treasurer a policy or certificate of public liability insurance showing (1) that the limits are at least as high as required, (2) that coverage is effective for at least the license term approved, and (3) that such insurance will not be cancelled or terminated without 30 days' written notice served upon the city clerk-treasurer. Cancellation or termination of such coverage shall be grounds for license revocation. 
(Code 1983, § 6.10, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 6.11. - License denial and fixing rates—Hearing. 
Subd. 1.  Right to deny. The council reserves to itself the right to deny any application for a license to operate any business licensed or regulated under this chapter where such business involves service to the public; rates charged for service; use of public streets or other public property by the applicant or the public; or the public health, safety and convenience. The council may also consider the location of such business in making such determination. Provided, however, that before making such determination, the council shall hold a public hearing thereon pursuant to such notice to interested parties and the public as it may deem necessary or proper in action calling for such hearing. 
Subd. 2.  Rates. Where, under specific provisions of this chapter, the council has reserved to itself the right to fix or approve fees, rates or charges of a licensed or regulated business, such rates shall be uniform for each category or class of service, and no licensee or proprietor of a regulated business shall claim or demand payment in excess thereof. 
Subd. 3.  Hearing . Any applicant or licensee under this chapter who challenges denial of a license or permit or fees, charges or rates fixed or approved by the council shall have a right to a hearing before the council upon written request therefor. Notice of time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given to such persons and by such means as the council may determine in calling the hearing. 
(Code 1983, § 6.11, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 498, 2nd series, § 4, eff. 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 6.12. - Workers' compensation. 
No license to operate a business shall be issued by the city until the applicant presents acceptable evidence of compliance with the workers' compensation insurance coverage requirement of Minnesota Statutes by providing the name of the insurance company, the policy number, and dates of coverage, or the permit to self insure. 
(Ord. No. 117, 2nd series, eff. 6-14-91)  
Secs. 6.13—6.29. - Reserved.  
Sec. 6.30. - Mechanical amusement devices. 
Subd. 1.  Unlawful use and devices. It is unlawful for any person to: (1) sell or maintain a mechanical amusement device which is for gambling or contains an automatic payoff device; (2) give any prize, award, merchandise, gift, or thing of value to any person on account of operation of such device; (3) sell or maintain or permit to be operated in a place of business any mechanical amusement device equipped with an automatic payoff device; (4) equip any mechanical amusement device with an automatic payoff device; (5) permit the playing of a mechanical amusement device between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day; or (6) permit the playing of a mechanical amusement device within 200 feet of any church, public or parochial school or playground. 
For purposes of this section, a mechanical amusement device shall mean any machine or device which upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, card or disc may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment, or amusement, whether or not registering a score. It shall include such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, mechanical billiard/pool tables, mechanical bowling lanes, video or other electronic games, and any other game or play device or machine under whatever name it may be indicated, and music (such as "juke box") or picture machines. 
(Code 1983, § 6.30, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 498, 2nd series, § 5, eff. 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 6.31. - Dancehalls. 
Subd. 1.  Definitions . The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
A.  Public dancing place means any building, room, place, or space open to the general public in which dancing is carried on and for which admission by the public may be had, directly or indirectly, by payment of an admission fee or price for dancing. A public dancing place for the purposes of this section shall not include any building, room, space, or place in which public dancing is not the primary use of the location and is only incidental to another use that is the primary use of the location, such as a public dance occurring in a restaurant, hotel, multi-event center, a school or church. 
Subd. 2.  Permits . It is unlawful for any person or entity to operate or permit the operation of a public dancing place without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city. 
Subd. 3.  Permit procedure. An application for a public dancing place and the permit fee shall be filed with the city clerk on an application form provided by the city. The applicant shall provide all information as requested on the application. The application shall be submitted to the city clerk who shall then refer the application to the chief of police for investigation and report before the granting of the permit. The chief of police shall return the application, along with the investigation and report of the proposed licensee, to the council to be placed on the council meeting agenda. The council shall thereupon act upon the application and either grant or deny the same. In the case the same is granted, the council shall direct the city clerk to issue the same. The permit shall specify the names and addresses of the persons to whom issued; the amount paid therefor; and the time, duration, and place where the public dance is to be held, as well as any other conditions of approval required by the council. The permit shall be posted in a public place in the dancehall described therein during the time the public dance mentioned therein is being given, and the persons named in the permit shall be responsible under the law for the manner in which the public dance is being held and conducted. The permit may be issued subject to conditions as the council may determine. 
Subd. 4.  Applications . All applications for such permits shall be made upon blanks furnished by the city, and they shall be accompanied, upon request, by references which shall affirmatively show by the application and references that the applicant is a person of good moral character and reputation in the community in which the applicant lives and the applicant has not, within five years prior to the making of the application, been convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor, or of any of the provisions of this section or a law similar thereto, and no such application shall be granted to any person of bad character or who has been so convicted as aforesaid, nor to any person who is deemed likely to permit illegal behavior to occur in or around the public dance. No permit shall be issued under the terms of this section unless the council is satisfied that the public dancing place meets all city and state laws and regulations. 
Subd. 5.  Obscene or indecent behavior . No person shall, in any public dancehall, act or speak in a rude, boisterous, obscene, or indecent manner, nor shall any licensee permit any person to so act or speak therein. 
Subd. 6.  Lights . Every public dancing place shall be brightly illuminated while in public use, and dancing therein while the lights are extinguished, dimmed, or turned low, so as to give imperfect illumination, is hereby prohibited. 
Subd. 7.  Not to admit certain persons . It is unlawful for any person to whom a permit has been issued to permit to be or remain in any public dancing place any intoxicated person, any prostitute, any person under the age of 17 years, unless such person is accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
Subd. 8.  Officer may attend public dances . The chief of police may, as a condition for approval of a permit, require an officer of the law be present at a public dance to be given or held thereunder during the time the public dance is being held. Such officer of the law shall be designated by the chief of police. In all cases, the fees and expenses of such officer of the law shall be paid in advance by the person to whom the permit has been issued. All premises licensed under this section shall, during all operating hours, be open to inspection by any police officer to determine whether or not this section and all other laws are being observed. All persons, as a condition to being issued such license, consent to such inspection by such officers and without a warrant for searches or seizures. It is unlawful for any licensee or agent or employee of a licensee to hinder or prevent a police officer from making such inspection. 
Subd. 9.  Hours . No public dancing place shall be open to the public between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day, provided that no public dance shall be held or conducted on Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon thereof. In all other cases, the council issuing the permit herein provided for may, if they so desire, fix the hours within which public dances may be held, not inconsistent herewith, and shall also have authority by ordinance or resolution to regulate or prohibit the same on Sunday, within the limits of the city. 
Subd. 10.  Numbers of persons admitted . Each permit shall set forth the maximum number of persons to be admitted into the permitted premises based upon permitted occupancy loads per the Minnesota Building Code. 
Subd. 11.  Fees . All fees for permits hereunder shall be established by council resolution. 
Subd. 12.  Revocation of permit . The council may, at any time, revoke the permit for violation of any of the provisions of this section, the City Code or state laws and regulations. 
(Code 1983, § 6.31, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 122, 2nd series, eff. 7-26-91; Ord. No. 498, 2nd series, § 6, eff. 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 6.32. - Shows. 
Subd. 1.  Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to operate, host or permit any traveling or transient caravan, circus, carnival, or other similar performance or exhibition in the city without first having obtained a permit therefor from the city. 
Subd. 2.  Exceptions . No permit shall be required for the following: 
A.  Any circus, carnival, festival or similar event operated by and on the property of any school or church provided no part of the event is performed or operated by a traveling company. 
B.  Any carnival or festival at which no amusement rides are provided. 
Subd. 3.  Permit issuance. A permit under this section shall be issued if the following are met: 
A.  The applicant provides a sworn statement from the authorized agent of the circus, caravan, carnival or performing company, if applicable, certifying that the company is in compliance with all state and federal regulations pertaining to circuses and keeping of animals. 
B.  The applicant provides proof of general liability insurance coverage for both applicant and the traveling company providing the caravan, circus, carnival or other performance, if not the same, and said coverage shall be a minimum of $1,000,000.00 combined single limit and $2,000,000.00 aggregate limit and product liability coverage of $1,000,000.00 if the sale of food or non-alcoholic beverages will be sold or provided. 
C.  All city and state permits or licenses have been obtained as may be required for any part of the event, including, but not limited to, building permits for erection of structures, mechanical permits, food service licenses, etc. 
D.  The traveling company to provide the circus, caravan, carnival or similar performance has not had a license or permit revoked or suspended by the city or another jurisdiction in the 60 months preceding the date of application. 
Subd. 4.  Obscenity prohibited. 
A.  Definitions. As used in this subdivision, the following words and terms shall have the meanings stated: 
1.  Nudity means uncovered or less than opaquely covered post-pubertal human genitals, pubic areas, the post-pubertal human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this definition, a female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the areola only are covered. 
2.  Obscene performance means a performance which in whole or in part depicts or reveals nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse or which includes obscenities or explicit verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual conduct. 
3.  Obscenities means those slang words currently generally rejected for regular use in mixed society that are used to refer to genitals, female breasts, sexual conduct or excretory functions or products, either that have no other meaning or that in context are clearly used for the bodily, sexual or excretory meaning. 
4.  Performance means any play, motion picture film, dance, or other exhibition pictured, animated or live, performed before an audience. 
5.  Sadomasochistic abuse means flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed. 
6.  Sexual conduct means human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or any touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals or an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification. 
7.  Sexual excitement means the condition of human male or female genitals or the breasts of the female when in a state of sexual stimulation, or the sensual experiences of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct or nudity. 
B.  It is unlawful for any licensee, for a monetary consideration or other valuable commodity or service, to knowingly or recklessly (1) exhibit an obscene performance, or (2) directly or indirectly sell an admission ticket by other means to gain entrance to an obscene performance, or (3) directly or indirectly permit admission of a person to premises whereon there is exhibited an obscene performance. 
C.  Any prosecution under this subdivision shall include the following elements: (1) that the average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find the performance, taken as a whole, appealing to the prurient interest of the audience; (2) that the performance describes or depicts, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct included in the definition of "obscene performance"; and (3) that the performance, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(Code 1983, § 6.32, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 498, 2nd series, § 7, eff. 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 6.33. - Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 32, 2nd series, eff. 5-6-86)  
Sec. 6.34. - Tobacco. 
Subd. 1.  Purpose. The city recognizes that many persons under the age of 18 years purchase or otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco related devices, and such sales, possession and use are violations of both state and federal laws. Thus, the city intends to regulate the sale, possession and use of tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco related devices for the purpose of enforcing and furthering existing laws, to prevent and protect minors against the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco related devices, and to further the official public policy of the State of Minnesota, as stated in Minn. Stat., § 144.391, in regard to preventing minors from starting to smoke. 
Subd 2.  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
Compliance checks means the enforcement system the city uses to investigate and ensure that those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco related devices are following and complying with the requirements of this section. Compliance checks shall involve the use of minors as authorized by this section whereby the authorized minor attempts to purchase tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices for the purpose of enforcement of this section, as well as educational, research and training purposes as authorized by state and federal laws. 
Electronic delivery device means any product, including any component part of a product whether marketed or sold together or separately, containing or delivering nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking in the delivery of nicotine or any other substance through inhalation of vapor from the product. Electronic delivery device does not include any product that has been approved or certified by the Unites States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco-cessation product, as a tobacco-dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is marketed and sold for such an approved purpose. 
Hearing officer means the city administrator or any other city employee duly appointed by the city administrator. 
Individually packaged means the practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco product wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco products shall include, but not be limited to: single cigarette packs; single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form; and single cans or other packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco; cartons or other packaging containing more than a single pack or other single container as described in this paragraph shall not be considered individually packaged. 
Loosies means the common term used to refer to a single or individually wrapped cigarette. 
Minor means any person under the age of 18 years. 
Moveable place of business shall mean any form of business operated by which sales are made by U.S. Mail or other courier service or online (internet) services or out of a truck, van, automobile, or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure authorized for sales transactions. 
Nicotine and lobelia delivery product means any product containing or delivering nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption, or any part of such a product, that is not tobacco or an electronic delivery device. 
Retail establishment means any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices are available for sale to the general public, including, but not be limited to: grocery stores; convenience stores; liquor establishments; and restaurants. 
Sale or sell means any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other consideration. 
Self-service merchandising means open displays of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices for sale in any manner which any person may have access to tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices without the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee. Assistance or intervention for access shall require the actual physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related device between the customer and the license or employee. For purposes of this definition, self-service merchandising does not include vending machines. 
Smoking means inhaling or exhaling smoke from any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted tobacco or plant product. Smoking also includes carrying a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation. 
Tobacco or tobacco products shall mean any substance, item, or product containing, made or derived from tobacco that is intended for human consumption whether chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed or ingested by any other means or any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, including but not limited to: cigarettes; cigars; pipe tobacco; snuff; fine cut or other chewing tobacco; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff flowers; cavendish; shorts; plug and twist tobacco; dipping tobacco; refuse scraps; clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco. The term tobacco or tobacco products exclude any tobacco product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for an approved purpose. 
Tobacco related device means any product intentionally designed or intended to be used in connection with chewing, sniffing, smoking or using tobacco or tobacco products, including a pipe, rolling papers, tobacco or tobacco product carrying case or lighter. 
Vending machine means any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices upon the insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment directly into the device by the person seeking to purchase or otherwise obtain the tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related device. 
Subd. 3.  License required. It is unlawful for any person to, directly or indirectly, keep for retail sale, sell at retail, or otherwise dispose of any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco-related device without a license therefor from the city. 
Subd. 4.  License application . Application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices hereunder shall be made on a form provided by the city. The application shall contain the full name of the applicant, the applicant's residential address and telephone number, the name of the business, the address and telephone number for which the license is sought, and any additional information the city deems necessary. Upon receipt of a complete application and license fee, the city clerk shall forward a copy to the police department for completion of a background investigation. If the city clerk determines that an application is incomplete, he or she shall return the application to the applicant with notice of the information necessary to make the application complete. 
Subd. 5.  Action on license application . The city clerk may either approve or deny the license, or may delay action for such reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary. If the city clerk approves the license, a license shall be immediately issued to the applicant. If the city clerk denies the license, notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant. The city clerk may deny a license on the following grounds: 
A.  The applicant is under the age of 18 years. 
B.  The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any violation of a federal, state or local law, ordinance provisions or other regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco products or tobacco related devices. 
C.  The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date of application. 
D.  The applicant fails to provide information required on the application or provides false or misleading information. 
E.  The applicant is prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance or other regulation from holding such a license. 
Subd. 6.  Conditions of license. 
A.  Separate licenses shall be issued for the sale of tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco-related devices at each fixed place of business and no license shall be issued for a moveable place of business. 
B.  The licensee shall comply with all provisions on this section. 
C.  Notwithstanding any exceptions for tobacco products shops as set forth in the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act, no licensee shall directly or indirectly permit smoking in the licensed premises. All licensees under this section shall be responsible for the actions of their employees and patrons in regard to any smoking in the licensed premises. 
Subd. 7.  Duration of license. All licenses issued under this section shall expire on December 31st of each year. 
Subd. 8.  Suspension or revocation. Any license issued under this section may be revoked or suspended for any violation of this section or for any violation of any federal, state or other law, ordinance or regulation relating to tobacco products or tobacco related device as follows: 
A.  A licensee's authority to sell cigarettes at the licensed location may be suspended for a violation of this section. 
B.  In the case of suspension, there shall be no license refund. 
C.  License revocation may be instituted following a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor conviction under this section of any officer, director, manager, or other agent or employee of any license. 
Subd. 9.  Termination of license. All licenses issued under this section shall be valid only for the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to whom the license was issued. No license may be transferred to another location or person and any transfer or change of ownership of the licensed premises shall terminate the license. 
Subd. 10.  Moveable place of business. No license shall be issued to a moveable place of business. 
Subd. 11.  Display of license. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of the general public on the licensed premises. 
Subd. 12.  Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be made in accordance with this section as the original application. The request for a renewal shall be made at least 30 days, but no more than 60 days before the expiration of the current license. No license shall be renewed in the absence of payment of the annual license fee. 
Subd. 13. Investigation and License fees. No license shall be issued under this section until the investigation fee and license fee is paid in full. The fees for an investigation and license under this section shall be in an amount set forth by city council resolution. 
Subd. 14.  Unlawful Sales. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related device: 
A.  To any person under the age of 18 years; 
B.  By means of any type of vending machine; 
C.  By means of self-service merchandising, unless granted an exemption under the licensee's license as provided herein; 
D.  Containing opium, morphine, jimpson [jimson] weed, belladonna, strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic, or controlled substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process. 
A licensee under this section may be exempt from the self-service merchandising prohibition set forth above if: 
(1)  The licensee's establishment derives 90 percent or more of its total revenues from tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco related device sales; 
(2)  The licensee prohibits any person under the age of 18 from entering the licensed premises at all times; and 
(3)  The licensee's license authorizes self-service merchandising and is subject to the condition that no person under the age of 18 shall be permitted within the licensed premises at any time. 
Subd. 15.  Self-service sales. All tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices shall either be stored behind a counter or other area, including a case or other storage unit, which is not freely accessible and not left open or accessible by the general public. This section shall not apply to any licensee that was granted an exemption under its license for self-service merchandising. 
Subd. 16.  Responsibility. All licensees under this section shall be responsible for the actions of their employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices on the licensed premises, and the sale of such an item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the licensee. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the city from subjecting a licensee's employee to any penalties appropriate under this section, state or federal law, or other applicable law or regulation. 
Subd. 17.  Compliance checks and inspections. All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the city during licensee's regular business hours. From time to time, but at least once per calendar year, the city shall conduct unannounced compliance checks to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section. Such compliance cheeks shall involve minors who are over the age of 15 years, but less than 18 years (with the written consent of their parent or guardian), who shall enter the licensed premise and purchase or attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices. 
Minors used for the purpose of compliance cheeks shall be supervised by designated law enforcement officers or other designated city personnel. Minors used for compliance checks shall not be in violation of any law prohibiting the purchase or attempted purchase, or the unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices by a minor when such items are obtained as a part of the compliance check. No minor used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the minor's age, and shall answer all questions about the minor's age asked by the licensee or licensee's employee and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he or she is asked. Nothing in this section shall prohibit other or additional compliance checks authorized by state or federal laws for educational, research, or training purposes required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal law. 
Subd. 18.  Unlawful sale, purchase or possession. Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be unlawful. 
A.  Illegal possession. It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to have in his or her possession any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device. This division shall not apply to persons under the age of 18 lawfully involved in a compliance check or fulfilling his or her duties as an employee of the licensee in making a retail sale. 
B.  Illegal purchase by minor. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related device. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to purchase, attempt to purchase, or possess a product that contains or delivers nicotine or lobelia and is intended for human consumption. This division shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check. 
C.  Illegal purchase or procurement for minor. It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain for or provide to any person under the age of 18 any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device. It shall further be unlawful for any person to coerce or attempt to coerce a person under the age of 18 to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device. This division shall not apply to any person under the age of 18 lawfully involved in a compliance check. 
D.  Use of false identification. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use of a false form of identification, whether the identification is that of another person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to represent an age older than the actual age of the person. 
E.  Illegal sale to person under the age of 18. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, obtain for or otherwise provide to any person under the age of 18 tobacco or a product containing or delivering nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption, or any part of such product, that is not tobacco as defined in this chapter. This section shall not apply to a parent or legal guardian of a person under the age of 18 who obtained or provided to the person under the age of 18 such product if the product has been approved or otherwise certified for legal sale by the United States Food and Drug Administration for tobacco use cessation, harm reduction or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for the approved purpose. 
F.  Child resistant packaging required. It is unlawful for a licensee hereunder to sell or offer to sell any liquid, whether or not such liquid contains nicotine, which is intended for human consumption and use in an electronic delivery device, that is not contained in "child-resistant packaging" as the term is defined and as is required in Minn. Stat. §461.20. 
Subd. 19.  Administration procedures and penalty. 
A.  Notice. Upon discovery of a violation of this section, a citation that sets forth the alleged violation and which shall inform the alleged violator of his/her right to be heard on the accusations shall be issued and served upon the violator either personally or by mail. 
B.  Hearings. If a person accused of violating this section requests a hearing within ten days of the issuance of the citation, a hearing shall be scheduled, of which the time and place shall be published and provided to the accused violator, but in no event more than 14 days after the violator's request for a hearing. 
C.  Hearing officer. Such hearing shall be held before the hearing officer and shall be open to the public. 
D.  Decision. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue written findings of fact and conclusions detailing whatever violation has occurred and whether the alleged violator committed it. A copy of the hearing officer's written findings of fact and conclusions shall be provided to the accused violator. If the hearing officer finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, such findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the accused violator. 
E.  Appeals. The violator may appeal the decision made by the hearing officer to the district court. 
F.  Misdemeanor prosecution. A violator of any provision of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor. If the violator is criminally charged, no administrative penalty shall be imposed. 
G.  Continued violation. Each day which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
H.  Penalties. 
1.  Licensees. Any licensee found to have violated this section, or whose employee has violated this section, shall be charged an administrative fine of $75.00 for a first violation of this section; $200.00 for a second violation at the same licensed premises within a 24-month period; and $250.00 for a third or subsequent violation at the same licensed premises within a 24-month period. In addition, upon the third violation, the license shall be suspended for seven days. Upon the fourth or subsequent violation at the same licensed premises that has occurred since the date on which the city issued its initial license to the licensee under this section, the city council shall determine the penalty to be imposed. 
2.  Other individuals. Individuals, other than minors regulated by subparagraph H(3) herein, found to be in violation of this section shall be charged an administrative fee of $50.00, unless the individual is charged with a criminal offense arising out of the same violation. 
3.  Minors. Minors found in unlawful possession of, or who unlawfully purchase or attempt to purchase, tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices shall be handled in the same manner as nay other juvenile or minor charged with a violation of the law. 
4.  Suspension upon failure to pay administrative penalty. Any administrative fine imposed hereunder shall be paid by the licensee within 30 days of the date of notice. The licensee's failure to pay the administrative fine within 30 days of the date of notice shall be grounds for suspension of the license and the license shall remain suspended until the administrative fine is paid in full, plus any surcharge or interest imposed for late payment. 
Subd. 20.  Exceptions and defenses. 
A.  Religious, spiritual or cultural ceremony. Nothing in this section shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices to a minor as part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual or cultural ceremony with the consent of the minor's parent or legal guardian. 
B.  Reliance of proof of age. It shall be an affirmative defense to the violation of this section for a person to have reasonably relied on proof of age as described by state law. 
Subd. 21 .  Electronic delivery devices and nicotine and lobelia delivery products . All of the license, sale, purchase, possession, use and enforcement provisions in this section relating to tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices shall apply fully and to the same extent to electronic delivery devices and nicotine and lobelia delivery products. 
(Code 1983, § 6.34, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 134, 2nd series, eff. 2-28-92; Ord. No. 266, 2nd series, eff. 11-12-98; Ord. No. 314, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 6-28-01; Ord. No. 332, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-28-02; Ord. No. 421, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 12-8-07; Ord. No. 455, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 4-6-10; Ord. No. 462, 2nd series, §§ 1—4, eff. 10-5-10; Ord. No. 498, 2nd series, § 8, eff. 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 520, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 6-4-2013; Ord. No. 533, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 7-15-2014; Ord. No. 543, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 4-7-2015) 
State Law reference— Municipal cigarette license, Minn. Stat. § 461.12 et seq.  
Sec. 6.35. - Gambling. 
Subd. 1.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure that charitable gambling in the city is conducted by organizations licensed or exempt from licensing under Minnesota Statutes and that the proceeds from such gambling are used primarily for the betterment of the residents and businesses of the community. These restrictions shall be no less restrictive than Minnesota Statutes or regulations and shall apply to all forms of lawful gambling. 
Subd. 2.  Applicability. This section shall regulate all forms of lawful gambling within the city except bingo conducted within a nursing home or a senior citizen housing project or by a senior citizen organization and the following limits are followed: 
A.  The prizes for a single bingo game do not exceed $10.00; 
B.  Total prizes awarded at a single bingo occasion do not exceed $200.00; 
C.  No more than two bingo occasions are held by the organization or at the facility each week; 
D.  Only members of the organization or residents of the nursing home or housing project are allowed to play in a bingo game; 
E.  No compensation is paid for any persons who conduct the bingo; and 
F.  A manager is appointed to supervise the bingo. 
Subd. 3.  Approval required . Unless excepted from regulation by this section and not including exempt or excluded lawful gambling as defined by state law, it is unlawful for any organization to conduct lawful gambling in the city without approval from the city council or the county in the form of a premises permit. It is unlawful for any person or organization to conduct exempt or excluded lawful gambling in the city without approval and exempt/excluded permit issued by the city clerk or designee. 
Subd. 4.  Applications. 
A.  Applications to conduct lawful gambling shall be considered and approved by the council at regular meetings. 
B.  Only applications submitted by eligible organizations will be considered for approval by the council. 
C.  An application organization shall provide adequate proof that it has at least 15 active members and that at least 15 of its members are either employed or live within the city or that it is a nationally known organization as determined by the city. 
D.  An applicant for a premises permit shall be subject to a criminal background investigation which shall include investigation of the organization and the gambling manager. 
E.  No application for a premises permit will be considered or approved by the city council until the investigation fee is paid in full. The investigation fee under this section shall be in an amount set forth by city council resolution. 
Subd. 5.  Regulations and restrictions. 
A.  In addition to regulations imposed by the state, all information and reports required to be submitted to the state shall also be submitted to the city, both with the application and on an annual basis. Failure to comply with this reporting requirement shall result in suspension of the premises permit. The city council may revoke the premises permit where the organization has failed to meet the reporting requirements on more than one occasion. 
B.  Lawful gambling may be conducted only in on-sale liquor licensed establishments in the city, which are either owned or leased by the eligible organization. 
C.  Eligible organizations may, however, be granted temporary approval for lawful gambling in premises other than on-sale liquor licensed establishments for no more than four consecutive days. 
Subd. 6.  Distribution of proceeds. Every organization conducting lawful gambling within the City of Eagan shall expend 60 percent of its expenditures derived from lawful gambling on lawful purposes conducted or located within the City of Eagan or the City of Eagan's trade area. The City of Eagan's trade area is defined as the cities of Apple Valley, Bloomington, Burnsville, Inver Grove Heights, Mendota Heights, Rosemount and Sunfish Lake. Annually, every organization must file with the city, on a form provided by the city, a report signed by an independent certified public accountant, documenting compliance with this section. In addition, every organization must submit a report to the city each January listing all lawful purpose expenditures from January 1 to December 31 of the preceding year. The report shall identify the name of the entity to whom the check was written, the city location of the recipient, and the amount of the donation. 
(Code 1983, § 6.35, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 50, 2nd series, eff. 6-26-87; Ord. No. 352, 2nd series, eff. 9-12-02; Ord. No. 410, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 3-31-07; Ord. No. 420, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 12-8-07; Ord. No. 458, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 8-2-10; Ord. No. 561, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 5-16-2017)  
Sec. 6.36. - Solicitors. 
Subd. 1. Purpose. This section is not intended to in any way hinder, delay or interfere with legitimate business or organizational activities. The council finds, however, that solicitors have used public streets and their direct contact with residents of the city for the illegitimate solicitation practices of harassment, nuisance, theft, deceit, or menacing, troublesome or unlawful activities. This section is intended to prevent and protect against the existence of illicit, unlawful or fraudulent solicitation in the city. To protect the public's health, safety and welfare, the city deems it necessary to regulate door-to-door or street solicitation through a registration process 
Subd. 2. Scope of application. This section shall apply to solicitors, peddlers and transient merchants. This section shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Newspaper/magazine carriers; 
B.  Merchants delivering goods in the regular course of business when the delivery occurs at the customer's home or place of business; 
C.  Persons who sell products of the farm or garden occupied, grown or cultivated by such person; and 
D.  Outdoor sales on private property in connection with a seasonal outdoor event or temporary outdoor event, as those terms are defined and permitted under the zoning regulations set forth elsewhere in the City Code, if conducted by or with the consent of the owner or occupant of the property on which the event occurs. 
E.  Persons who conduct garage sales, rummage sales, estate sales, multipurpose bazaar or flea markets. 
F.  Auctions conducted by licensed auctioneer or by an officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. 
Subd. 3. Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
A.  Solicitor means any person who procures or attempts to procure orders for the sale of goods, merchandise, subscriptions or services for future delivery or seeks donations for any organization by the means of going door-to-door. 
B.  Peddler means any person who sells, distributes or attempts to sell or distribute for a consideration any goods for immediate delivery by the means of going door-to-door. 
C.  Transient merchant means any person who sells or attempts to sell goods for immediate delivery, the method of which may be from a vehicle or other mobile conveyance or device or a temporary stand and not by means of door-to-door, from a temporary location. If an organization or entity organizes and operates an event, at which there will be the sale of goods to the public or to the attendees of the event by vendors who must register or enroll with the organization or entity in order to sell goods at the event, then the vendor, nonetheless, shall be deemed a transient merchant for purposes of this section. Transient merchant shall not mean any person who sells or attempts to sell goods on property which the person owns or legally occupies a building or portion thereof on the property. 
D.  Goods means any tangible thing of value, but not including money, things in action or intangible personal property other than merchandise certificates or coupons as herein described. The term includes such chattels as are furnished or used at the time of sale or subsequently in the modernization, rehabilitation, repair, alteration, improvement or construction of real property so as to become a part thereof whether or not severable therefrom. The term also includes retail seller-issued merchandise, certificates, or coupons which are not redeemable for cash but to be used in lieu of cash, equal to its face value, in exchange for goods or services sold by such seller. 
Subd. 4. Prohibited practices. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation, peddling or transient merchandising for any unlawful business or organizational purpose or unlawful activity. 
B.  It is unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or transient merchant to commit any conduct constituting harassment, nuisance, theft, deceit, or menacing, troublesome or otherwise unlawful activities during the course of the sales activity. 
C.  It is unlawful for any solicitor, peddler, or transient merchant to enter or attempt to gain entrance to any residential or business premises displaying at such entrance a sign prohibiting any solicitation. 
D.  It is unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or transient merchant to refuse to leave any premises when requested by the owner, lessee, or person in charge thereof. It is unlawful for any transient merchant to sell or attempt to sell on private property without the written consent of owner of record of the property. 
E.  It is unlawful for any person to engage in any activity constituting that of a solicitor, peddler or transient merchant without first obtaining a permit or being registered with the city as herein provided. 
F.  It is unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or transient merchant to not carry the permit or certificate of registration when engaging in sales activity. 
G.  It is unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or transient merchant to transfer the permit or registration identification. 
H.  It is unlawful to obstruct the free flow of either vehicle or pedestrian traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way. 
I.  It is unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or transient merchant to conduct any sales activity between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except a transient merchant may sell after 8:00 p.m. if specifically permitted under the permit. 
J.  It is unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or transient merchant to use unreasonably loud noises or amplifying devices while engaged in sales activities. 
K.  It is unlawful to make any false or misleading statements about the product or service being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the city based on the city having issued a permit or certificate of registration to that person. 
L.  It is unlawful to sell or attempt to sell or solicit a sale within any public right-of-way, except this provision shall not apply to any person who is selling merchandise from a motor vehicle that travels through the streets and stops only to make an immediate sale and does not park to await customers or sales. 
M.  It is unlawful to sell or attempt to sell or solicit a sale upon any city-owned property that is otherwise a public right-of-way, unless the sale is in connection with an event or special activity that is organized by the city or an organization pursuant to a special event or park facility permit for provided elsewhere in this Code and for which a vendor permit has been issued by the director of parks and recreation in accordance with regulations elsewhere in this Code. 
Subd. 5. Permit; exemptions. 
A.  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful to conduct business as either a peddler, a solicitor, or transient merchant without first having obtained a permit from the city. The permit shall be carried by the person soliciting or peddling or selling the goods and shall be shown to any resident or police officer upon demand. 
B.  Permit application. Application for a city permit to conduct business as a peddler, transient merchant, or solicitor shall be made before the person conducts business. Application for a permit shall be made on a form available from the office of the city clerk. The application shall be signed by the applicant. All applications shall include the following information: 
1.  Applicant's full legal name; 
2.  All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to which applicant officially answers; 
3.  A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color, height, weight, distinguishing marks and features, and the like); 
4.  Full address of applicant's permanent residence; 
5.  Telephone number of applicant's permanent residence; 
6.  Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed or operated by applicant or for which the applicant is an employee or agent for which the permit is applied; 
7.  Full address of applicant's regular place of business (if any); 
8.  Any and all business-related telephone numbers of the applicant; 
9.  The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a permit; 
10.  The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business, and if the applicant is applying for a temporary permit, the number of days he or she will be conducting business in the city (maximum 14 consecutive days); 
11.  Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant can be reached while conducting business within the city; 
12.  A statement as to whether the applicant has been arrested or convicted within the last five years for any violation of any state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than traffic offenses, providing for each violation the offense, the date of the offense, the disposition of the offense, the date of the disposition of the offense, and the city, county and state in which the offense occurred; 
13.  A statement as to whether the applicant is the subject of any complaint filed with any municipality, Better Business Bureau, attorney general office or other agency, providing the date and location of the complaint and the agency within which the complaint was filed; 
14.  A statement whether the applicant had a license for solicitation, peddling, or transient merchant from any other municipality and/or county which was revoked within the past five years; 
15.  A list of the three most recent locations (city, town, county and state) where the applicant has conducted business as a peddler; 
16.  A general description of the items to be sold or services to be provided; 
17.  All additional information deemed necessary by the city council; 
18.  The applicant's driver's license number or other acceptable form of photo identification; and 
19.  The license plate number, registration information and vehicle identification number for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the licensed business and a description of the vehicle. 
20.  If the application is for a transient merchant permit and the applicant is an organization or entity operating an event including the sale of goods by vendors, the applicant shall provide a complete list of all vendors who will sell goods at the event. 
C.  Fee. All applications for a permit under this section shall be accompanied by the fees established in the city's fee schedule as adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
D.  Procedure. Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of the required fees, the city clerk shall forward the application to the chief of police or designee. An application shall be determined to be complete only if it is signed and all required information is provided. If the city clerk determines that the application is incomplete, the city clerk shall inform the applicant of the required necessary information which is missing. The chief of police or designee shall review the application and conduct an investigation, including background checks, necessary to verify the information provided with the application. No background investigation shall be required for an applicant that is a non-profit organization or group based or located in the City of Eagan. 
1.  The permit may be issued by the city clerk when the police department's investigation is completed or within seven business days of application, whichever is earlier. 
2.  The permit shall be denied if the application is not complete or the applicant is ineligible for a license pursuant to the provisions herein. 
E.  Duration. A permit granted under this section shall be valid for a period of 364 days from the date on which the permit was issued or a shorter time if otherwise required by the city or other regulation in this Code. 
F.  Permit exemptions. 
1.  No permit under this section shall be required for any of the following: Any person to sell or attempt to sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown, produced, cultivated, or raised on any farm. 
2.  Any person going from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or other type of place-to-place when the activity is for the purpose of exercising that person's state or federal Constitutional rights, such as the freedom of speech, press, religion and the like. However, the person will not be exempt from licensing if the person sells or attempts to sell any goods or services in connection with the door-to-door canvassing. 
3.  Professional fundraisers working on behalf of an otherwise exempt person or group shall not be exempt from the permitting requirements of this section. 
4.  Any canvassing, soliciting, or fund raising for the purpose of charitable organizations if such organization is registered with the attorney general pursuant to the provisions of Minn. Stat. § 309.52 as a charitable organization or exempted pursuant to the provisions of Minn. Stat. § 309.515; however, the organization shall register with the city as required herein. 
5.  Any person to sell or attempt to sell goods at an event or special activity on city-owned property, such as a farmer's market, art fair, holiday festival or organized fundraiser, marathon or tournament, sponsored or organized by the city or an organization, provided the vendor is a registered vendor for the event and has a vendor permit issued by the director of parks and recreation as provided elsewhere in this Code. 
G.  Permit ineligibility. An application for a permit under this section shall be denied if any of the following exists: 
1.  The applicant provides any false, misleading, or misrepresenting information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the failure to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of application. 
2.  The conviction of the applicant within the past five years from the date of application for any violation of any federal or state statute or regulation or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person's ability to conduct the business for which the permit is being sought in an honest and legal manner. Violations shall include but not be limited to: burglary, theft or theft-related offenses, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person; and any offense or violation committed in the course of solicitation or peddling activity. 
3.  The revocation within the past five years from the date of the application of any license or permit issued to the applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant. 
4.  The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the existence of more than three complaints against the applicant filed with any municipality, the Better Business Bureau, the attorney general's office, or other similar business or consumer rights office or agency within the preceding five years of the date of application. 
5.  For transient merchants, the outdoor sales as proposed by the applicant is not permitted on the proposed property or in the proposed location upon the property under any other regulation of this Code. 
6.  The applicant is proposing to sell goods upon or within public right-of-way. 
7.  The applicant is proposing to sell goods upon or within city owned or other public property and the sale is not in connection with and under the operation of a civic or community event or a non-profit organization's activity permitted to occur on the public property or the applicant is not a registered or enrolled vendor for the event or activity otherwise permitted. 
8.  The applicant is proposing to be a vendor of food or beverages to users of a city park or facility when food or beverage is made available to the users by the city. 
Subd. 6. Permit suspension and revocation. 
A.  Generally. Any permit issued under this section may be suspended or revoked at the discretion of the chief of police or designee for violation of any of the following: 
1.  Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements on the application form; 
2.  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course of the permitted activity; 
3.  Conviction of any violation for which granting of a permit could have been denied under this section; 
4.  Violation of any provision of this Code; or 
5.  Upon being arrested or charged for an unlawful act as described in Subd. 5.G.2. herein. 
B.  Notice. After revoking or suspending any permit issued under this section, the city shall provide the permit holder with written notice of the alleged violation(s) and inform the permit holder of his or her right to a hearing on the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by U.S. mail to the permanent residential address listed on the permit application, or if no residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the permit application. 
C.  Public hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in clause B. of this subdivision, the permit holder shall have the right to request a hearing. If no request for a hearing is received by the city clerk within ten regular business days following the service of the notice, the city may proceed with the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of mailed notices, service shall be considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the U.S. mail. If a hearing is requested within the stated time frame, a hearing shall be scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request. Within seven regular business days of the hearing, the city clerk shall notify the permit holder of its decision. 
D.  Emergency. If, in the discretion of the chief of police or designee, imminent harm to the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a permit holder under this section, the city may immediately suspend the person's permit and provide notice of the right to hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in clause B. of this subdivision. 
Subd. 7. Permit transferability. No permit issued under this section shall be transferred to any person other than the person to whom the permit was issued. 
Subd. 8. Registration. 
A.  An organization registered with the Minnesota Attorney General pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 309.52 as a charitable organization or exempted by Minn. Stat. § 309.515 is exempt from the licensing requirements of this section, but shall register with the city. No fee shall be required for registration. Registration shall be made on a form provided by the city and shall include the following information: 
1.  Name and address of the organization; 
2.  Name and address of the person seeking to register on behalf of the organization; 
3.  Names and addresses of all of the officers and no more than four directors of the organization; 
4.  Period during which canvassing, solicitation, or fundraising is to be carried on, not to exceed five years; 
5.  Purpose of the cause for which registration is sought; and 
6.  Evidence of registration with the Minnesota Attorney General or exemption from registration pursuant to Minn. Stat. §§ 309.515 or 309.52. 
B.  Upon completion of the registration form, the city clerk shall issue to the registrant a certificate of registration as proof of the registration. Certificates of registration shall be non-transferable and state the date of issuance and length of time, not to exceed a period of 364 consecutive days from the date of issuance, that the same shall be operative. 
C.  Each time during said 364-day period or less, as registered with the city by the organization, that solicitation is conducted, such organization shall furnish to the city clerk the list all of its members, agents, or representatives who are conducting solicitations on behalf of the organization, solicitation credentials, in writing, stating the name of the organization, name and address of the person issuing credentials on behalf of the organization, name of agent to whom the credentials are issued, purpose of solicitation and period during which solicitation is to be carried on, not to exceed the period of time during which the registration certificate issued to the organization is operative. 
D.  No person shall solicit on behalf of any organization until first registering with the city as set forth herein. 
Subd. 9. Exclusion by placard. No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant when the property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches long and four inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating "No Peddlers, Solicitors or Transient Merchants," or "Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants Prohibited," or other comparable statement. No person other than the property owner or tenant shall remove, deface or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this section. 
(Code 1983, § 6.36, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 23, 2nd series, eff. 8-23-85; Ord. No. 207, 2nd series, eff. 10-26-95; Ord. No. 425, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 6-3-08; Ord. No. 473, 2nd series, §§ 1—5, eff. 4-5-2011; Ord. No. 491, 2nd series, §§ 1—3, eff. 2-8-2012; Ord. No. 519, 2nd series, §§ 2, 3, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 568, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 11-17-2017)  
Sec. 6.37. - Garbage, refuse and recycling haulers. 
Subd. 1.  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
A.  Garbage means all putrescible wastes, including animal offal and carcasses of dead animals but excluding human excreta, sewage and other water-carried wastes. 
B.  Refuse means ashes, nonrecyclable glass, crockery, cans, paper, boxes, rags and similar nonputrescible wastes (does not decay or have foul odor), construction or demolition debris, and wood except when stored as firewood in compliance with section 10.53, subd. 3. 
C.  Recyclables means materials that are separated from mixed municipal solid waste for the purpose of recycling, including paper, glass, plastics, metals, automobile oil, and batteries. Refuse-derived fuel or other material that is destroyed by incineration is not a recyclable material. 
D.  Targeted recyclables means materials metal food and beverage containers, glass food and beverage containers, newsprint, corrugated cardboard, plastics (as defined by the county), office paper and mail, magazines, catalogs or other materials as defined by council resolution. 
E.  Yard waste means leaves, lawn clippings, garden waste, weeds, Christmas trees and prunings up to six inches in diameter or other materials as may be defined by council resolution. 
F.  Single family/multiple dwelling-individual household service hauling means garbage, refuse and recycling hauling services in which the hauler specifically services an individual residential dwelling unit for the pickup of garbage, refuse or recyclables of that individual residential dwelling unit at that specific unit, regardless of whether it is a single-family dwelling or a dwelling unit within a multiple dwelling unit structure. 
G.  Commercial/multiple dwelling-commingled service hauling means garbage, refuse or recycling hauling services provided to any commercial establishment or any multiple dwelling units of which all residents commingle their garbage and refuse in a dumpster or other similar container for shared pickup service by the hauler or commingle their recyclables in a dumpster or other similar container for shared pickup service by the hauler. 
H.  Commercial establishment means any premises where a commercial or industrial enterprise of any kind is carried on and shall include restaurants, clubs, churches, and schools. 
I.  Special pickup means any collection of materials other than garbage, other refuse, recyclables or yard waste including white goods, furniture, oversized materials and construction debris. 
J.  Daily residential hauling district means a residential area in which garbage, other refuse, recyclables and yard waste are collected on the same day, the boundaries and day of collection of which are defined as follows: (i) Monday Residential Hauling District - any area in the city north of Diffley Road and west of Lexington Avenue; (ii) Wednesday Residential Hauling District - any area in the city south of Diffley Road and west of Lexington Avenue; and (iii) Friday Residential Hauling District - any area in the city east of Lexington Avenue. 
K.  Construction or demolition debris means waste building materials, packaging, and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of buildings. 
L.  Mixed municipal solid waste and recycling transfer station means an intermediate waste facility in which garbage, refuse and other solid waste and recyclable materials from residential, commercial, industrial and community activities that the generator of the waste aggregates for collection is temporarily deposited to await transportation to another waste facility. 
M.  Construction and demolition debris waste transfer station means an intermediate waste facility in which construction and demolition debris that the generator of the debris aggregates for collection is temporarily deposited to await transportation to another waste facility. 
Subd. 2.  License required. It is unlawful for any person to haul garbage, refuse, recyclables, yard waste or food waste, without a license therefor from the city, or to haul garbage, refuse, or recyclables, yard waste or food waste from his own residence or business property other than herein excepted. For purposes of this section, a license shall be required for hauling construction or demolition debris only in cases of hauling for hire or with a motor vehicle that has a hauling capacity of four cubic yards or greater. 
Subd. 3.  Exception. Nothing in this section shall prevent persons from hauling garbage, refuse, recyclables, yard wastes or food wastes from their own residences or business properties provided the following rules are observed: 
•  That all garbage is hauled in containers that are watertight on all sides and the bottom and with tightfitting covers on top; 
•  That all refuse, recyclables, yard wastes and food wastes are hauled in vehicles with leakproof bodies and completely covered or enclosed by canvas or other means or material so as to completely eliminate the possibility of loss of cargo; 
•  That all garbage and refuse shall be dumped or unloaded only at a licensed solid waste facility or county-designated facility; 
•  That recyclables may be disposed of at a recycling facility, an organized recyclable drive or through a licensed recyclable hauler; 
•  That yard wastes may be composted privately or be disposed of at a composting facility or through a licensed refuse hauler or recyclable hauler; and 
•  That food wastes may be disposed of at a food waste composting facility or processing facility or through a licensed food waste hauler. 
Subd. 4.  Hauler licensee requirements. 
A.  Hauler licenses shall be granted by the city clerk only upon the condition that the licensee has watertight packer-type vehicles or, in the case of recycling and construction or demolition debris haulers, appropriate container vehicles in condition to prevent loss in transit of liquid or solid cargo; that the vehicle be kept clean and as free from offensive odors as possible; the vehicle not be parked in any street longer than reasonably necessary to collect garbage, other refuse, yard waste or recyclables; and the insurance requirements as set forth in this section are met. All hauler licenses shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  There shall be three license categories defined by the type of account served: (1) commercial/multiple dwelling-commingled service hauling, (2) single family/multiple dwelling-individual household service hauling, and (3) construction and demolition debris hauling. 
2.  Commercial/multiple dwelling-commingled service and single family/multiple dwelling-individual household service hauling licenses include recycling hauling services. 
3.  Licensees shall make curbside recycling collection available to all single-family and multiple dwelling residences with individual household services. At a minimum, such service shall include all targeted recyclables as defined herein. Commercial/multiple-dwelling hauling licensees shall make recycling collection available to all commercial establishment accounts. At a minimum, such service to commercial establishments shall include at least two targeted recyclables items as defined herein. 
4.  Single family/multiple dwelling-individual household service hauling licensees shall make weekly collection of separated garbage and other refuse, yard waste and recyclables for all single family/multiple dwelling-individual household service hauling accounts subject to the daily residential hauling district restrictions. 
Notwithstanding the weekly collection requirement set forth above, a single family/multiple dwelling-individual household hauler licensee may collect recyclables for single family/multiple dwelling-individual household hauling accounts on a bi-weekly basis provided the licensee complies with the following conditions: 
(a)  The collection of recyclables shall comply with the daily residential hauling district restrictions; 
(b)  The licensee shall permit single-sort recycling whereby the customer may commingle all recyclables in a single container; and 
(c)  The licensee shall provide to the customer a close fitting covered container of not less than 32 gallon capacity and, at a customer's request, the licensee shall provide a larger capacity close fitting covered container to the customer at no additional cost to the customer. 
It is unlawful for hauler vehicles to operate on residential streets in any district on any day other than as permitted for the daily single-family-multiple dwelling-individual household service hauling district, except to collect a missed pickup, special pickup or when an observed holiday falls within that week. 
5.  At a minimum, commercial/multiple dwelling-commingled service hauling licensees shall make weekly collections of separated garbage, other refuse and recyclables for all multiple residential dwelling accounts under its license. 
6.  It shall be the responsibility of the licensee that the name and telephone number of the owner of any and all containers which are located on and hauled off a construction or demolition site by the licensee be permanently affixed to each such container. 
7.  All hauler vehicles shall be in full compliance with the Minnesota Department of Transportation requirements and all hauler vehicles shall be available for inspection by the city. 
8.  In order to receive or retain a hauling license hereunder, the applicant/licensee shall be in compliance with all state, county and city regulations, including any conditional use permits. 
B.  Before a hauling license may be issued, the applicant shall file with the city clerk evidence of the following insurance coverages and amounts for each vehicle operated under the license from an insurance company authorized to do business within the state: 
1.  Auto liability coverage including all owned, nonowned and hired motor vehicles. Coverage provided shall be in an amount of at least $250,000.00 for injury to or death of any one claimant and $500,000.00 for total injuries and/or damages arising from a single occurrence, or a combined single limit of $500,000.00. 
2.  Workers' compensation insurance certificate as required by Minnesota Statutes. 
The licensee shall file with the city clerk a copy of the licensee's certificate of insurance(s) which shall list the vehicle identification number of each vehicle operated under the license verifying insurance coverage in effect during the duration of the license. If the licensee's insurance policy period is not a calendar year running with the license, then the licensee shall file with the city clerk newly issued certificates of insurance upon its policy coverage period renewals to evidence continued coverage for the license duration. 
C.  The council, in the interest of maintaining healthful and sanitary conditions in the city, hereby reserves the right to specify and assign certain areas to all licensees, and to limit the number of licenses issued. The council shall issue no more than seven single-family-multiple dwelling-individual household service hauling licenses. 
No license shall be transferable between persons or entities. Any change in individual or corporate ownership or substitution in partners shall constitute a transfer and shall automatically terminate the license. Upon the termination of a license as a result of change of ownership as provided herein, a license application of the new hauler shall be granted license approval preference over any other license applicant, provided the hauler makes application within 30 days of the license termination and the hauler meets all conditions and regulations for licensing as required herein. If the licensee's name changes and the change is not due to change of ownership during the period of the license within 30 days of the name change, a new application for license must be submitted to the city and subsequently approved by the city in order for license to remain in effect. 
D.  Each applicant shall file with the city clerk-treasurer, before a garbage and refuse hauler or recycling license is issued or renewed, a schedule of proposed rates to be charged by him during the licensed period for which the application is made. Every licensee shall provide prior notification of any change in rates to be implemented during the licensed period. 
1.  Single family/multiple dwelling-individual household service hauling licensees rates shall include a minimum of three levels of regular service, priced on the basis of volume or weight with a rate structure designed to encourage reduction, re-usage and recycling. Single family/multiple dwelling-individual household service hauling licensees are prohibited from imposing a greater charge on residents who recycle than on residents who do not recycle. 
E.  No hauler operating on a route in a residential district shall operate a truck on any city street when the weight of said vehicle exceeds eight tons per axle. 
F.  No hauler shall operate in a residential district after 8:30 p.m. or before 6:30 a.m. of any day, and no hauler shall operate in a residential district on Sunday. 
G.  Each vehicle for which a hauler's license is issued shall exhibit such license in a prominent position on said vehicle. The applicant shall submit with the application a list of the vehicle identification number and license plate number for each vehicle to be operated under the license. This information shall be provided on the license for each separate vehicle. 
H.  All single family/multiple dwelling-individual household service and commercial/multiple dwelling-commingled service, licensees shall report to Dakota County, on the form provided for such purpose, the quantity of all recyclables and yard waste abated from the landfills and any other information as required by state, county or local laws. 
I.  The duration of a license shall be for a calendar year, expiring on December 31 of each year, regardless of the date of issuance. All existing licenses on December 31 of each year will be automatically renewed provided the licensee pays the license fee prior to issuance and is in compliance with all requirements of this section. 
J.  All single family/multiple dwelling-individual household service hauling licenses shall be subject to the licensee providing single family/multiple dwelling-individual household hauling services to not less than 250 residential households in the city, with their own equipment, excluding multiple dwelling units which fall within the definition of commercial/multiple dwelling-commingled service hauling. The licensee shall file with the city clerk by the end of each calendar year a written certification of compliance with this paragraph on a form provided by the city. The licensee shall make available for inspection upon request, a list of all single family/multiple dwelling-individual household service accounts, by address, within the city. If the licensee fails to provide proof of providing single family/multiple dwelling-individual household service hauling services to households as required herein by the end of the calendar year, (December 31 of all years), the license shall automatically terminate. 
Subd. 5.  Mixed municipal solid waste and recycling transfer station. It is unlawful for any person to operate or to permit another to operate a mixed municipal solid waste and recycling transfer station without a license or permit required therefor by Dakota County and the State of Minnesota—Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. It is unlawful for any person to operate or to permit another to operate a mixed municipal solid waste and recycling transfer station within the city in violation of any term or condition of a license or permit required therefor by Dakota County and the State of Minnesota—Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. Prior to the operation of a mixed municipal solid waste and recycling transfer station, the operator shall provide a copy of the license or permit issued by the county or state. The current license or permit shall be posted in a conspicuous location in the transfer station. 
Subd. 6.  Construction and demolition debris waste transfer station. It is unlawful for any person to operate or permit another to operate a construction and demolition debris waste transfer station (hereinafter "transfer station") within the city, except in a limited industrial (I-1) district and only upon the council's granting of a conditional use permit. Any conditional use permit under this subdivision shall be subject to the provisions of section 11.40, Subd. 4, of this Code. All applications for conditional use permit for a transfer station shall include a detailed and scaled site plan specifying the dimensions, location, materials and design of the principal building. 
A transfer station permitted under a conditional use permit in accordance with this subdivision shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Construction or demolition debris waste transfer activity shall be incidental to the principal use on the property. 
2.  Only construction or demolition debris waste of buildings, including concrete, brick, bituminous concrete, untreated wood, masonry, glass, trees, rock, and plastic, building parts may be intermediately and temporarily stored on the property to await transfer to another waste facility. 
3.  The waste capacity of the transfer station shall not exceed 120 tons per day and 37,440 tons per year and operation shall not exceed such waste capacity. 
4.  The transfer station shall have a maximum storage capacity of 100 cubic yards. 
5.  All operations of the transfer station shall be conducted within the principal building and no operation shall be conducted outdoors. All construction and demolition debris waste transferred to the property shall be removed from the property within 24 hours of arrival on the property, except that waste arriving on a Saturday shall be removed within 48 hours of arrival at the property. 
6.  No construction or demolition debris waste shall be stored, stocked or kept outside any building on the property for which the conditional use permit was issued. 
7.  The operations of the transfer station shall not produce any adverse noise, glare, fumes, odor, obnoxious products, byproducts, litter, waste or any other nuisance impacts. 
8.  No transfer station shall operate without a license or permit required therefor by any county or state agency or department having jurisdiction over any solid waste transfer system and no transfer system shall operate in violation of any term or condition of a license or permit required therefore by any county or state agency or department. 
9.  Prior to the operation of a transfer station permitted in accordance with this subdivision, the operator of the transfer station shall provide to the city a copy of any license or permit required or issued by any county or state agency or department having jurisdiction over a solid waste transfer station transfer system. 
10.  The transfer station and the property on which it is located shall be open at all times for inspection by the city, county, and state. 
(Code 1983, § 6.37, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 93, 2nd series, eff. 12-15-90; Ord. No. 130, 2nd series, eff. 11-29-91; Ord. No. 136, 2nd series, eff. 5-15-92; Ord. No. 192, 2nd series, eff. 1-12-95; Ord. No. 210, 2nd series, eff. 2-8-96; Ord. No. 213, 2nd series, eff. 3-14-96; Ord. No. 218, 2nd series, eff. 5-2-96; Ord. No. 222, 2nd series, eff. 9-12-96; Ord. No. 254, 2nd series, eff. 1-29-98; Ord. No. 274, 2nd series, eff. 4-29-99; Ord. No. 277, 2nd series, eff. 6-1-99; Ord. No. 288, 2nd series, § 1, 2-24-00; Ord. No. 294, 2nd series, §§ 1—3, 7-27-00; Ord. No. 322, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 11-22-01; Ord. No. 350, 2nd series, §§ 1—4, eff. 7-25-02; Ord. No. 369, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 11-27-03; Ord. No. 498, 2nd series, § 9, eff. 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 6.38. - Kennels. 
Subd. 1.  Defined. For the purpose of this section, the term "kennel" means any place, building, tract of land, abode or vehicle, wherein or whereon a total of four or more dogs, cats, ferrets, or rabbits or combination thereof, over six months of age, are kept, kept for sale, or boarded. 
Subd. 2.  License required. It is unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a kennel without license therefor from the city. 
Subd. 3.  Exception. Hospitals and clinics operated by licensed veterinarians exclusively for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
Subd. 4. Issuance and condition of license. The city clerk may issue a license under this section provided a conditional use permit has been approved for the operation of the proposed kennel premises. The city clerk shall deny a license on the following grounds: 
A.  No license shall be issued to a person or the operation of a kennel in a zoning district where such operation is not permitted or otherwise allowed under the zoning chapter of the City Code. 
B.  The applicant has had prior violations of this section or the conditional use permit governing the operation of the kennel. 
C.  The applicant violated this section or state or federal laws governing the care, treatment, or shelter of animals within the preceding five years. 
D.  The applicant had a license or permit for the operation of a kennel or other animal facility that was suspended or revoked within the preceding five years. 
E.  The applicant does not have facilities as required by this section for the shelter or harboring of the animals proposed to be kept under the license. 
Subd. 5. Kennel licensee requirements. All kennel licensees shall be subject to the following requirements: 
A.  Veterinary care. A licensee must establish and maintain a program of disease control and prevention, euthanasia, and adequate veterinary care under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian. A written program of veterinarian care, signed and dated by the veterinarian and kennel manager, must be kept on file at the kennel and available for review upon request. The program of veterinary care must be reviewed by the kennel manager and veterinarian annually and updated as needed. The veterinarian must visit the facility as often as necessary to supervise the program, with a minimum of an annual visit. Sick or injured animals must receive veterinary care promptly. 
B.  Control of pests. The licensee shall establish and maintain an effective program for the control of insects, ectoparasites, rodents, and other pests. 
C.  Feeding of animals. Kenneled animals must be fed at least once a day with clean, wholesome food sufficient to meet the normal daily nutritive requirements for the animal's age, size, and condition. Feed standards must be those recommended by the National Research Council. Clean potable water must be made available to all animals at least twice daily for periods of not less than one hour. All feeding and watering receptacles must be kept clean and sanitary. The receptacles must be accessible to each animal and located so as to minimize contamination by excreta. Disposable food receptacles must be discarded when soiled. 
D.  Identification. Each animal in a kennel must be identified with a numbered tag affixed to a collar worn by the animal, identification attached to the cage, a microchip, or by other means approved by the city. 
E.  Transportation of kenneled animals. An animal must be transported in a vehicle equipped with ample cargo space and confinement areas. The animal cargo space must be constructed and arranged to prevent injuries from fighting and allow for compatible grouping in terms of age, breed, size, and disposition. Separate confinement areas must be provided for females in estrus. An animal must not be placed in a confinement area over other animals unless the upper confinement area is constructed to prevent excreta from entering the lower confinement area. All confinement areas and cargo space must be cleaned and disinfected between uses. The number of animals transported at one time must not exceed the number that can ride comfortably. Vehicles must be adequately equipped to provide sufficient ventilation and still protect the animals from the elements, injurious drafts, and exhaust fumes. 
F.  Confinement. 
1.  The kenneled animals must not be confined by chains or by tethering. 
2.  Animals housed in the same primary confinement area: 
(a)  Each animal must be maintained in a compatible animal species group; 
(b)  Puppies or kittens must not be housed with adult dogs or cats other than their mother; 
(c)  Any dog or cat exhibiting a vicious disposition must be housed separately; and 
(d)  Females in estrus must not be confined in the same confinement area with males. 
3.  Animals with clinical signs of infectious, contagious, or communicable disease must be separated from other animals. 
Subd. 6. Kennel premises and facilities. All licensed kennels must meet the following requirements: 
A.  All animal housing facilities must be structurally sound and maintained in good repair. 
B.  All animals must be housed in an indoor facility maintained at a temperature of not less than 50 degrees Fahrenheit. Animals may be provided temporary access to outdoor runs and exercise areas when appropriate for the species, breed, and weather conditions. 
C.  All housing facilities must have at least eight hours of illumination, either natural or artificial, sufficient to permit routine inspection and cleaning. 
D.  All housing facilities must be adequately ventilated. Drafts, odors, and moisture condensation must be minimized. Auxiliary ventilation, such as exhaust fans, vents, and air conditioning, must be used when the ambient temperature exceeds 85 degrees Fahrenheit at the floor level. 
E.  Carcass and garbage disposal facilities must be provided and managed to minimize vermin infestation, odors, and disease hazards. 
F.  Adequate storage and refrigeration must be provided and managed to protect food supplies against contamination and deterioration. Open bags of food must be stored in vermin-proof containers. 
G.  The premises, housing facilities, exercise areas, and confinement areas must be cleaned and disinfected as often as necessary to maintain a clean and sanitary condition. Animal confinement areas must be cleaned at least once daily. Measures must be taken to protect animals from being splattered with water or feces and from exposure to harmful chemicals during cleaning. Bedding, if used, must be kept clean and dry. Outdoor runs and exercise areas must be kept clean and soiled base material must be replaced as necessary. 
H.  Confinement areas must be of sufficient size to allow each dog or cat to turn about fully and to stand, sit, and lie in a comfortable, normal position. The confinement area must be constructed so as to prevent injury to the dog or cat. Interior surfaces of indoor confinement areas must be constructed and maintained so that they are substantially impervious to moisture, provide for rapid drainage, and may be readily cleaned. 
Subd. 7. Inspections . 
A.  All kennel premises subject to a license under this section shall, during all daylight hours, be open to inspection by a city official to determine whether or not the terms and provisions of this section and all other laws are met. All licensees, as a condition to being issued such license, consent to inspections by city employees or agents without a court warrant. 
B.  All records required in this section must be maintained for a minimum of two years and available to duly authorized agents upon demand at any reasonable time. 
C.  It is unlawful for any licensee or agent or employee of a licensee to hinder or prevent a city official from making such inspection. 
(Code 1983, § 6.38, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 12, 2nd series, eff. 4-27-84; Ord. No. 308, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-15-01; Ord. No. 498, 2nd series, § 10, eff. 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 544, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 4-21-2015) 
Cross reference— Dog and cat regulation and dog licensing, § 10.11; keeping, transporting, treatment, housing of animals and fowl, § 10.12; trapping of animals and fowl, § 10.13.  
Sec. 6.39. - Massage therapy establishment and massage therapist licenses. 
Subd. 1.  Statement of policy. The city recognizes and accepts therapeutic massage, as distinguished from other forms of massage, as a scientific health care and/or maintenance technique or procedure for the human muscles, tendons, tissues and the like. The city, however, equally recognizes the potential for illicit massage operations or establishments in the wake of legitimate, professional therapeutic massage establishments. Accordingly, in order to prevent or protect against the existence of illicit massage establishments or operations in the city and to protect the public's health, safety and welfare, the city deems it necessary to regulate therapeutic massage establishments and massage therapists through the licensing process. 
Subd. 2.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings stated: 
Accredited institution. An educational institution holding accredited status from the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools (NCA) or another regional accrediting agency approved by the United States Department of Education presently or at the time the applicant obtained his/her diploma or certificate of graduation. 
Accredited program. A professional massage program presently or at the time the applicant obtained his/her diploma or certificate of graduation accredited by the Commission on Massage Therapy Accreditation (COMTA), or a comparable national or regional organization which is approved by the United States Department of Education for its accrediting program for compliance with quality and competency standards through a process of periodic review and self-study. 
Massage therapist means a person, other than a person licensed as a medical doctor, chiropractor, osteopath, podiatrist, licensed nurse, physical therapist, athletic director or trainer, or beautician or barber who confines his treatment to the scalp, face and neck, who for compensation practices and provides therapeutic massage. 
Massage therapy or therapeutic massage means a scientific health care or health maintenance technique or procedure carried out by a massage therapist involving the massaging and kneading of human skin, muscles and tissues for the purpose of easing mental and physical tension, the breaking up of fatty tissues and muscle spasms, and the improvement of circulation through the body. 
Massage therapy establishment means any room or rooms wherein persons may, for a fee or other consideration paid either directly or indirectly, receive a therapeutic massage. 
Student of massage therapy means a person who is enrolled in and attends classes at a school, college, university or other institution that is approved by the American Massage Therapists Association or other similar reputable massage association or accredited by a recognized educational accrediting association or agency or is licensed by the state or local government agency having jurisdiction over the school. 
Subd. 3.  Prohibited establishments or operations. Any use, establishment, operation or business whose massage therapy services include sessions offered to adults, conducted in private by members of the same or the opposite sex, and employing personnel with no specialized training and susceptible to operation in a manner contravening, subverting or endangering the morals of the community by being the site of acts of prostitution, illicit sex and occasions of violent crimes are prohibited, including but not limited to: 
A.  A sauna, defined as any public facility used for the exclusive purpose of bathing, reducing or relaxing, utilizing steam as a cleaning, reducing or relaxing agent. 
B.  A rap parlor or conversation parlor or adult encounter group or adult sensitivity group, defined as any person, establishment or business advertising, offering, selling, trading or bartering the services of itself, its employees or agents as nonprofessional counselors, teachers or therapists who may talk to, discuss or have conversation with patrons or who deal in any way with patrons' physical senses, whether or not other goods or services are simultaneously advertised, offered, sold, traded or bartered and regardless of whether said goods or services are also required to be licensed. 
C.  An escort service or modeling service or dancing service or hostess service are defined as any person, establishment or business advertising, offering, selling, trading or bartering the services of itself, its employees or agents as hostesses, models, dancers, escorts, dates or companions, whether or not goods or services are simultaneously advertised, offered, sold, traded or bartered and regardless of whether said goods or services are also required to be licensed. 
D.  Any other similar adult-oriented service that falls within the uses or establishments described in this subdivision but that are operated under different names. 
Subd. 4.  Massage therapy establishment. 
A.  License required. It is unlawful for any person to operate a massage therapy establishment without a license therefore from the city. It is unlawful for any person to practice therapeutic massage therapy in any place except upon a licensed premises, unless a temporary off-site permit is issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
B.  License application. All initial applications for licenses to operate massage therapy establishments shall be accomplished by a nonreturnable investigation fee. This fee shall also cover the investigation fee for one massage therapist. Applications shall contain the names and addresses of the owners, lessees and operators of the applicant, together with a description and location of the premises. The application shall also include information as to any convictions of any crime or offense committed by applicant, together with such other information as the city may require before consideration of the application. All applications by corporations shall include the names and addresses of all persons having a beneficial interest therein. An investigation by the building inspector shall be conducted of all premises proposed to be licensed before consideration by the city. The police department shall conduct an investigation of all persons proposed to be licensed before consideration by the city. All applications shall thereafter be considered by the city. 
C.  Restrictions and regulations. 
1.  Licenses shall be granted only for operation on fixed premises which must be located in a commercial or industrial district as established by the zoning chapter. 
2.  Licenses shall be granted only upon a showing of compliance with all laws of sanitation. 
3.  No beer, liquor, narcotic drug or controlled substances, as such terms are defined by state statutes or the City Code, shall be permitted on licensed premises. 
4.  Violation of any law or regulation relating to building, safety or health shall be grounds for revocation of any license. 
5.  No doors of massage rooms, when occupied by one or more persons, shall be locked. All locks, if any, shall be keyed only from the exterior of the massage rooms. 
6.  Only massage therapists who are licensed by the city shall practice therapeutic massage at the licensed premises. 
7.  No massage therapy establishment shall discriminate between persons on the basis of race, color, creed, sex or national origin or ancestry. 
8.  All massage therapy establishment licensees must comply with any and all amendments to this chapter. Failure to do so shall be grounds for revocation of any license. 
9.  The person who is receiving a massage shall at all times have the following covered with clothing or properly draped with non-transparent material: his/her anus, intergluteal cleft (buttocks crease), and genitals. The person who is receiving massage therapy of the breast or buttocks (gluteal) shall have the breast or buttock (gluteal muscle) that is not then immediately receiving massage therapy properly covered and draped with non-transparent material. 
10.  The licensee and all employees or agents of the licensee shall at all times be fully clothed and shall not expose his/her breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals. 
11.  At no time shall the massage therapist massage or otherwise touch or offer to massage/touch the penis, scrotum, mons veneris, vulva, or vaginal area of any customer or person inquiring of massage therapy services. 
12.  No massage room shall have any showering or bathing facilities and no employee or massage therapist shall provide or be present in any showing or bathing facility with a client. 
D.  Unlawful acts. 
1.  It is unlawful for any licensee to fail to at all times observe all restrictions, regulations and maintenance requirements contained in this section. 
2.  It is unlawful for any licensee to be open for business between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day. 
E.  License condition and unlawful acts. 
1.  All premises licensed under this section shall, during all operating hours, be open to inspection by any health or police officer to determine whether or not this section and all other laws are being observed. All persons, as a condition to being issued such license, consent to such inspections by such officers and without a warrant for searches and seizures. 
2.  It is unlawful for any licensee or agent or employee of a licensee to hinder or prevent a police or health officer from making such inspection. 
3.  The licensee shall post its valid establishment license and the valid license of each massage therapist providing massage therapy at the licensed establishment in plain view of the general public on the licensed premises. 
4.  The act of any massage therapist or any employee of the licensee at the licensed premises is deemed to be the act of the licensee. The licensee shall be responsible for all acts and conduct attributable to and in connection with massage therapy services provided by the licensee or occurring on the licensed premises of the massage therapy business. 
5.  The licensee shall notify the city clerk, in writing, of all massage therapists providing massage therapy at the licensed premises and such notice shall be made within five business days of each hire of or contract with a massage therapist to perform massage therapy services at the licensed premises. 
F.  Exception. This section shall not apply to a health care facility (1) owned by a municipal corporation organized under the laws of the state, or (2) owned by the state or any of its agencies, or (3) licensed by the state. This section shall not apply to a school, college, university or other institution which provides a program of study or course work in massage therapy or therapeutic massage provided: 
(1)  the school, college, university or institution meets the criteria set forth in the definition of student of massage therapy herein; 
(2)  the massage therapy is provided during and as part of a course or clinical component of the school's program or course work; and 
(3)  the person is supervised by an instructor while providing or performing massage therapy. 
G.  Manager or agent. Before a license is issued under this section to an individual who is a nonresident of the city, to more than one individual whether or not they are residents of the city, or to a corporation, partnership, or association, the applicant or applicants shall appoint in writing a natural person as its on-premises manager or agent. Such on-premises manager or agent shall, by the terms of his written consent, (1) take full responsibility for the conduct of the licensed premises, and (2) serve as agent for service of notices and other process relating to the license. Such manager or agent must be a person who, by reason of age, character, reputation, and other attributes, could qualify individually as a licensee. The on-site manager or agent designated by the applicant shall be a United States citizen or otherwise legally permitted to be in the United States and shall be a resident of the State of Minnesota or the following Wisconsin counties: Pierce, St. Croix, Pepin, Dunn, Polk. If such manager or agent ceases to be located at the licensed premises or ceases to act in such capacity for the licensee without appointment of a successor, the license issued pursuant to such appointment shall be subject to revocation or suspension. 
H.  License fee. The annual license fee shall be determined by resolution of the city council. This fee shall also cover the annual license fee for one massage therapist. 
Subd. 5.  Massage therapist license. 
A.  License required. It is unlawful for any person to provide or practice therapeutic massage without a license therefor from the city. It is unlawful for any person to provide or practice therapeutic massage therapy in any place except within a licensed massage therapy establishment, unless a temporary off-site permit is issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
B.  License application. All initial applications shall be accompanied by a nonreturnable investigation fee. Applications shall be on a form provided by the city and contain all information requested thereon and shall contain such other information as the city may, from time to time, require. All applicants shall be at least 18 years of age. 
C.  Restrictions and regulations. 
1.  A massage therapist license shall not be issued unless the applicant provides proof of the following: 
(a)  Proof of successful completion of a minimum of 500 credit hours of certified therapeutic massage training/course work that includes subjects of anatomy, physiology, hygiene, ethics, massage theory and research, and massage practice from an accredited institution or program; 
(b)  A diploma or certificate of graduation for a comprehensive massage therapy program consisting of the course work stated in clause (a) above issued to the applicant from an accredited institution or an accredited program; or 
(c)  Proof of passing the National Certification Exam offered by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork and a minimum of seven years of full-time work experience as a massage therapist within the United States. 
2.  A licensed massage therapist shall post his or her valid license in plain view of the general public on the licensed premises where he or she provides massage therapy or therapeutic massage. 
3.  The person who is receiving a massage shall at all times have the following covered with clothing or properly draped with non-transparent material: his/her anus, intergluteal cleft (buttocks crease), and genitals. The person who is receiving massage therapy of the breast or buttocks (gluteal) shall have the breast or buttock (gluteal muscle) that is not then immediately receiving massage therapy properly covered and draped with non-transparent material. 
4.  The licensee shall at all times be fully clothed and shall not expose his/her breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals. 
5.  At no time shall the massage therapist massage or otherwise touch or offer to massage/touch the penis, scrotum, mons veneris, vulva, or vaginal area of any customer or person inquiring of massage therapy services. 
6.  No massage room shall have any showering or bathing facilities and a massage therapist shall not provide to or be present in any showing or bathing facility with a client. 
D.  License fee. The annual license fee shall be determined by resolution of the city council. 
E.  Exception. A massage therapist license shall not be required for a massage therapist if the therapist is working for, or an employee of, a medical professional licensed under Minn. Stat. ch. 147 or 148; or any student of massage therapy meeting the definition as set forth herein, provided: 
(1)  The massage therapy is provided during and as part of a course or clinical component of the school's program or course work; and 
(2)  The massage therapy student is supervised by an instructor while providing or performing massage therapy services. A notice, which advises the public that the person who may provide massage therapy services is a student of massage therapy and is not licensed by the city, shall be posted in a conspicuous location in the room in which the massage therapy is provided. 
Subd. 6.  Off-site/Call-out massage therapy. 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions regulating a massage therapy establishment license hereunder, a massage therapist licensed by the city and who operates or is employed by a massage therapy establishment licensed by the city may provide massage therapy at a location within the city other than the premises of the licensed massage therapy establishment. All massage therapy permitted under this provision must comply with all of the provisions of this section governing licensed massage therapy establishments and licensed massage therapists. 
Subd. 7.  Grounds for denial of licenses. 
A.  A massage therapy establishment shall not be issued a massage therapy establishment license upon the following grounds: 
1.  The proposed fixed location or premises of the massage therapy establishment is not a permitted or conditional use for the property as established by the zoning regulations in this Code; 
2.  The owner, operator, or any person who has a five percent or more financial interest in the proposed licensed massage therapy establishment or the appointed on-site manager or agent of the applicant has a conviction for, or was charged with, but convicted of a lesser charge of, a crime involving a violation of any massage therapy related regulation in any other jurisdiction, any prostitution-related offense, criminal sexual conduct, indecent exposure, surreptitious intrusion, disorderly house as defined by Minnesota Statutes, theft, felony drug offense, any crime of violence as defined by Minnesota Statutes, or any other similar crime or offense within five years of the date of application; 
3.  The owner, operator, or any person who has a five percent or more financial interest in the proposed licensed massage therapy establishment had a massage therapist or massage therapy business-related license in another jurisdiction suspended or revoked within five years preceding the date of application; 
4.  The application failed to identify the full name, address, and date and place of birth of the natural person designated by the applicant as the massage therapy establishment's on-site manager or agent, along with the notarized written consent of such a person to: (1) take full responsibility for the conduct of the licensed premises and operation; and (2) serve as agent for service of notices and other process relating to the license; 
5.  The applicant provided false or misrepresented information in the application; 
6.  The applicant has been denied a license under this section within the preceding 12 months; or 
7.  Any other basis as provided in this section. 
B.  A massage therapist shall not be issued a massage therapist license upon the following grounds: 
1.  The applicant has a conviction for or was charged with, but convicted of a lesser charge a crime involving a violation of any massage therapy related regulation in any other jurisdiction, any prostitution-related offense, criminal sexual conduct, indecent exposure, surreptitious intrusion, disorderly house as defined by Minnesota Statutes, theft, felony drug offense, any crime of violence as defined by Minnesota Statutes, or any other similar crime or offense within five years of the date of application; 
2.  The applicant had a massage therapist or massage therapy business-related license in another jurisdiction that was suspended or revoked within five years preceding the date of application; 
3.  The applicant is not 18 years of age or older; 
4.  The applicant has not provided proof of education/training as required elsewhere in this section; 
5.  The applicant provided false or misrepresented information on the application; 
6.  The applicant has been denied a license under this section within the preceding 12 months; or 
7.  Any other basis as provided in this section. 
(Code 1983, § 6.39, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 79, 2nd series, eff. 4-14-89; Ord. No. 186, 2nd series, eff. 10-13-94; Ord. No. 229, 2nd series, eff. 3-4-97; Ord. No. 261, §§ 1—4, 6-25-98; Ord. No. 316, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 8-30-01; Ord. No. 358, 2nd series, eff. 5-29-03; Ord. No. 394, 2nd series, §§ 1—4, eff. 10-6-05; Ord. No. 446, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 10-6-09; Ord. No. 498, 2nd series, § 11, eff. 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 521, 2nd series, §§ 1—3, 6-4-2013; Ord. No. 572, 2nd series, §§ 1—5, eff. 12-22-2017)  
Sec. 6.40. - Indoor firearms shooting range. 
Subd. 1. License required. It is unlawful for any person or entity to operate or permit to be operated any firearms shooting range or facility except as permitted herein and pursuant to a license issued therefor from the city as provided in this section. No license shall be issued for any firearms shooting range or facility unless all shooting operations occur within the building of the licensed premises. No license under this section shall be required for the permitted firearm shooting ranges existing within the city as the effective date of the ordinance adopting this section. 
Subd. 2. Applications and licenses under this chapter—Procedure and administration. 
A.  Application. All applications shall be filed with the city clerk upon forms prescribed by the city, together with such information as required on the application form and as set forth herein. All questions asked or information required by the application forms shall be answered fully and completely by the applicant. All applications shall be subject to a criminal background investigation. 
B.  False statements. It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false statement or omission upon any application form. Any false statement in such application or any willful omission to state any information requested on the application form shall, upon discovery of such falsehood, be grounds for denial of a license or, if already issued, shall render the license issued pursuant thereto void and of no effect immediately upon notice. 
C.  Application and investigation fees. At the time of the initial application, the applicant shall pay the application and background investigation fees as duly set by Council resolution. An additional fee of $200.00 for each person or entity beyond five having an interest in the proposed licensed establishment shall be required. An escrow of $1,000.00 for applicants residing outside of the state shall be required to reimburse the city for out-of-pocket investigative costs and the escrow shall be released upon payment in full of actual investigation costs. 
D.  Corporate applicants and licensees. A corporate, partnership or other legal entity applicant, at the time of application, shall furnish the city with a list of all persons and entities that have an ownership interest or control in the applicant entity in excess of 5% and the extent of such interest. The list shall name all shareholders, partners or members, as the case may be, and state the number of shares/units held by each, either individually or beneficially for others. It is the duty of each licensee to notify the city clerk-treasurer in writing of any change in legal ownership or beneficial interest in such entity. Any change in the ownership or beneficial interest in the interest entitled to be voted at a meeting of the owners of the licensee, which results in the change of voting control of the entity by the persons owning the shares/units therein, shall be deemed equivalent to a transfer of the license issued to the entity, and any such license shall terminate 30 days after any such change in ownership or beneficial interest unless the council has been notified of the change in writing and has approved it by appropriate action. The council or any officer of the city designated by it may at any reasonable time examine the stock/unit transfer records and minute books of any licensee in order to verify and identify the shareholders/partners/members, and the council or its designated officer may examine the business records of any other licensee to the extent necessary to disclose the interest which persons other than the licensee have in the licensed business. The council may revoke any license issued upon its determination that a change of ownership in the entity licensee has actually resulted in the change of control of the licensed business so as materially to affect the integrity and character of its management and its operation, but no such action shall be taken until after a hearing by the council on notice to the licensee. 
E.  Action. 
1.  Granting. Prior to consideration of any application for an initial license or renewal, the applicant shall pay the license application and investigation fees. The city clerk may reject any incomplete application and an application will not be considered until a fully complete application is submitted. Upon rejection of any application for a license or upon withdrawal of an application before approval of the issuance by the council, the license application fee shall be refunded to the applicant but the investigation fee shall not be refunded if any background investigation commenced by the city. 
The completed application for the initial license shall be considered for approval by the city council. The renewal application may be considered for approval by the city clerk. A license hereunder shall be denied if the applicant or proposed licensed establishment does not meet all the requirements and conditions for licensing as set forth in this section or elsewhere in this Code. 
2.  Issuance. If an application is approved, the city clerk-treasurer shall forthwith issue a license pursuant thereto in the form prescribed by the city and upon payment of the license fee. All licenses shall be on a calendar-year basis unless otherwise specified herein. For licenses issued and which are to become effective other than on the first day of the license year, the fee to be paid with the application shall be a pro rata share of the annual license fee. Licenses shall be valid only at one location and on the premises therein described. 
F.  Transfer. No license shall be transferable between persons or entities or to a different location. Any change in individual ownership or substitution of partners is a transfer. However, a change in corporate name shall not be considered a transfer if at least 90 percent of the issued and outstanding shares are in the same ownership as at the time of original application. It is unlawful to make any transfer in violation of this subparagraph. 
Subd. 3. Resident manager or operation agent. At the time of application and before a license is issued under this section to an individual who is a nonresident of the state, to more than one individual whether or not they are residents of the state, or to a corporation, partnership, or association, the applicant shall designate in writing a natural person, who shall be a resident of Minnesota, as its operation manager or agent of the licensed establishment. Such operation manager or agent shall, by the terms of his/her written consent (1) take full responsibility for the conduct of the licensed premises, and (2) serve as agent for service of notices and other process relating to the license; and (3) shall be subject to the criminal background investigation for the license. Such operation manager or agent must be a person who, by reason of age, character, reputation, and other attributes, could qualify individually as a licensee hereunder. If such manager or agent ceases to be a resident of Minnesota or ceases to act in such capacity for the licensee without appointment of a successor, the license issued pursuant to such appointment shall be subject to revocation or suspension. A non-refundable investigation fee of $300.00 shall be paid to the city for all changes in the designated operating manager(s) at the licensed establishment. 
Subd. 4. Persons disqualified for a license under this section. No license under this section shall be issued to an applicant if the applicant or the designated operation manager is: 
A.  A person not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien; 
B.  A person who within five years of the license application has been convicted of a federal or state law or local ordinance governing the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession of firearms; 
C.  A person who has had a federal or state firearms-related license or permit revoked within five years of the license application, or to any person who at the time of the application owns any interest, whether as a holder of more than five percent of the capital stock of a corporate licensee, as a partner or otherwise, in the premises or in the business conducted thereon, or to a corporation, partnership, association, enterprise, business, or firm in which any such person is in any manner interested that has had a federal or state firearms-related license or permit revoked within five years of the license application; 
D.  A person under the age of 21 years; 
E.  A person who is ineligible to sell, transfer, deal, receive or possess firearms under Minnesota or federal law. 
F.  No license under this section shall be granted for operation on any premises upon which real property taxes, assessments, or installments thereof, or other financial claims of the city are owed by the applicant and are delinquent and unpaid. For the purpose of this subparagraph, "applicant" includes persons and related persons, (1) owning at least a 50 percent beneficial interest in the proposed license or in the entity making the application, and (2) at least an undivided one-half interest in the premises proposed to be licensed, or at least a 50 percent beneficial interest in the entity owning such premises. 
The term applicant as used in this subdivision shall include any natural person who is an individual applicant or any natural person who owns more than a 5 percent beneficial interest in the legal entity named as applicant and any spouse of such person. 
Subd. 5. Responsibility for conduct on licensed premises. The licensee under this section shall be responsible for the conduct at the licensed premises and shall maintain conditions of safety and order therein. Any act of an employee of the licensee in or at the licensed premises is the act of the licensee; and every such employer is liable to all of the penalties, except criminal penalties, provided by law for such conduct. 
Subd. 6 Conditions of license. No license shall be issued hereunder unless the following conditions are met and all licenses issued hereunder shall be subject to the following conditions: 
A.  No license shall be granted for premises located in a zoning district other than limited industrial (I-1). 
B.  The operations under the license shall comply with all regulations in this Code. 
C.  No alcoholic beverages, narcotic drugs or controlled substances, as such terms are defined by Minnesota statutes or the City Code, shall be permitted on licensed premises. 
D.  No person under the influence of alcohol or drugs shall be permitted to enter or remain in the licensed premises. 
E.  No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted to enter or to remain in the licensed premises, unless accompanied by a parent or an adult chaperone not less age 25. 
F.  Discharge of firearms shall occur only within the designated shooting range area within the building of the licensed premises; no person shall discharge any firearm outside of the licensed premises. 
G.  No exploding targets shall be permitted within the licensed premises. 
H.  All persons transporting any firearm onto and from the licensed premises shall possess and transport the firearm in accordance with Minnesota state laws governing possession and transport of firearms. 
I.  Any patron in the licensed premises who is known by the licensee to be restricted from possession of a firearm under Minnesota or federal laws shall not be permitted to shoot any firearm within the licensed premises. 
J.  The interior improvements to the licensed premises shall be designed and constructed to attenuate and contain all firearm discharge noise to within the inside of the building; firearm discharge shall not be audible outside of the licensed premises. 
K.  The licensed premises shall be equipped with a security alarm system and a surveillance system that has full audio recording and video recording that has infrared capability with high definition video resolution, all of which shall be in operation at all times. The video surveillance shall be directed at all entrances, all areas of the shooting range, the point of sale for and storage area of the firearms. The video recordings shall be maintained for a 30-day period and shall be produced to the Eagan police department immediately upon demand. 
L.  All firearms and ammunition shall be stored in a secured locked enclosure or room during non-business hours. Ammunition may remain stored in a sale display cabinet during non-business hours, provided the display cabinet is fully enclosed and is locked. 
M.  The licensee shall immediately report to the police department any gunshot wound inflicted upon any person while on the licensed premises. 
N.  No firearms, ammunition or firearm accessories shall be purchased, sold or traded on the licensed premises unless the licensee holds a valid federal firearms license or permit pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §§922-931 (2014 and as amended hereafter). 
O.  If the licensee buys, sells or trades firearms under a valid federal firearms license pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §§922-931 (2014 and as amended hereafter) on the licensed premises, then the licensee shall comply with all federal laws and regulations under its federal firearms license. 
P.  If the licensee buys, sells or trades firearms under a valid federal firearms license pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §§922-931 (2014 and as amended) on the licensed premises, then the licensed premises shall be subject to the zoning regulations in this Code for retail sales in I-1 districts. 
Q.  If the licensee buys or otherwise acquires a used firearm under a valid federal firearms license pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §§922-931 (2014 and as amended) on the licensed premises, then the licensee shall comply with the following: 
1.  The licensee, at the time of purchasing or otherwise receiving a used firearm, shall immediately record the following information: 
(a)  An accurate description of the article, in English, and any numbers written, stamped, impressed or engraved thereon, together with the name of the manufacturer, model, and serial number of the firearm; 
(b)  The date, time and place of receipt of the firearm; 
(c)  The full name, residence address, date of birth and reasonably accurate description of the person, including approximate height, sex and race from whom the firearm was received; 
(d)  The identification number and state of issue from one of the following forms of identification of the person from whom the item was received, including a photocopy thereof: 
(1)  A valid Minnesota driver's license; 
(2)  A valid Minnesota identification card; or 
(3)  A valid photo identification issued by another state or a province of Canada and one other form of identification. 
2.  The records shall be open to inspection by Eagan city police officers at all reasonable times. 
3.  The records shall be retained by the licensee for so long as the licensee is operating the indoor firearm shooting range under this section. 
R.  All premises licensed under this section shall, during all operating hours, be open to inspection by any Eagan police officer or Eagan code enforcement technician to determine whether or not this section and all other laws are being observed. All persons, as a condition to being issued such license, consent to such inspections by such officers and without a warrant for searches and seizures. 
S.  If during the license period the licensee or designated operation manager becomes ineligible to have or disqualified for a license under this section, then the licensee shall notify the city clerk within five business days of the ineligibility or disqualification. 
Subd. 7. Financial responsibility of licensee. 
A.  No license shall be issued or renewed unless and until the applicant has provided proof of financial responsibility, by filing with the city a certificate of insurance, that there is in effect an insurance policy or pool providing minimum coverage's of (1) $50,000.00 because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence and, subject to the limit for one person, in the amount of $100,000.00 because of bodily injury to two or more persons in any one occurrence and in the amount of $10,000.00 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one occurrence; and (2) $50,000.00 for loss of means of support of any one person in any one occurrence, and, subject to the limit for one person, $100,000.00 for loss of means of support of two or more persons in any one occurrence; and $50,000.00 for other pecuniary loss of any one person in any one occurrence, and $100,000.00 for other pecuniary loss of two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
B.  The applicant shall file with the city clerk a certificate of insurance showing (1) that the limits are at least as high as required in this section; (2) that coverage is effective for at least the license term approved; and (3) that the insurer shall provide 60 days' written notice of policy cancellation to the city, unless policy cancellation is for nonpayment of premium in which case the insurer shall provide ten days' written notice of policy cancellation to the city. Cancellation or termination of such coverage shall be grounds for immediate suspension and revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 540, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-17-2015)  
Sec. 6.41. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 498, 2nd series, § 12, effective Feb. 21, 2012, repealed § 6.41, which pertained to stables and derived from Code 1983, § 6.41, eff. 1-1-83.  
Sec. 6.42. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 498, 2nd series, § 13, effective Feb. 21, 2012, repealed § 6.42, which pertained to golf driving range and derived from Code 1983, § 6.42, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 83, 2nd series, eff. 6-16-89.  
Sec. 6.43. - Pet shops. 
Subd. 1.  Definition. "Pet shop" means every place kept or maintained for the purpose of selling live dogs, cats, monkeys, hamsters, parrots, fish or other small animals, but shall not mean veterinary hospitals or kennels. 
Subd. 2.  License required . It is unlawful for any person to operate a pet shop without a license therefor from the city. The applicant shall file a completed application and license fee to the city clerk. The city clerk shall approve the license unless any of the following grounds exists: 
A.  The applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
B.  The applicant or a person with five percent or more financial interest in the named applicant has a conviction for any local, state or federal law or regulation in connection with the operation of an animal shelter or retail shop or with the keeping, harboring, care or treatment of an animal. 
C.  The applicant or person with five percent or more financial interest in the named applicant has been ordered by any local, state or federal government agency to cease operation of any retail pet store or animal shelter within the preceding five years. 
Subd. 3.  Diseased animals. It is unlawful for any person to bring into the city or have in his possession for sale or otherwise any animals having an infectious disease. 
Subd. 4.  Restrictions and regulations. The following conditions shall be complied with by all pet shop licensees. Failure to abide by these conditions shall result in the denial, revocation or nonrenewal of a pet shop license. 
A.  The floor shall be constructed of a material that is nonabsorbent and nonadsorbent. Floors must be kept clean, sanitary and in good repair. 
B.  Walls and ceilings shall be kept clean, sanitary and in good repair. 
C.  All cages, pens, benches, boxes or receptacles in which animals are confined shall be of metal, glass, durable plastic or other similar durable material and must be kept clean, sanitary and in good repair and shall be sufficient in size for the humane confinement of the animals. 
D.  All rooms containing animals shall be illuminated at least eight hours per day with a luminosity sufficient to permit routine cleaning and inspections. 
E.  All rooms shall be mechanically ventilated for air exchange. A negative pressure must be maintained to prevent odors and organisms from entering the adjacent businesses. Provisions shall be made for preheated replacement air. Ventilation must be sufficient to prevent temperatures that would endanger the health of the animals. 
F.  All utensils used in the preparation of food and the feeding of the animals shall be kept clean, sanitary and in good repair, and the use of utensils which are badly worn, rusted or corroded or in such condition that they cannot be rendered sanitary or clean is prohibited. 
G.  All animals shall be kept entirely within an enclosed building, and no animal shall be kept outside at any time. 
H.  All animals subject to distemper and infectious hepatitis must have been inoculated, prior to delivery to the pet shop, by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the state. Monkeys must have a yearly tuberculin test. 
I.  The pet shop must include a separate room for the purpose of storing janitorial supplies and equipment. This room must contain a sink with hot and cold running water. 
J.  All license holders must comply with all performance standards as amended from time to time by the council within 45 days of the effective date for the standards. 
Subd. 5.  Zoning. No license shall be issued to a person for operation of a pet shop in a zoning district other than commercial. 
(Code 1983, § 6.43, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 97, 2nd series, eff. 3-2-90; Ord. No. 498, 2nd series, § 14, eff. 2-21-2012) 
Cross reference— Dog and cat regulation and dog licensing, § 10.11; keeping, transporting, treatment, housing of animals and fowl, § 10.12.  
Sec. 6.44. - Tree maintenance contractors' licensing. 
Subd. 1.  License required . Professional contractors hired to perform tree maintenance services within the city shall be required to obtain a license. The license may be issued by the city clerk in accordance with this section. 
Subd. 2.  Application . Application for a license under this section shall be made at the office of the city clerk. 
Subd. 3.  Application form . The application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the city which shows, among other things, the name and address of the applicant, the number and names of employees of the applicant, the number of vehicles of the applicant, together with a description and license number of each, and the type of equipment proposed to be used. 
Subd. 4.  Liability insurance . No license or renewal shall be granted nor shall the same be effective until the applicant shall file with the city clerk proof of a public liability insurance policy covering all operations of such applicant under this section for the sum of at least $100,000.00 against liability for bodily injuries to one person from one accident, $300,000.00 for the injury of two or more persons, and for at least $200,000.00 against liability for damage or destruction of property. Said policy shall provide that it may not be cancelled by the insurer, except after ten days' written notice to the city, and if such insurance is so cancelled and the licensee shall fail to replace the same with another policy conforming to the provisions of this section, said license shall be automatically suspended until such insurance shall have been replaced. 
Subd. 5.  Workers' compensation insurance . Each license applicant shall file with the city clerk-treasurer a certificate of insurance of workers' compensation when such insurance is required by state statute. 
Subd. 6.  Chemical treatment requirements . Applicants who propose to use chemical substances in any activity related to treatment or disease control of trees and shrubs shall file with the city clerk-treasurer proof that the applicant or an employee of the applicant administering such treatment has been certified by the agronomy division of the state department of agriculture as a "commercial pesticide applicator." Such certification shall include knowledge of tree disease chemical treatment. 
Subd. 7.  Fees . The annual license fee shall be determined by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1983, § 6.44, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 106, 2nd series, eff. 7-27-90; Ord. No. 262, 2nd series, eff. 6-25-98; Ord. No. 498, 2nd series, § 15, eff. 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 6.45. - Pawnshop license. 
Subd. 1.  License required. It is unlawful for any person to exercise, carry on or be engaged in the trade or business of pawnbroker without first obtaining a license from the city as provided in this chapter. 
Subd. 2.  Initial license application. 
A.  General. Applications for pawnbrokers' licenses to be issued under this chapter shall contain information as required on forms prescribed by the city clerk. Applications shall be filed with the city clerk. 
B.  Nature of application. The application shall state whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, partnership or other form of organization. 
C.  Natural person. If applicant is a natural person, the following information shall be furnished: 
1.  True name, place and date of birth, and street residence address and length of time at that address of applicant. 
2.  Whether applicant has ever used or been known by a name other than his true name and, if so, what was such name or names, and information concerning dates and places where used. 
3.  The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a designation, name or style other than the full individual name of the applicant. 
4.  Kind, name and location of every business or occupation applicant has been engaged in during the preceding five years. 
5.  Names and addresses of applicant's employers and partners, if any, for the preceding five years. 
6.  Whether applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor including violation of a municipal ordinance, but excluding traffic violations, and if so the date and place of conviction and the nature of the offense. 
7.  If applicant has not resided in the city for three years last preceding the date of application, at least four character references. 
D.  Partnership. If applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners and all information concerning each partner as is required of a single applicant in subparagraph C, above. A managing partner or partners shall be designated. The interest of each partner in the business shall be disclosed. 
E.  Corporation. If applicant is a corporation or other association, the following information shall be required: 
1.  Name and, if incorporated, the state of incorporation. 
2.  A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of incorporation or association agreement and bylaws and, if a foreign corporation, a certificate of authority as described in Minnesota Statutes. 
3.  The name of the operating officer or proprietor or other agent in charge of the premises to be licensed, giving all the information about said person as is required of a single applicant in subparagraph C, above. As used in this section, the term "operating officer" shall mean the person responsible for the day-to-day operating decisions of the licensed premises. 
4.  A list of all persons who, singly or together with their spouse or a parent, brother, sister or child or either of them, own or control an interest in said corporation or association in excess of five percent or who are officers or directors of said corporation or association, together with their addresses and all information as is required of a single applicant in subparagraph C, above. 
F.  Description of premises. 
1.  Legal description. The exact legal description of the premises to be licensed, together with a plot plan of the area for which the license is sought showing dimensions, location of buildings, street access parking facilities. 
2.  Street address. The street address of the premises for which application is made. 
G.  Taxes. Whether or not all real estate taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the city, state or federal government for the business and premises to be licensed have been paid and if not paid the years for which delinquent. 
H.  Other information required. Such other information as the council shall require. 
Subd. 3.  Renewal applications. 
A.  License period, expiration. Each renewal license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
B.  Time of making application. Applications for renewal of an existing license shall be made at least 90 days prior to the date of the expiration of the license and shall state that everything in the prior applications remains true and correct except as otherwise indicated. The city will mail application forms to existing licensees approximately 120 days prior to expiration of the licenses. If, in the judgment of the council, good and sufficient cause is shown by any applicant for failure to file for a renewal within the time period provided, the council may, if the other provisions of this section are complied with, grant the application. 
Subd. 4.  Execution of application. If application is by a natural person, it shall be signed and sworn to by such person; if by a corporation, by an officer thereof; if by a partnership, by one of the general partners; if by an incorporated association, by the operating officer or managing officer thereof. If the applicant is a partnership, the application, license and bond shall be made and issued in the name of all partners. Any false statement in an application shall result in denial of the application. 
Subd. 5.  Granting licenses. 
A.  Investigation. At the time of making an initial or renewal application, the applicant shall, in writing, authorize the police department to investigate all facts set out in the application and do a personal background and criminal record check on the applicant. The applicant shall further authorize the police department to release information received from such investigation to the council. The applicant shall have an opportunity to review such information before it is released to the council. 
B.  Vote required. After such investigation, the council shall grant or refuse the application. 
C.  Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not be transferable. 
D.  Each license shall be issued only for the premises described in the application and shall not be transferable to a different location. 
E.  No change in ownership, control or location of a license shall be permitted except by amendment to the license, which amendment must be approved by the council. 
Subd. 6.  Payment of fees. 
A.  Initial fees. The annual license and investigation fees for a new license shall be paid in full before the application for the license is accepted. Upon rejection of any application for a license or upon withdrawal of an application before approval of the issuance by the council, the license fee only shall be refunded to the applicant except where rejection is for a willful misstatement in the license application. 
B.  Renewal fees. The annual license fee for renewal of a license shall be paid in full at the time the renewal application is filed with the city clerk. 
Subd. 7.  Bond required. At the time of filing an application for a license, the applicant shall file a bond in the amount of $5,000.00 with the city clerk. The bond, with a duly licensed surety company as surety thereon, must be approved as to form by the city attorney. Said bond must be conditioned that the licensee shall observe the City Code provisions, in relation to the business of pawnbroker, and that the licensee will account for and deliver to any person legally entitled thereto any articles which may have come into the possession of the licensee as pawnbroker or in lieu thereof such licensee shall pay the person or persons the reasonable value thereof. 
Subd. 8.  Persons and places ineligible for license. 
A.  No license shall be granted to or held by any person who: 
1.  Is a minor at the time the application is filed; 
2.  Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed, as prescribed by Minn. Stat. § 364.03, subd. 2, and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a pawnbroker as prescribed by Minn. Stat. § 364.03, subd. 3; 
3.  Is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien; 
4.  Holds an intoxicating liquor license under chapter 5 of the City Code; or 
5.  In the judgment of the council, is not the real party in interest or beneficial owner of the business operated or to be operated under the license. 
B.  No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises on which real estate taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city or of the state are due, delinquent, or unpaid. If an action has been commenced pursuant to the provisions of Minn. Stat. ch. 278, questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the council may on application by the licensee waive strict compliance with this provision; no waiver may be granted, however, for taxes or any portion thereof which remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming due unless such one-year period is extended through no fault of the licensee. 
Subd. 9.  Conditions of licenses. 
A.  Records. Every licensee, at the time of receipt of an article deposited, left, sold, purchased, pledged or pawned, shall immediately and legibly record, in English, in ink, or other indelible medium, or by computerized or electronic record, including the storage thereof on backup disk or other electronic storage medium, in accordance with the standards and procedures approved by the chief of police, the following information: 
1.  An accurate description of the article, in English, and any numbers written, stamped, impressed or engraved thereon, together with the name of the manufacturer and model if indicated on the article; 
2.  The amount of money loaned upon or pledged therefor; 
3.  The date, time and place of receipt of the item; 
4.  The full name, residence address, date of birth and reasonably accurate description of the person, including approximate height, sex and race from whom the items were received; 
5.  The identification number and state of issue from one of the following forms of identification of the person from whom the item was received: 
(a)  A valid Minnesota driver's license; 
(b)  A valid Minnesota identification card; or 
(c)  A valid photo identification issued by another state or a province of Canada and one form of identification. 
6.  The maturity date of the pawn transaction and the amount due; and 
7.  The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees and charges. 
B.  Disposition of articles. When any article is sold or disposed of by the licensee, the records shall contain an account of such sale with the date thereof, interest and charges accrued, the amount for which the article was sold and identification of the person to whom sold as specified in subdivision 9, subparagraph A, hereof. 
C.  Inspection of records. The records referred to in this section shall be open to the inspection of the city police officers at all reasonable times and shall be retained by the licensee for at least four years. 
D.  Pawn receipt. Every licensee shall deliver to the person pawning, pledging, selling, leaving or depositing any articles a pawn receipt with a certificate numbered to correspond with the entry in the licensee's records. The pawn receipt shall contain the same information the pawnbroker is required to record under this subdivision, in addition to the following statement: 
"Any personal property pledged to a pawnbroker within this state is subject to sale or disposal when there has been no payment made on the account for a period of not less than 60 days past the date of the pawn transaction, renewal or extension; no further notice is necessary. There is no obligation for the pledgor to redeem pledged goods. The pledgor of this item attests that it is not stolen, that it has no liens or encumbrances against it, and the pledgor has the right to sell or pawn the item. This item is redeemable only by the pledgor to whom the receipt was issued, or any person identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in the receipt, or a person identified in writing by the pledgor at the time of the initial transaction and signed by the pledgor. Written authorization for release of property of persons other than the original pledgor must be maintained along with the original transaction record." 
The person pawning, pledging, selling, depositing or leaving any article shall sign the pawn receipt and receive an exact copy thereof from the licensee. 
E.  Reports to police. 
1.  Each licensee shall prepare and deliver to the chief of police, every day before 12:00 noon, on forms prescribed by the city clerk, a legible, correct and complete copy from the records hereinbefore required and a true and correct account of all personal property or other valuables received, deposited, purchased, pledged, pawned, sold or otherwise disposed of during the preceding day. The report and description shall be signed and delivered, in person, by the person making the report to the chief of police unless otherwise directed, in writing, by the chief of police. 
2.  Automated pawn system reporting. Upon connection to a multiple jurisdiction computerized/automated pawn data reporting system (APS) by the police department, the licensee shall provide all information required for pawn, secondhand goods or precious metal transaction records in subdivision 9, subparagraph A, hereof, in accordance with this subparagraph in lieu of the reporting requirements in subparagraph (1) herein. The licensee shall submit all transaction record data required under subdivision 9, subparagraph A, via computerized transmission in accordance with the standards and procedures established by the chief of police for purposes of implementing and utilizing an APS. All required transaction record data shall be transmitted at the close of each business day. In the event the APS central server or the licensee's system is temporarily inoperable, the licensee shall provide its transaction record data to the police department as required in subparagraph (1) herein and shall provide the same to the APS central server as reasonably practical upon the system becoming operable. 
The licensee shall display a sign of sufficient size and in a location which makes it visible to all patrons which informs all patrons that all transactions are reported to the police department. 
The licensee shall be charged monthly for each transaction record transmitted through the APS at the rate set by city council resolution. The licensee shall pay the charges by the due date shown on the billing. Any charges unpaid at the close of business on the due date shall be deemed delinquent and the licensee shall be charged interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month on all delinquent charges. Interest charges shall be added to, or become a part of, the delinquent balances. Whenever any charges are more than 30 days delinquent, the city may suspend the licensee's license until all delinquent charges are paid in full. 
F.  Exceptions to reports. No person shall be required to furnish descriptions of any property purchased from manufacturers and wholesale dealers having an established place of business or of any goods purchased at an open sale from any bankrupt stock or from any other person doing business and having an established place of business. Any goods referred to in this section must be accompanied by a bill of sale or other evidence of open or legitimate purchase and must be shown to the police department when demanded. 
G.  One-hundred-twenty-day redemption period. Any person pledging, pawning or depositing an article for security shall have a minimum of 120 days from the date when the loan or pledge becomes due and payable to redeem the article before the article becomes forfeitable. 
H.  Minimum period before redemption or sale. No personal property on deposit with any licensee nor property purchased by or sold to or in any other ways coming into the possession and under the control of any licensee in the due course of business shall be permitted to be redeemed from the place of business of the licensee for a period of 72 hours, nor shall the property be sold within 60 days of the pawn transaction. 
I.  Police restrictions on sale . Whenever the chief of police or his designee shall notify any licensee not to sell or permit to be redeemed any articles received on deposit or purchased by the licensee, the articles shall not be permitted to be redeemed or sold until such time as may be determined by the chief of police. Such time shall in no case exceed the period of six months from the date of such notification. 
J.  Payment by check. Payment by licensee for any article deposited, left, purchased, pledged or pawned shall be made only by a check, draft or other negotiable or nonnegotiable instrument or order of withdrawal which is drawn against funds held by a financial institution. 
K.  Posting license. All licensees shall post their licenses, in a conspicuous place, in the licensed premises near the licensed activity. 
L.  Responsibility of licensees. The conduct of agents or employees of a licensee, while engaged in performance of their duties for their principal or employer under such license, shall be deemed the conduct of the licensee. 
M.  Penalty for property owner. It is unlawful for any person who owns or controls any real property to knowingly permit it to be used for pawnbroking without a license required by this chapter. 
Subd. 10.  Restricted hours of operation; minors. 
A.  No licensee shall be open for the transaction of business on any day of the week before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. 
B.  No licensee shall purchase or receive personal property, of any nature, on deposit or pledge from any minor. 
Subd. 11.  Inspection. 
A.  Stolen goods. Any licensee shall, at all reasonable times during the term of the license, allow any city police officer to enter or inspect the premises, where the licensee is carrying on business, and all records pertinent to the operation of the business for the purpose of locating goods suspected or alleged to have been stolen. No licensee shall conceal any article in his possession from any city police officer. 
B.  Inspection by claimed owner. All goods, wares or merchandise coming into the possession of any licensee, under the terms hereof, shall at all reasonable times be open to inspection and right of examination of any person claiming to have been the owner thereof or claiming to have had any interest therein when such person is accompanied by the city police officer. 
Subd. 12.  Corporations, partnerships or associations. 
A.  Licenses issued to corporations shall be valid only so long as there is no change in the officers or ownership interest of the corporation unless such change is approved by the council, in which event said license shall continue in force until the end of the then-current license year. 
B.  Licenses issued to associations or partnerships shall be valid only so long as there is no change in the partnership or association agreement or in the ownership of said partnership or association unless such change is approved by the council, in which event said license shall continue in force until the end of the then-current license year. 
C.  Corporations, partnerships or associations shall submit written notice to the city clerk of any such changes described herein on or before 60 days prior to the effective date of any such change and pay any fee required by section 6.04 for an amendment to the license. In the case of a corporation, the licensee shall submit written notice to the city clerk when a person not listed in the initial application will be acquiring an interest and shall give all information about said person as is required of a person pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
Subd. 13.  Refusal, suspension or revocation. 
A.  It is unlawful for any applicant to make a false statement or omission upon any application form. Any false statement in such application or any omission to state any information called for on such application form shall, upon discovery of such falsehood, work an automatic refusal of license or, if already issued, shall render any license issued pursuant thereto void. Prior issuance is of no effect to protect the applicant from prosecution for violation of this section or any part hereof. 
B.  The council may suspend or revoke a license issued under this section for operation on any premises on which real estate taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city or of the state are due, delinquent, or unpaid. If an action has been commenced pursuant to the provisions of Minn. Stat. ch. 278, questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the council may, on application by the licensee, waive strict compliance with this provision; no waiver may be granted, however, for taxes or any portion thereof which remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming due unless such one-year period is extended through no fault of the licensee. 
C.  The council may suspend or revoke a license issued under this section upon a finding of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any state statute regulating pawnbrokers. Any conviction by the pawnbroker for theft, receiving stolen property or any other crime or violation involving stolen property shall result in the immediate suspension pending a hearing on revocation of any license issued hereunder. 
D.  Except in the case of a suspension pending a hearing on revocation, a revocation or suspension of a license by the council shall be preceded by a public hearing conducted in accordance with Minn. Stat. §§ 14.57—14.69. The council may appoint a hearing examiner or may conduct a hearing itself. The hearing notice shall be given at least ten days prior to the hearing, shall include notice of the time and place of the hearing, and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee. 
Subd. 14.  Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee and any clerk, agent or employee of the licensee to commit the following acts: 
(1)  Make any false entry in the transaction records; 
(2)  Falsify, obliterate, destroy, or remove from the place of business the records, books, or accounts relating to the licensee's transactions; 
(3)  Refuse to allow the appropriate law enforcement agency, the attorney general, or any other duly authorized state or federal law enforcement officer to inspect the licensee's transaction records or any transaction goods in the licensee's possession during the ordinary hours of business or other times acceptable to both parties; 
(4)  Fail to maintain a record of each transaction for four years; 
(5)  Accept a pledge or purchase property from a person under the age of 18 years; 
(6)  Make any agreement requiring the personal liability of a pledgor or seller, or waiving any provisions of this article, or providing for a maturity date less than one month after the date of the pawn transaction; 
(7)  Fail to return pledged goods to a pledgor or provide compensation as set forth in Minn. Stat. § 325J.09, upon payment of the full amount due the pawnbroker unless either the date of redemption is more than 60 days past the date of the pawn transaction, renewal or extension and the pawnbroker has sold the pledged goods pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 325J.06, or the pledged goods have been taken into custody by a court or a law enforcement officer or agency; 
(8)  Sell or lease, or agree to sell or lease, transaction goods back to the pledgor or seller in the same, or a related, transaction; 
(9)  Sell or otherwise charge for insurance in connection with a pawn transaction; or 
(10)  Remove transaction goods from the licensed premises or other storage place approved by a municipality at any time before the transaction goods may be disposed of pursuant to Subd. 9 herein. 
(Code 1983, § 6.45, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 112, 2nd series, eff. 3-15-91; Ord. No. 265, 2nd series, eff. 8-27-98; Ord. No. 498, 2nd series, § 16, eff. 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 6.46. - Paintball sport facility. 
Subd. 1.  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
A.  Paintball means a round, thin-skinned gelatin capsule filled with a nontoxic, noncaustic, water-soluble and biodegradable colored liquid specifically designed and manufactured to be expelled from a paintball gun. 
B.  Paintball facility means any building, structure or location at which a paintball game is played. 
C.  Paintball game means a game or sport, for adult recreational purposes, of which the objective is to tag opposing players with a paintball expelled or discharged from a paintball gun. 
D.  Paintball gun means a gun from which 0.68 caliber paintballs are expelled by the use of CO 2 pressure set for a maximum velocity of 250 feet per second. 
Subd. 2.  License required . It is unlawful for any person to operate a paintball facility without first obtaining a license therefor from the city. The operation of a paintball facility within the city for which a license will not issue is unlawful. 
Subd. 3.  License application . All applications for a license for the operation of a paintball facility shall be made on a for furnished by the city which states, among other things, the name and address of the applicant, the owner and operator of the paintball facility, the name and address of the paintball facility, and the approval of the fire marshal and police chief of the paintball facility. The city clerk may approve or deny the application in accordance with this section. 
Subd. 4.  Licensing requirements. No license shall be issued hereunder unless the following conditions are met, and any license issued hereunder shall be subject to the following conditions: 
A.  The paintball facility shall provide solely for indoor paintball games; no paintball game shall be played outdoors. 
B.  It is unlawful to discharge or otherwise fire a paintball gun except on an indoor paintball field while engaged in a paintball game. 
C.  It is unlawful to discharge or otherwise fire a paintball gun at another person who is not equipped with protective face gear as approved by International Paintball Players Association (IPPA). 
D.  It is unlawful for any person under 14 years of age, or any person 14 or 15 years of age without the accompaniment of a parent or guardian, to participate in any paintball game or be in possession of any paintball gun on the licensed premises. 
E.  It is unlawful to carry a paintball gun while off the paintball field without the barrel plug engaged. 
F.  Paint guns not meeting the definition set forth in subdivision 1 herein are prohibited on the licensed premises. 
G.  The paintball field on which the paintball game is played shall be at a minimum of 7,000 square feet and completely enclosed by plexiglass. 
H.  The licensee shall provide all persons engaged in a paintball game with protective gear as recommended and approved by the IPPA. 
I.  It is unlawful to allow alcohol on the licensed premises, and the licensee shall prohibit any person reasonably believed to be under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance from playing paintball on the premises. 
J.  The paintball facility shall be located on property on which a commercial or recreational facility is a permitted or conditional use under the zoning regulations in this Code. 
Subd. 5.  Noncompliance. Failure to comply with any licensing requirement set forth in this section or any other violation of the City Code shall constitute sufficient cause for the termination of the license by the council following a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 170, 2nd series, eff. 10-29-93; Ord. No. 498, 2nd series, §§ 17, 18, eff. 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 6.47. - Special hunting permit. 
Subd. 1.  It is unlawful for any person to participate in any special hunting season, which is established by the city council for purposes of wildlife management and does not conflict with any state law or regulation, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the police chief or designee. 
Subd. 2.  All applications for a permit for special hunting within the city shall be made on a form furnished by the city and accompanied with the required permit fee, the amount of which shall be set by city council. 
Subd. 3.  No permit shall be transferable between persons, and it shall be unlawful to make any transfer in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 211, 2nd series, eff. 2-15-96)  
Sec. 6.48. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 374, 2nd series, § 1, effective March 4, 2004, repealed § 6.48 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to commercial turf fertilizer application as enacted by Ord. No. 231, 2nd series, effective April 1, 1997.  
Sec. 6.49. - Adult establishments. 
A.  Findings and purpose. Minnesota State Attorney General's Office and the Cities of St. Paul, Minnesota; Indianapolis, Indiana; Phoenix, Arizona; Seattle, Washington; Houston, Texas; and Los Angeles, California, have conducted studies of the impact of adult establishments on their respective communities. Based on these studies and the information received at the public hearings on this issue, the city council finds: 
1.  Residential neighborhoods located within close proximity to adult theaters, bookstores and other adult establishments experience increased crime rates (sex-related crimes in particular), lowered property values, increased transiency, neighborhood blight and potential health risks; 
2.  Adult establishments can have an adverse impact on adjacent commercial uses; 
3.  The adverse impacts which adult establishments have on surrounding areas diminish as the distance from the adult establishments increases; 
4.  Many members of the public perceive areas within which adult establishments are located as less safe than other areas which do not have such uses; 
5.  Adult establishments can exert a dehumanizing influence on persons attending nearby places of worship; children attending family day care homes, group family day care homes and child care centers; students attending schools; and people using parks. 
6.  The concentration of adult establishments in one area can have a substantially detrimental effect on the area in which such businesses are concentrated and on the overall quality of urban life. A cycle of decay can result from the concentration of adult establishments. The presence of such businesses is perceived by others as an indication that the area is deteriorating which can cause other businesses and residents to move out of the vicinity. Declining real estate values, which can result from the concentration of such businesses, erode the city's tax base and contribute to a feeling that section of the city is depressed. 
7.  Adult establishments can increase the risk of exposure to communicable diseases. Experiences of other cities indicate that such businesses can facilitate the spread of communicable diseases by virtue of the design and use of the premises, thereby endangering not only the patrons of such establishments but also the general public. 
In order to minimize the detrimental effect adult establishments have on adjacent land uses, and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the city, the city council adopts the following licensing regulations, recognizing that it has a great interest in the present and future character of the city's residential and commercial neighborhoods. Adoption of these regulations is not intended to unreasonably restrict the opportunity of adult establishments to locate in the city. 
B.  Definitions. For purposes of this section, these terms shall be defined as follows: 
1.  Adult establishment means any adult use as defined in this section or any business engaged in any of the following activities or which utilizes any of the following business procedures or practices: 
(a)  A business that is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage either by operation of law or by the owners of such business; or 
(b)  Any business that has a substantial or significant portion of the business or establishment that is devoted to material or persons depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
2.  Adult use means any of the activities and businesses defined below: 
(a)  Adult body painting studio means an establishment or business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or non-transparent, to or on the body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas as defined herein. 
(b)  Adult book store means an establishment used for the barter, rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tapes, videotapes, motion picture films, CD ROMs or any other form of media, if such business is not open to the public generally but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age, or if a substantial or significant portion of such business or establishment is devoted to material distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(c)  Adult cabaret means a building or portion of a building used for providing dancing or other live entertainment, if such building or portion of a building excludes minors by virtue of age or if such dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(d)  Adult companionship or escort services establishment or business means any person or business entity which receives a source of income, compensation or other consideration from providing the services of an escort to, or the placement of an escort with, a customer. For purposes of this section, an escort shall mean any individual hired for the purpose of accompanying another to or about social affairs, entertainments, or places of amusements, or at any place of public resort, or within any private quarters for compensation or consideration of any kind. An adult companionship or escort services establishment or business shall be licensed under this section. Any individual providing services as an escort, individually or as an agent of an adult companionship or escort services establishment or business, shall be licensed pursuant to the adult companionship/escort services provider license regulations in this chapter, subject to the regulations therein and in this section. 
(e)  Adult conversation/rap parlor means a building or portion of a building which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the services of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(f)  Adult entertainment facility means a building or portion of a building wherein an admission is charged for entrance or food or nonalcoholic beverages are sold or intended for consumption and wherein live presentation or entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas may be observed. 
(g)  Adult health/sport club means a building or portion of a building which excludes minors by reason of age and wherein activities that are distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activity" or "specified anatomical areas" occur. 
(h)  Adult hotel or motel means a building or portion of a building wherein hotel or motel services are provided from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage and in which material is presented which is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(i)  Adult massage parlor means an adult establishment which restricts minors by reason of age and which provides the services of massage services, other than therapeutic, health-care related massage services governed by Chapter 6 of this Code, that is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(j)  Adult mini motion picture theater means a building or portion of a building with a capacity for fewer than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters, depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as herein defined, for observation by patrons therein. The phrase "used for" in this definition shall mean a regular and substantial course of conduct and not a one-time presentation of such material. 
(k)  Adult modeling studio means an adult establishment which its primary business is the provision to customers, of figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in specified sexual activities as defined herein or display specified anatomical areas as defined herein while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such customers. 
(l)  Adult motion picture arcade means any building or portion of a building in which coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images displayed are distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(m)  Adult motion picture theater means a building or portion of a building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as herein defined, for observation by patrons therein. The phrase "used for" in this definition shall mean a regular and substantial course of conduct and not a one-time presentation of such material. 
(n)  Adult novelty business means a business which has as principal activity the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which are designed for sexual stimulation. 
(o)  Adult sauna means a sauna which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent and if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein. 
3.  Specified anatomical areas means: 
(a)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
i.  Human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair; 
ii.  Buttock; 
iii.  Female breast or breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
iv.  Any combination of the foregoing; or 
(b)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered. 
4.  Specified sexual activities include, but are not limited to, the following activities: 
(a)  Human genitals in a discernible state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(b)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttock, or female breast or breasts; or 
(c)  Actual or simulated intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, autoeroticism, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
(d)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 
(e)  Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any such person; or 
(f)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(g)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
5.  Substantial or significant means for purposes of this section, the phrase "substantial or significant" means that: (1) at least one-fourth of the portion of the floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of the business not open to the public and open to employees/agents only); or (2) at least 350 square feet of the business (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of the business not open to the public and open to employees/agents only), whichever is less, is devoted to items, merchandise or other material that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
6.  Booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room or individual room means: 
(a)  Enclosures specifically offered to persons for a fee or as an incident to performing high-risk sexual conduct; or 
(b)  Enclosures which are part of a business operated on the premises which offers movies or other entertainment to be viewed within the enclosure, including enclosures wherein movies or other entertainment is dispensed for a fee. 
The phrase "booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms" does not mean enclosures which are private offices used by the owners, managers, or persons employed by the premises for attending to the tasks of their employment, and which are not held out to the public or members of the establishment for hire or for a fee or for the purpose of viewing movies or other entertainment for a fee, and are not open to any persons other than employees. 
7.  Doors, curtains or portal partitions means full, complete, nontransparent closure devices through which one cannot see or view activity taking place within the enclosure. 
8.  Health inspectors means inspectors employed by the County of Dakota or their agents. 
9.  Minor means any natural person under the age of 18 years. 
10.  Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area with less than fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or the depiction or showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
11.  Open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to persons in the adjacent public room means either the absence of any entire "door, curtain or portal partition" or a door or other device which is made of clear, transparent material such as a glass, plexi-glass or other similar material meeting building code and safety standards, which permits the activity inside the enclosure to be entirely viewed or seen by persons outside the enclosure. 
12.  Person means one or more natural persons; a partnerships, including a limited partnership; a corporation, including a foreign, domestic, or nonprofit corporation; a trust; a political subdivision of the state; a limited liability corporation; professional association; or any other business organization or entity. 
C.  Prohibition; license required. No person shall own or operate an adult establishment within the city except within Limited Industrial (I-1), Community Shopping Center (CSC), General Business (GB), and Business Park (BP) Districts pursuant to a license issued by the city under this section. No license shall be issued hereunder for any proposed adult establishment within 1,000 feet of another licensed adult establishment, residential use, day care provider, on- or off-sale liquor establishments, park or public facility. 
No person shall engage in adult establishment activities, including the sale or display of instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are used or designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, regardless of the area size devoted to the activities at any indoor or outdoor public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, flea market or the like, theatrical or other performance, or exhibition presented to the general public where minors are admitted. 
D.  License application. The application for a license under this section shall be made on a form supplied by the city clerk and shall request the following information: 
1.  For all applicants: 
(a)  Whether the applicant and owner is a natural person, corporation, partnership, or other form of organization. 
(b)  Name, address, phone number and birth date of the applicant, owner and the operator or manager of such operation who shall be responsible for all daily operations, if different from applicant or owner. 
(c)  The legal description and address of the premises where the adult establishment is to be located. 
(d)  A floor plan of the premises which details all internal operations and activities including a statement of the total floor space occupied by the business. The floor plan need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
(e)  A site plan of the premises for which the license is sought, showing dimensions, locations of buildings, site and building lighting, street access, and parking facilities. Illumination of the exterior premises must be adequate to observe the location and activities of all persons on the exterior of the premises. 
(f)  A building elevation drawing which shows exterior construction, proposed building signs, materials and colors of the proposed adult establishment. Signs for the adult establishments shall comply with the city's sign ordinance; in addition, signs for adult establishments shall not contain representational depiction of an adult nature or graphic descriptions of the adult theme of the operation. 
(g)  The name of the business. If the business is to be conducted under a designation, name, or style other than the name of the applicant, a certified copy of the certificate required by Minn. Stat. § 333.01 shall be submitted. 
(h)  The activities and types of business to be conducted. 
(i)  The intended hours of operation. 
(j)  The names, residences and business addresses of three persons, residents of the state, of good moral character, not related to the applicant or financially interested in the premises or business, who may be referred to regarding the applicant's character or, in the case where information is required of an operating officer, the operating officer's character. 
(k)  Whether all taxes due and owing on the premises to be licensed have been paid. 
(l)  Abstractor's certificate of property ownership of the subject parcel and all parcels within 1,000 feet of the subject parcel. 
2.  If the applicant is a natural person: 
(a)  The name, place and date of birth, street and city address, and phone number of the applicant and operator/manager. 
(b)  Whether the applicant and operator/manager have ever used or has been known by a name other than his/her name, and if so, the name or names used and information concerning dates and places where used. 
(c)  The street and city addresses at which the applicant and operator/manager have lived during the preceding ten years. 
(d)  The type, name and location of every business or occupation in which the applicant's spouse and operator/manager have been engaged during the preceding two years and the name(s) and address(es) of their employer(s) and partner(s), if any, for the preceding two years. 
(e)  Whether the applicant, applicant's spouse and operator/manager have ever been convicted of a felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than traffic. If so, they shall furnish information as to the time, place, and offense for which there were convictions. 
3.  If the applicant is a partnership: 
(a)  The name(s) and address(es) of all general partners and the operator/manager and all of the information concerning each general partner and the operator/manager that is required of applicants in D.1.(b) of this section. 
(b)  The name(s) of the managing partner(s) and the interest of each partner in the business. 
(c)  A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the application. If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a trade name pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 333.01, a certified copy of such certificate shall be attached to the application. 
4.  If the applicant is a corporation or other business organization or entity: 
(a)  The name of the corporation or business entity, and if incorporated, the state of incorporation. 
(b)  A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of incorporation or association agreement, and by-laws shall be attached to the application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certificate of authority as required by Minn. Stat. § 303.06, shall be attached. 
(c)  The name of the manager(s), proprietor(s), owner(s), or other agent(s) in charge of the business and all of the information concerning each manager, proprietor, or agent that is required of applicants in subsection D.1.(b) of this section. 
(d)  A statement detailing any felony convictions of the owners of more than five percent of the interest in the entity and whether or not those owners have ever applied for or held a license to operate a similar type of business in other communities. 
E.  Application execution and verification of information. 
1.  If the application is that of a natural person, the application shall be signed and sworn to by that person; if of a corporation, by an officer thereof, if of a partnership, by one of the general partners; if of an unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer thereof. 
2.  The fee owner of the property on which the adult establishment is proposed to be located and operated shall sign the application before a notary public as to verify his/her approval of the application. 
3.  Applications for licenses under this section shall be submitted to the city clerk. Within 30 calendar days of receipt of a completed application and payment of all licensing application fees, the city clerk and police chief or their designees shall verify any and all of the information requested of the applicant in the application including the ordering of criminal background checks, and conduct any necessary investigation to assure compliance with this section. The period for investigation may be extended 15 days by the city council if an out-of-state investigation is required. 
F.  Application consideration. No later than 30 calendar days after the completion of the license application verification and investigation by the city clerk, as prescribed in this section, the city clerk shall grant or deny the license in accordance with this section. 
If an application is granted for a location where a building is under construction or not ready for occupancy, the license shall not be delivered to the licensee until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the licensed premises. During the application consideration process prescribed herein, an applicant operating a business not previously subject to the license provisions of this section may remain operating pending the outcome of the application consideration. 
If the license is denied, the city clerk shall notify the applicant of the determination in writing. The notice shall be mailed by certified and regular mail to the applicant at the address provided on the application form. The applicant shall have the right to appeal the city clerk's determination to the city council. The applicant shall file a request for an appeal with the city clerk's office within 20 calendar days of receipt of the notice of denial. If a request for an appeal to the city council is timely filed with the city clerk, a hearing before the city council shall take place within 20 calendar days of the receipt of the request for an appeal by the city clerk. The applicant's right to appeal or otherwise contest the city clerk's denial of the application shall be deemed waived by the applicant if the applicant fails to timely file a written request for appeal as required herein or fails to appear at the scheduled appeal hearing before the city council. The notice of denial shall advise the applicant of the applicant's right to request an appeal and the appeal request procedures. 
G.  Fees. 
1.  Application fee: 
(a)  The annual license application fee shall be determined by city council resolution. The license application fee shall be prorated if the application is submitted for a license issuance before December 31. 
(b)  The license application fee shall be paid in fill before the application for a license is accepted. All fees shall be paid to the city clerk for deposit into the general fund of the city. Upon rejection of any application for a license or upon withdrawal of application before approval by the city clerk the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(c)  When the license is for premises where the building is not ready for occupancy, the time fixed for computation of the license fee for the initial license period shall be 90 days after approval of the license by the issuing authority or upon the date an occupancy permit is issued for the building. 
2.  Investigation fee: 
(a)  At the time of each original application for a license, applicant shall pay, in full, an investigation fee, which shall be determined and set by city council resolution. If any investigation outside the State of Minnesota is required, the applicant shall be charged the cost, not to exceed $10,000.00, which shall be paid prior to issuance of a license, after deducting the initial application fee, whether or not the license is granted. 
(b)  At any time an additional investigation is required because of a change in the ownership of any license or control of a corporate license, the licensee shall pay an additional investigation fee. The investigation fee shall be determined by city council resolution. If any of the additional investigation outside the State of Minnesota is required, the applicant shall be charged the cost, not to exceed $10,000.00, which shall be paid after deducting the initial investigation fee. 
(c)  At any time an additional investigation is required because an amendment to the license is required under this section, the licensee shall pay an additional investigation fee as specified by city council resolution. 
(d)  Fees for additional investigation required because of a change in the operating officer or proprietor or other agent in charge of the licensed premises shall be as specified by city council resolution. 
H.  Persons and locations ineligible for a license. The city clerk shall issue or renew a license under this section to an applicant unless one or more of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The applicant is under the age of 21 at the time the application is submitted; 
2.  The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the license application; 
3.  The applicant or applicant's spouse is overdue in his/her payment of city, county or state taxes, fees, fines or penalties. 
4.  The applicant gave false, fraudulent, or untruthful information on the license application; 
5.  The applicant, spouse, or anyone residing with the applicant has had an adult establishment license revoked or suspended or has been denied a license to operate an adult establishment within a one-year period immediately preceding the date the application was submitted; 
6.  The applicant or spouse has had a conviction of a felony or a gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses, or adult uses in the past five years; 
7.  The operator or manager of the proposed licensed adult establishment is not eligible for a license pursuant to this section; 
8.  The spouse of the applicant is ineligible for a license pursuant to this section or the applicant is not the real party in interest or beneficial owner of the business operated, or to be operated, under the license. "Interest" shall have the meaning as defined in this section; 
9.  The adult establishment does not meet all of the requirements prescribed in the City of Eagan Code, the city's zoning ordinance, building code, fire code and the city's health regulations, this section and all provisions of state and federal laws; 
10.  The premises to be licensed as an adult establishment is currently licensed by the city as an adult establishment, therapeutic massage enterprise, or an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages; 
11.  The applicant has not paid the license and investigation fees required. 
12.  The fee owner of the property on which the proposed licensed premises is located has not signed or approved the license application. 
I.  Renewal application. 
1.  All licenses issued under this section shall be effective until December 31 of the year of issuance. An application for the renewal of an existing license shall be submitted to the city clerk no later than 4:30 p.m. on November 1 of the year of issuance. 
2.  Within 30 calendar days of receipt by the city clerk of a fully completed renewal application, the city clerk and chief of police or designee shall verify any and all of the information requested of the applicant in the renewal application, including the ordering of criminal background checks, and shall conduct any necessary investigation to assure compliance with this section. No later than 30 calendar days after the completion of the renewal application verification and investigation as prescribed herein, the city clerk shall issue a renewal license unless one or more of the conditions which is listed for denial of the license herein exists. 
3.  If the city clerk denies a renewal application, the city clerk shall notify the applicant in accordance with this section and the notice shall, in addition, state the grounds for the denial. 
4.  After the denial of a renewal application by the city clerk, the applicant may appeal the city clerk's determination to the city council as provided for an initial denial of a license under this section or by immediately challenging the determination in a court of law. If the city denies renewal of a license under this section, the applicant shall not be issued a license under this section for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to the denial, the city finds that the basis for the denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the denial became final. 
J.  General license requirements. 
1.  Posting of license. A license issued under this section must be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises for which it is issued in order that it is plainly visible to all persons entering the premises. 
2.  Scope of license. A license issued under this section is only effective for the compact and contiguous space specified in the approved license application. 
3.  Maintenance of order. A licensee and licensee's designated operator or manager under this section shall be responsible for the conduct of the business being operated and shall not allow any illegal activity to take place within or outside on the property of the licensed premises, including but not limited to prostitution, public indecency, indecent exposure, disorderly conduct, or the sale or use of illegal drugs. Every act or omission by an employee or independent contractor of the licensee constituting a violation of this section shall be deemed the act or omission of the licensee and licensee's operator or manager if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the licensee, operator or manager, or as a result of the licensee's, operator's or manager's negligent failure to supervise the licensed premises. 
4.  Alcohol on licensed premises. No alcohol shall served or present on the licensed premises. 
K.  Restrictions regarding license transfer. 
1.  A license granted under this section is for the person and the premises named on the approved license application. No transfer of a license shall be permitted from place to place or from person to person without complying with the requirements of an original application. 
2.  An adult establishment license under this section shall terminate immediately upon the sale or transfer in ownership of the adult establishment business. Upon the sale or transfer, the licensee shall immediately notify the city clerk of the sale or transfer and the new owner or operator must immediately apply for a license under this section including payment of the investigation fee. 
L.  Change in business entity ownership. 
1.  Licenses issued to corporations shall be valid only so long as there is no change in the officers or ownership interest of the corporation, within the meaning of the term in this Code unless such change is approved by the council, in which event said license shall continue in force until the end of the then current license year. 
2.  License issued to any other business entity shall be valid only so long as there is no change in the partnership or association agreement or in the ownership of the entity unless such change is approved by the council, in which event said license shall continue in force until the end of the then current license year. 
3.  Any business entity holding an adult establishment license shall submit written notice to the clerk of any such changes described herein on or before 60 days prior to the effective date of any such change and pay any fee required by this section. Notwithstanding the definition of "interest" as given in this Code, in the case of a corporation, the licensee shall submit written notice to the clerk when a person not listed in the application will be acquiring an interest and shall give all information about said person as is required of a person pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
4.  Corporations holding an adult establishment license shall submit written notice to the clerk of any change in operating officers within ten days of such change. The written notice shall designate the interim operating officer and shall contain all the information about said person as is required of a single applicant in this section. The operating officers shall be subject to the investigation required by this section. Investigation fees shall be as determined by the city council pursuant to this section. 
5.  The designation of a new operating officer or manager shall not cause the corporation's license to become invalid before a decision is rendered by the city council provided proper notice and application are made pursuant to this section. A proposed new operating officer shall be referred to as the interim operating officer. In the event an interim operating officer is rejected by the city clerk, the corporation shall designate another interim operating officer and make the required application pursuant to this section within 15 calendar days of the council's decision. 
M.  Change in building, premises and character of business. An application for approval of any proposed enlargement, change in character of the establishment or extension of premises previously licensed shall be made to the clerk before the time application is made for a building permit for any such change. Any additional fee required by the fee provisions of this section shall be paid at the time of application if the enlargement, substantial alteration or extension requires an amendment to the license. The change shall not be allowed unless the city clerk approves an amendment to the license prior to the issuance of any building permit. 
N.  Restrictions regarding hours of operation. A licensed premise shall not be open for business to the public during the hours of 1:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and no person other than a licensee's bonafide employees shall be in the licensed premises between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., provided no employee of the licensee shall be in the premises more than 75 minutes after 1:00 a.m. or before 8:00 a.m. 
O.  Restriction regarding minors. No licensee shall allow minors to enter the licensed premises. The licensee shall request proof of age of all persons entering the licenses premises. Proof of age may be established only by: a valid driver's license or identification card issued by Minnesota, another state, or a province of Canada; a valid military identification card issued by the United States Department of Defense; or in the case of a foreign national from a nation other than Canada, a valid passport, all of which shall include the photograph and date of birth of the person to be identified. 
P.  Restrictions regarding sanitation and health. 
1.  Partitions facilitating sexual activity. A licensee under this section shall not allow any partition between a subdivision, portion, or part of the licensed premises having any aperture which is designed or constructed to facilitate sexual intercourse, sodomy, or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttocks, or female breast between persons on either side of the partition. 
2.  Restrictions on booths, stalls, and partitions. A licensee under this section shall not allow or have on the licensed premises or adjoining areas any booths, stalls, or partitions used for the viewing of motion pictures or other forms of entertainment, including but not limited to live entertainment that have doors, curtains, or portal partitions, unless such booths, stalls, or partitions have at least one side open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to persons in the adjacent public room. Such areas shall be lighted in a manner that the persons in the area used for viewing motion pictures or other forms of entertainment are visible from the adjacent public rooms. No reclining surfaces inside any booths, stalls, or partitions used for the viewing of motion pictures or other forms of entertainment including but not limited to live entertainment shall be permitted. 
3.  Distance requirement for live adult entertainment. All performers, dancers, and persons providing live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas in the licensed facility or in areas adjoining the licensed facility where such entertainment can be seen by patrons of the licensed facility shall remain at all times a minimum distance of ten feet from all patrons, customers, or spectators and shall dance or provide such entertainment on a platform intended for that purpose, which shall be raised at least two feet from the level of the floor on which patrons or spectators occupy. 
4.  Interaction with patrons. No dancer, performer, or person providing live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas in the licensed facility or in areas adjoining the licensed facility where the entertainment can be seen by patrons of the licensed facility shall fondle or caress any patron or spectator. 
5.  Authority of health inspectors. City staff or designees shall have the authority to inspect or cause to be inspected the licensed premises and adjoining areas in order to ascertain sources of infection or reduce the spread of communicable diseases. Such officials shall have the authority to issue appropriate orders to the licensee regarding health and sanitation. 
6.  Limitation on number of persons in partitioned areas. Any booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms used for the viewing of motion pictures or other forms of entertainment including but not limited to live entertainment shall not be occupied by more than one person at a time. 
7.  Duty to supervise. The licensee shall not permit specified sexual activities as defined herein to take place on the premises and shall have an affirmative duty to supervise the licensed premises and prevent such activities. 
Q.  Right of inspection. Prior to issuance of an initial license or renewal license, a police officer, building inspector or a city designee must inspect the premises for compliance with this section and applicable building and health codes. Any police officer, building inspector or any properly designated officer or employee of the city shall have the unqualified right to enter, inspect and search the premises of any licensee hereunder at any time without a warrant. 
R.  License and criminal violations. 
1.  Suspension. The city council may suspend a license issued pursuant to this section for up to 60 days if the city council determines that a licensee or the licensee's designated operator or manager has committed the following: 
(a)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in a license application or a renewal application. 
(b)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of carrying on the licensed occupation or business. 
(c)  Any violation of this section. 
(d)  A licensee's criminal conviction that is directly related to the occupation or business licensed as defined by Minn. Stat., § 364.03, Subd. 2, provided that the licensee cannot show competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of the licensed occupation or business as defined by Minn. Stat., § 364.03, Subd. 3. 
(e)  Conducting the licensed business or occupation in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the community. 
2.  Revocation. The city council may revoke a license if the city council determines that: 
(a)  The licensee's license was suspended in the preceding 14 months and an additional cause for suspension as detailed in (a) above is found by the city. council to have occurred within the fourteen-month period; 
(b)  The licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the city during the application process; 
(c)  A licensee or an employee or independent contractor of the licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(d)  A licensee or an employee or independent contractor has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(e)  A licensee violated any of the provisions of Minn. Stat. §§ 617.241—617.299 relating to the illegal distribution, possession, or sale of obscene materials; 
(f)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the adult establishment during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(g)  A licensee or licensee's operator or manager has been convicted of an offense listed in this section for which the time period required has not elapsed; 
(h)  On two or more occasions within a twelve-month period, a person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in this section for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees or independent contractors of the licensee at the time the offenses were committed; 
(i)  A licensee or an employee or independent contractor of the licensee has knowingly allowed specified sexual activities to occur in or on the licensed premises; or 
(j)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city, county, state or federal governments for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes, sales taxes, or other financial obligations. 
3.  Hearing procedures. A revocation or suspension shall be preceded by written notice to the licensee and a public hearing. The notice shall give at least eight days notice of the time and place of the public hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee. The notice shall be mailed to the licensee at the most recent address listed on the application. 
4.  Any act enumerated as a grounds for suspension or revocation shall constitute an unlawful act and violation of this section. 
S.  Criminal penalty. A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor under Minnesota law. The city may also pursue injunctive remedies. 
T.  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this section is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted this section and each subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid. 
(Ord. No. 249, 2nd series, eff. 12-25-97)  
Sec. 6.50. - Adult companionship/escort services provider license. 
Subd. 1.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prescribe licensing requirements for escort services operating within the city in order to prevent criminal activity and provide for the health and welfare of citizens. 
Subd. 2.  Findings of the city council. The city council finds that escort services can be used as fronts for prostitution and other criminal activity including but not limited to prostitution, thereby taxing city law-enforcement resources. The Council finds that escort services used as fronts for illegal sexual activity can also increase the risk of the spread of sexually transmitted diseases including but not limited to Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) for which currently there is no cure. 
Subd. 3.  Definitions. The following words and terms when used in this section shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Escort shall mean any individual hired for the purpose of accompanying another to or about social affairs, entertainments, or places of amusements or at any place of public resort or within any private quarters for compensation or consideration of any kind. The term "escort" as used in this chapter does not include baby-sitters, child care providers or any other person providing child care services to a minor or providing health care services to any person. 
Escort service shall mean any individual having a source of income or compensation derived from providing the services of an escort, or placement of an escort with a customer. 
Within the city includes physical presence as well as telephone referrals such as phone-a-massage operations in which the business premises, although not actually located within the city, serves as a point of assignment of employees who respond to requests for services from within the city. 
Subd. 4.  License required. It is unlawful for any person to provide, or to advertise for or offer to provide, escort services, whether individually or as an agent of or for an adult companionship establishment or business, within the city without first obtaining a license therefor from the city. For purposes of this section, the phrase "for a fee" shall mean to sell, trade or barter the companionship/escort services, for goods or services, which need not be simultaneously exchanged. 
Subd. 5.  License application. All applications for a license hereunder shall be accompanied by a medical certificate from a physician duly licensed to practice medicine in the state, stating that the applicant has no communicable disease. All initial applications shall be accompanied by the license fee and the nonrefundable investigation fee. Applications shall be on a form provided by the city and shall contain all requested information set forth therein as the city may require. All applicants shall be at least 21 years of age. 
Subd. 6.  Restrictions and regulations. 
A.  Whenever companionship/escort services are provided, it shall be required by the licensee that the person who is receiving the services shall have his/her buttocks, anus, breasts and/or genitals covered with appropriate nontransparent covering. 
B.  The licensee, while providing companionship/escort services, shall at all times have his/her buttocks, anus, breasts and/or genitals covered with an appropriate nontransparent covering. 
C.  The licensee shall comply with any and all amendments to this chapter and failure to do so shall be grounds for revocation of any license issued hereunder. 
D.  The licensee shall not engage in, or permit any customer to engage in, fondling, caressing or specific sexual activities between the licensee and the customer, or between the licensee and any other third party, or between any other third parties. For purpose of this paragraph, the term "specific sexual activities" shall mean as the term is defined in the adult establishment regulations in this chapter. 
E.  No companionship/escort services shall be provided during the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
F.  The licensee shall not provide any companionship/escort services to any person under the age of 21 years. For purposes of this paragraph, it is the licensee's burden to obtain a customer's proof of age which may be established only by one of the following: 
1.  A valid driver's license or identification card issued by Minnesota, another state, or a province of Canada, and including the photograph and date of birth of the licensed person; 
2.  A valid military identification card issued by the United States Department of Defense; or 
3.  In the case of a foreign national, from a nation other than Canada, by a valid passport. 
Subd 7.  License and investigation fees. The annual license fee and the applicant's investigation fee for a license hereunder shall be determined by city council resolution. The initial license fee shall be prorated if the application is submitted for a license issuance before December 31. 
Subd 8.  Application process and requirements. The provisions of the adult establishment regulations in section 6.49 of this Code governing application, execution and verification of information; application consideration; persons eligible for a license; renewal license application; and restrictions regarding license transfer shall be incorporated herein and applicable to a license issued hereunder. 
Subd 9.  License and criminal violations—Suspension and revocation. The provisions in the adult establishment regulations in section 6.49 of this Code shall be incorporated herein and applicable to a license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 251, 2nd series, eff. 1-15-98)  
Sec. 6.51. - Sale and display of lawn fertilizer. 
No person, firm, corporation, franchise, or commercial establishment shall sell or display for sale any lawn fertilizer, liquid or granular, that contains any amount of phosphorus or other compound containing phosphorus, such as phosphate, within the city unless: 
(a)  Phosphorus-free fertilizer is also available for sale; 
(b)  Phosphorus-free fertilizer and fertilizer with phosphorus are separately displayed with each display being clearly marked as to whether or not the fertilizer contains phosphorus; 
(c)  Displays of phosphorus-free fertilizer are of equal or greater size and prominence; and 
(d)  A sign or brochure is on prominent display next to any fertilizer display containing the City of Eagan's regulations concerning the use of fertilizer with phosphorus. 
(Ord. No. 349, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 7-25-02)  
Sec. 6.52. - Currency exchange business. 
Subd. 1.  Definition. "Currency exchange business" means any person, entity or establishment, except a bank, trust company, savings bank, savings association, credit union, or industrial loan and thrift company, engaged in the business of cashing checks or drafts or providing money orders, certified checks, travelers checks or currency wire transfers for a fee. Currency exchange does not include a person, entity or establishment which provides said services incidental to a primary business if the charge for service does not exceed $1.00 or one percent of the value of the check, draft, money order, travelers check, or wire transfer, whichever is greater. 
Subd. 2.  State license required. It is unlawful for any person to operate or engage in a currency exchange business within the city without first obtaining and holding a valid license therefor issued by the State of Minnesota through the commissioner of commerce as required in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 53A and without first obtaining from the city a conditional use permit for the permitted zoning district. 
Subd. 3.  Restrictions and regulations. A currency exchange business which is licensed to operate within the city in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 53A, shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  The operation of the currency exchange business shall comply and be operated in accordance with all state laws and regulations relating to the operation of currency exchange businesses. 
2.  A currency exchange business shall be operated only in the zoning districts as set forth in this Code and in accordance with the zoning regulations of this Code. 
3.  No currency exchange business shall be operated or located on a site unless it meets the special use setback, as defined in the zoning regulations of this Code, from any existing currency exchange business, secondhand goods store or pawnshop, day care facility, on or off-sale liquor establishment, park or public facility or residential property, including R-4 (residential multiple district) properties. 
4.  A currency exchange business shall comply with all provisions of this Code and other applicable state laws. 
5.  No bars, chains, or other security devices on the structure in which a currency exchange business is located shall be visible from a public street or sidewalk. 
6.  A currency exchange business shall not engage in any services in which money or funds are lended, borrowed or pledged to or by a customer. 
7.  The premises shall be open for inspection by the city and the city shall have the right to inspect the premises. 
8.  No currency exchange business shall be open or operated during the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:59 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 361, 2nd series, eff. 7-10-03; Ord. No. 418, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 12-8-07)  
Sec. 6.53. - Fireworks. 
Subd. 1.  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings as stated: 
A.  Consumer fireworks means wire or wood sparklers of not more than 100 grams of mixture per item, other sparking items which are non-explosive and non-aerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical mixture per tube, or a total or 200 grams or less for multiple tubes, snake and glow worms, smoke devices, trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of not more than 25/100 grains of explosive mixture, toy pistols, toy guns in which paper caps containing 25/100 grains or less of explosive compound are used, or toy pistol caps which contain less than 20/100 grains of explosive mixture. 
B.  Fireworks means any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, and includes blank cartridges, toy cannons, and toy canes in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedos, skyrockets, roman candles, daygo bombs, sparklers other than those identified as consumer fireworks, or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive or inflammable compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance and commonly used as fireworks. Consumer fireworks shall not be deemed "fireworks." 
Subd. 2.  Sale, possession and use of fireworks prohibited. 
A.  Minnesota Statutes, §§ 624.20—624.25 (2003), and as amended, are hereby adopted by reference as though set forth verbatim herein. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, display for sale, store, possess, use, or explode any fireworks. This subdivision shall not be construed to prohibit the possession, use, sale or explosion of fireworks as permitted by and subject to the permit requirements set forth in Minn. Stat. §§ 624.20—624.25. If the state fire marshall authorizes the city to permit and regulate indoor fireworks display, then the permitting process as set forth in the state statutes shall apply to any indoor fireworks display in the city. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to possess, use, explode, or sell at wholesale for the purpose of an outdoor fireworks display or an indoor fireworks display without first obtaining a permit therefor as required and governed by Minn. Stat. §§ 624.20—624.25. 
Subd. 3.  Sale of consumer fireworks. 
A.  Permit required. It is unlawful for any person or entity to, directly or indirectly, keep for retail sale, sell at retail, store or display for sale, or otherwise dispose of any consumer fireworks without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city. 
B.  Consumer fireworks permit application. Application for a permit to sell consumer fireworks hereunder shall be made on a form provided by the city. The application shall contain the full name of the applicant, the applicant's residential address and telephone number, the name of the business, the address and telephone number for which the permit is sought, and any additional information the city deems necessary. Upon receipt of the completed application and the permit fee, which shall be in an amount set forth by city council resolution, the city fire marshal or a designee (hereinafter collectively referred to as city fire marshal) shall have the authority to take action on the permit application whereby the city fire marshal shall grant or deny the permit as provided in this section. If the city fire marshal determines that an application is incomplete, he or she shall return the application to the applicant with notice of the information necessary to make the application complete. 
C.  Action on consumer fireworks permit application. The applicant shall be subject to a criminal background investigation. The city fire marshal may either approve or deny the permit or he/she may delay action for a reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any investigation. The city fire marshal may either approve or deny the permit or it may delay action for such reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any investigation of the application or the applicant as it deems necessary. The city fire marshal may deny a permit on the following grounds: 
1.  The applicant is under the age of 18 years. 
2.  The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any violation of federal, state or local law or ordinance provision or other regulation relating to fireworks or consumer fireworks. 
3.  The applicant has had a license or permit to sell consumer fireworks or has had a permit for fireworks displays revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date of application. 
4.  The applicant failed to provide information required on the application or provided false or misleading information. 
5.  The applicant is prohibited by federal, state or other local law or ordinance or other regulation from holding such license or permit. 
D.  Consumer fireworks permit conditions. A consumer fireworks permit shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  A separate consumer fireworks permit shall be issued for the retail sale of consumer fireworks at each fixed place of sale or business and no permit shall be issued for a mobile business location. 
2.  The permit holder shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations regarding fireworks or consumer fireworks and all provisions of this section. 
3.  Consumer fireworks shall not be sold to any person under the age of 18 years. Photo identification of each purchaser shall be checked at each sale. 
4.  Indoor retail sale of consumer fireworks shall occur only on property zoned GB (retail sales), NB, CSC, PD (retail sales). No sale of consumer fireworks shall occur on property zoned residential or on property with mixed uses of which include residential. 
5.  Outdoor sales of consumer fireworks shall be subject to the temporary outdoor event regulations set forth in the City Code zoning regulations, in addition to the following requirements: 
a.  No outdoor sales of consumer fireworks shall occur within 1,500 feet of any other permitted outdoor sales of consumer fireworks under this section. In the event that there are two or more applications for a consumer fireworks permit for outdoor sales of consumer fireworks to which the 1,500 foot radius requirement would apply to the pending applications if approved, the 1,500 foot radius requirement would not apply to the applicant who submitted the pending application earliest in time, and thus would apply to any other pending application(s) filed after the first applicant. 
b.  All consumer fireworks kept outdoors in a structure during the permitted period of the temporary outdoor event shall be stored in a metal container approved and required by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard 1124 between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and any other times that the permit holder is not open for business/sales. Any structure in which the outdoor sales of consumer fireworks is to occur shall comply with the requirements of NFPA Standard 1124. The storage container required hereunder shall be permitted notwithstanding any other zoning regulation to the contrary. 
6.  Retail sale of consumer fireworks shall occur only on the premises for which the permit is issued. 
7.  Smoking within 50 feet of the retail consumer fireworks sale and storage areas is prohibited and the sale and storage area(s) shall have signs designated "No Smoking" in red letters not less than two inches in height on white background. All signs shall be maintained in legible condition and all signage must be approved by the fire chief or his/her designee. 
8.  No consumer fireworks shall be discharged, exploded or used within 100 feet of the building in which the consumer fireworks are being sold or stored. 
9.  The building or outdoor sales structure in which the consumer fireworks are sold or stored shall have at least two 2 ½ gallon pressurized fire extinguishers in the area where the consumer fireworks are sold or stored in accordance with the 2000 International Fire Code. 
10.  The building or outdoor sales structure in which the consumer fireworks are being sold or stored shall have at least two exits to the outside and all consumer fireworks display aisles shall be a minimum width of 48 inches. The height of the consumer fireworks display shall not exceed six feet. 
11.  All consumer fireworks fuses shall be covered or arranged so fuses cannot be touched directly by a person handling the consumer fireworks without that person puncturing or tearing the package. 
12.  In buildings in which consumer fireworks are sold or stored, and do not have an approved automatic sprinkler system, consumer fireworks sales, displays or storage shall be limited to 50 pounds net pyrotechnic composition or 200 pounds gross weight, if the pyrotechnic composition weight is unknown. In buildings with an approved automatic sprinkler system, fireworks sales, displays and storage shall be limited to 100 pounds net pyrotechnic composition or 400 pounds gross weight, if the pyrotechnic composition weight is not known. 
13.  A list of all consumer fireworks displayed for sale or stored on the permitted property shall be posted in a conspicuous location near the display and storage areas. The list shall contain the name, weight and quantity of the consumer fireworks and shall be accompanied by the material safety data sheets. Upon request, samples of the consumer fireworks shall be made available to the fire chief or his/her designee for testing. 
14.  A permit granted under this subdivision shall not be transferable. 
15.  The building or outdoor sales structure in which retail sale consumer fireworks are permitted hereunder shall meet all applicable provisions of the State Building Code and Fire Code. 
16.  The permit holder shall be responsible for the actions of its employees or agents with regard to the sale of consumer fireworks on the licensed premises and for purposes of this provision, the sale of consumer fireworks by an employee or agent will be considered a sale by the permit holder. 
17.  The permit holder shall maintain at all times during the duration of the permit and as a condition thereof, general liability, bodily injury and property damage insurance approved by the city in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 per claim and for each incident. The city shall be named as an additional insured and the permit holder shall provide to the city clerk a current certificate of insurance. The permit holder shall notify the city clerk at least 30 days in advance of any insurance cancellation or threat of cancellation of insurance. 
18.  The permit shall be effective for a period of 12 months, expiring March 31st of each year. 
Subd. 4.  Consumer fireworks regulations. 
A.  No person under the age of 18 years shall purchase any consumer fireworks. 
B.  No person shall throw, toss or otherwise dispose of any consumer firework at or in the direction of any person, animal, vehicle, thing or object. 
C.  No person shall throw, toss or otherwise discard any consumer fireworks from a vehicle, moving or non-moving. 
D.  No consumer fireworks shall be kept, stored, used, permitted or discharged on public property or any public street or right-of-way. 
E.  No person shall use or discharge a consumer firework within any building or structure. 
F.  No person shall use or discharge any consumer firework between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
Subd. 5. Suspension or revocation of consumer fireworks permit. The city fire marshal shall have the authority to immediately suspend or revoke any consumer fireworks permit for any violation of this Section, or any other provision of the City Code or state statutes. The permit holder has a right to appeal the suspension or revocation of the permit upon filing a request for hearing with the city clerk. The hearing shall be held before the city council at its next regular meeting after the filing of the request for hearing, but in no case less than five days from the date of the request. The suspension or revocation of the permit by the city fire marshal shall remain in effect pending the hearing, if any, before the city council. 
(Ord. No. 378, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 5-13-04; Ord. No. 387, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 4-30-05)  
Sec. 6.54. - Body art establishments. 
Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the business of tattooing, body piercing, body branding, body painting and body art for the purpose of protecting the general health, safety, and welfare of the community. The city council is aware that activities that involve the piercing of skin with needles or other instruments pose the potential risk of spreading infection disease(s) or causing other health problems if not done in a safe manner and under sanitary conditions. Therefore, the city council finds it necessary and in the interest of the protecting the general health, safety and welfare to adopt regulations governing tattooing and body piercing. 
Subd. 2. Definitions. The following words and terms shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Body art means any physical body adornment including, but not limited to, the following techniques: body piercing, tattooing and cosmetic tattooing. 
Body art establishment means any place or premise, whether public or private, temporary or permanent in nature or location, where the practices of body art, whether or not for profit, is performed, but shall not include any medical or dental facility exempt from these regulations. 
Body piercing means the penetration or puncturing of human skin by any method, for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other objects, in or through the human body. For purposes of this section, body piercing does not include the puncturing of the lobe of the ear using a pre-sterilized ear-piercing system with the stud and clasp contained in a single-use cartridge or cassette following the manufacturer's instructions. 
Branding shall mean any method, including but not limited to using heat, cold or any chemical compound applied to the skin of an individual, to cause a scar to the body for the purpose of creating a permanent mark or design on the skin. 
Clean means the absence of dirt, grease, rubbish, garbage and other non-sanitary matter. 
Equipment shall mean all machinery, including fixtures, containers, vessels, tools, devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas, sinks, and all other apparatus and appurtenances, used in the operation of a body art establishment or used to perform or apply body art. 
Good repair means to be free of corrosion, breaks, cracks, chips, pitting, excessive wear and tear, leaks, obstruction, and similar defects so as to constitute a sanitary, workable and sound condition. 
Individual means a human being. 
Microdermal means a single-point perforation of any body part other than an earlobe for the purpose of inserting an anchor with a step either protruding from or flush with the skin. 
Operator or technician mean any individual who owns, controls, operates, manages, conducts or practices body art activities at a body art establishment. The term includes any person who works under the direction of the operator and perform body art techniques or procedures. 
Owner means an individual, firm, company, corporation or association that owns and operates an establishment where body art is performed. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation or association. 
Procedure means performing a technique to apply body art, as defined in this section, to an individual 
Procedure area means the physical space or room used solely for body art procedures. 
Scarification means to cut, lacerate, damage or tear the human skin for the purpose of creating a permanent mark or design on the skin. 
Subdermal implantation means the implantation of an object entirely below the dermis. 
Suspension means the suspension of the body from affixed hooks placed through temporary piercings. 
Tattoo, tattooing means any method of placing ink or other pigments into or under the skin with needles or any other instruments used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration. This includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing, except those performed by a licensed medical professional under the supervision of a physician and performance in a medical office. 
Tongue bifurcation means the cutting of the tongue from the tip to the base, forking at the end. 
Subd. 3A. Body art establishment license required. No person, partnership, corporation or other form of business entity shall operate a body art establishment without first obtaining a body art establishment license from the State of Minnesota. Jewelry stores and accessory stores that provide ear-piercing services exclusively using piercing guns shall be exempt from this section. This section does not apply to any body art performed or provided by a licensed medical or dental professional in a medical or dental office. 
Subd. 3B. Body art technician license required. No person shall engage in or perform any body art technique or procedure upon another unless the person holds a valid body art technician license from the State of Minnesota in accordance with the state law regulating body art. 
Subd. 4. Requirements. 
A.  No person, partnership, corporation, or other form of business entity shall operate a body art establishment that is located on property that is not zoned for retail uses as a permitted use, pursuant to the zoning regulations set forth in this Code. 
B.  No premises licensed by the State of Minnesota as a body art establishment, whether temporary or permanent, shall sell or provide alcoholic beverages. 
C.  No body art establishment shall be open for business before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. 
D.  All body art technicians and body art establishments licensed by the State of Minnesota shall comply with all state statutes, rules, and regulations governing body art. 
Subd. 5. Minn. Stat. §§ 146B.01—146B.10 adopted by reference. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the regulatory and procedural provisions in Minn. Stat. §§ 146B.01—146B.10 (body art licensure and regulations), as amended, are hereby incorporated herein and adopted by reference, including the penalty provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 429, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 10-21-08; Ord. No. 457, 2nd series, §§ 1—13, eff. 7-20-10; Ord. No. 469, 2nd series, §§ 1—4, eff. 12-21-2010)  
Sec. 6.55. - Rental property registration. 
Subd. 1. Purpose . It is the purpose of this section to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community at large and the residents of residential rental properties in the City of Eagan. It is the purpose of this section to ensure that rental housing in the city is decent, safe, and sanitary and is so operated and maintained as not to become a nuisance to the neighborhood or to become an influence that fosters blight and deterioration or creates a disincentive to reinvest in the community. The operation of residential rental properties is a business enterprise that entails certain responsibilities. Owners and operators are responsible to take such reasonable steps as are necessary to ensure that the citizens of the city who occupy such rental properties may pursue the quiet enjoyment of the normal activities of life in their surroundings that are: safe, secure and sanitary; free from noise, nuisances or annoyances; and free from condition that endangers the health or safety of persons and security of property. 
Subd. 2. Definitions . For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Apartment building shall mean as the term "apartment" is defined in chapter 11 of this Code. 
Applicant means the natural person completing the registration form prescribed herein. 
Dwelling unit shall mean as the term is defined in chapter 11 of this Code. 
Multiple residential building means a building with more than one dwelling unit which is joined to another dwelling unit at one or more sides by a party wall or walls, including: apartments, townhomes, twinhomes, duplexes or quadhomes. 
Rental manager means any natural person who has been delegated by the residential rental property owner for the day-to-day charge, care or control of a residential rental property and is able to respond in-person to issues related to the residential rental property. 
Residential rental property means any building or one or more portions thereof occupied or intended to be occupied for residential purposes by a residential tenant. 
Residential rental property owner means any person or entity owning residential rental property within the city. 
Residential tenant means a person who does not own, but occupies a dwelling unit for residential purposes for payment of a fee or other compensation to the owner under a lease or contract, written or verbal. 
Subd. 3. Applicability; scope. This section applies to any building and any dwelling unit therein which is a residential rental property as defined herein, including garages, storage buildings and appurtenances. This section does not apply to Minnesota Department of Health licensed rest homes, convalescent care facilities, licensed group homes, nursing homes, hotels, motels, owner-occupied units, or owner-occupied condominium units. 
Subd. 4. Rental manager required . 
A.  Each residential rental property owner shall appoint a rental manager upon whom the city may lawfully serve notices pertaining to the administration of this or any other section of the City Code or state or federal law, service of which shall be as effective as if made upon such residential rental property owner. 
B.  The residential rental property owner may serve as the rental manager, provided all requirements of a rental manager prescribed within this section are met by the residential rental property owner. 
Subd. 5. Registration . 
A.  All residential rental properties shall be registered with the city by either the residential rental property owner or rental manager. Registration of each residential rental property shall be made on a separate form provided by the city and shall include the following information: 
1.  Name, address and telephone number of the residential rental property owner and rental manager(s); 
2.  Name, address and telephone number of the natural person completing the registration form; 
3.  Address of the residential rental property. In the case of an apartment building, the applicant shall provide the address and name for the building, as well as the number of dwelling units contained therein; 
4.  A statement of whether the residential rental property owner or rental manager conducts a criminal background check on each and every residential tenant; 
5.  A statement of whether a written lease exists for the residential rental property and each unit dwelling thereon; and 
6.  A statement of whether a written lease addendum, commonly known as a "Drug Free/Crime Free Lease Addendum," exists for each and every written lease. 
B.  Upon completion of the registration form, the city shall issue to the registrant a certificate of registration as proof of the registration. Certificates of registration shall be non-transferable and state the following: the date of issuance; address of the residential rental property and name, if an apartment building, of the residential rental property owner; the name(s) of the rental manager(s); and the number of dwelling units located within the residential rental property. Within 30 days of the transfer of ownership or change in rental manager or change in the number of rental units or change in dwelling occupancy from owner occupancy to rental tenant occupancy, the residential rental property owner shall complete and submit a registration form for each and every residential rental property affected by the change. 
C.  A residential rental property owner owning residential rental property at the time of the adoption of this section shall have 180 days from the effective date of this section to comply with the registration provisions contained in this section. 
Subd. 6. Registration fees. The fee for registration shall be set forth as determined by city council resolution. The registration fee shall be paid at the time the registration form is submitted to the city. 
Subd. 7. Violation. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to provide false information on the prescribed registration form. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person or entity to operate or cause to be operated any property as a residential rental property without first registering with the city as set forth herein. 
C.  It is unlawful to fail to submit a new registration form as required in subdivision 5(B) herein. 
(Ord. No. 484, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 8-16-2011)  
Secs. 6.56—6.98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 6.99. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. 
(Code 1983, § 6.99, eff. 1-1-83)  
Chapter 7 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS GENERALLY[1] 
(THIS CHAPTER CONTAINS PROVISIONS AS TO DEFINITIONS, APPLICATION AND SCOPE RELATING TO CHAPTERS 8 AND 9 AS WELL AS THIS CHAPTER) 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Public works department, § 2.34; consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages on streets, § 5.16; traffic regulations, ch. 8; parking regulations, ch. 9; traffic visibility, § 11.10, subd. 7. 
 
Sec. 7.01. - Definitions. 
Except as otherwise defined in the City Code or where the context clearly indicates a contrary intent, the words and terms defined in Minn. Stat. ch. 169, shall be applicable to City Code chapters 7, 8 and 9. For purposes of chapter 8 only, the following words shall have the meaning stated: "street" or "highway" means the entire width between the boundary lines of any way or place when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic, and any private road or driveway used for vehicular access to any business establishment. 
(Code 1983, § 7.01, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 84, 2nd series, eff. 6-16-89)  
Sec. 7.02. - Application. 
The provisions of City Code, chapters 7, 8 and 9, are applicable to the drivers of all vehicles and animals upon streets, including, but not limited to, those owned or operated by the United States, the state, or any county, town, city, district, or other political subdivision. 
(Code 1983, § 7.02, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 7.03. - Scope and orders of officers. 
Subd. 1.  Scope. The provisions of chapters 7, 8 and 9 relate exclusively to the streets, alleys and private roads in the city, and the operation and parking of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation and parking of vehicles upon such streets, alleys and private roads. 
Subd. 2.  Orders of an officer. It is a misdemeanor for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police or peace officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. 
(Code 1983, § 7.03, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 7.04. - Traffic and parking control. 
Subd. 1.  Council action. No device, sign or signal shall be erected or maintained for traffic or parking control unless the council shall first have approved and directed the same, except as otherwise provided in this section; provided, that when traffic and parking control is marked or signposted, such marking or signposting shall attest to council action thereon. 
Subd. 2.  Temporary restrictions. The city, acting through the chief of police or the director of public works, may temporarily restrict traffic or parking for any private, public or experimental purpose. It is the duty of the chief of police or the director of public works to so restrict traffic or parking when a hazardous condition arises or is observed. 
Subd. 3.  Traffic restrictions and prohibitions. It is a misdemeanor for any person to drive a vehicle contrary to lane restrictions or prohibitions painted on any street or contrary to signposted, fenced, or barricaded restrictions or prohibitions. 
Subd. 4.  Parking restrictions and prohibitions. It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, except an emergency vehicle, contrary to lane restrictions or prohibitions painted on any curb or contrary to signposted, fenced, or barricaded restrictions or prohibitions. 
Subd. 5.  Damaging or moving markings. It is a misdemeanor for any person to deface, mar, damage, move, remove, or in any way tamper with any structure, work, material, equipment, tools, sign, signal, barricade, fence, painting or appurtenance in any street unless such person has written permission from the city or is an agent, employee or contractor for the city or other authority having jurisdiction over a particular street and acting within the authority or scope of a contract with the city or such other authority. 
(Code 1983, § 7.04, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 7.05. - Obstructions and excavations within public rights-of-way (streets or sidewalks/trails). 
Subd. 1. Application and scope. This section shall not apply to obstructions or excavations within public rights-of-way by a person or entity owning or controlling a utility service facility therein, which is regulated elsewhere in this chapter. 
Subd. 2. Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meaning stated: 
Authorized non-stormwater discharge means any of the following that may discharge into the city's municipal storm sewer system that is not deemed as an illicit discharge unless specifically prohibited under a NPDES permit in effect: discharges or flows from firefighting activities; water line flushing; street wash water; discharges from potable water sources; landscape irrigation or lawn watering water; de-chlorinated swimming pool discharges; individual residential car washing; water from a sump pump system; foundation drains; footing drains; air conditioning condensation; diverted stream flows; rising groundwaters; uncontaminated pumped groundwater; uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined by Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations); springs; and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands. 
Construction debris, yard waste, garbage, kitchen waste, recyclables, and refuse mean as the terms are defined in the regulations governing storage and disposal of refuse set forth elsewhere in this Code. 
Excavate or excavation means to dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate any public right-of-way ground surface, or any portion thereof. 
Illicit discharge means any release or discharge, directly or indirectly, into the city's municipal storm sewer system of any substance or pollutant that is not composed entirely of stormwater, unless the substance is an authorized non-stormwater discharge, as defined herein, not otherwise prohibited under a NPDES permit in effect. 
Obstruct or obstruction means to place or the placement of any object in a public right-of-way, or to remove or the removal of an existing structure, or any portion thereof, from a public right-of-way, for an aggregate period of eight hours or more. 
Public right-of-way means the surface, air space above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, trail, avenue, boulevard, drive, court, concourse, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, skyway, waterway, or similar property within the city owned by or under control of the city, or dedicated or otherwise conveyed to the city, for general public use. 
Stormwater means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
Street means the entire width of the roadway surface open to the public for use as a matter of right for the purposes of vehicular traffic, including any private street or road. 
Subd. 3. Obstructions and excavations . No person shall excavate, obstruct, or place, deposit, display, install, or maintain any obstruction, including but not limited to: a fence, goods, building or landscaping materials, any structure, landscaping, electrical cords or devises of any kind or other objects, or sell or offer for sale any goods or merchandise within any public right-of-way. This paragraph shall not apply to operable and registered motor vehicles lawfully parked within the street or upon a portion of a driveway within the public right-of-way, provided the motor vehicle is not blocking any portion of a sidewalk or trail and is not used in connection with the sale of any goods. No violation shall occur if the person obtains a written permit from the council for the excavation or obstruction, provided a permit will be issued only for mailboxes, irrigation systems and landscaping that do not create a public safety concern and are placed and maintained in compliance in all respects with the terms and conditions of such permit and the regulations of this Code. This subdivision shall not apply to any person who is selling merchandise from a motor vehicle that travels through the streets and stops only to make an immediate sale and does not park to await customers or sales. This subdivision shall not apply to any person participating in a special event for which a special event permit has been issued and in accordance with terms of the special event permit as governed elsewhere in this Code. 
Subd. 4. Fires. It is a misdemeanor for any person to build or maintain a fire within or upon a public right-of-way. 
Subd. 5. Dumping in streets, sidewalk or trail, storm-sewers, or catch basins. This subdivision shall include all streets, storm sewers and catch basins, public or private. It is unlawful and deemed as a public nuisance for any person to throw, deposit, place or cause to be deposited or placed onto any street or sidewalk/trail or discharged into any catch basin or storm-sewer located on public or private property, any refuse or garbage, dirt, rock, yard waste, sewage, petroleum products, paint, stain, finishing products or the like, chemicals, solid or liquid, antifreeze, including fluids leaking from vehicles or any other fluid or illicit discharge that is not composed entirely of storm water or tap water. 
This subdivision shall not include swimming pool water or clean ground water from sump pumps when discharged overland before reaching the street or storm sewer or basin provided discharge is in accordance with city policies or water from permitted irrigation systems installed or placed in the right-of-way. 
Subd. 6. Signs and other structures. Except as otherwise permitted by the City Code, it is a misdemeanor for any person to place or maintain a sign, advertisement, or other structure in any public right-of-way without first having obtained a written permit from the council. In a district zoned for commercial or industrial enterprises, special permission allowing an applicant to erect and maintain signs overhanging into the public right-of-way may be granted upon such terms and conditions as may be set forth in the zoning or construction provisions of the City Code. A violation of this subdivision shall be deemed a public nuisance. Any person who is in violation of this subdivision shall immediately remove the obstruction upon demand by the city and upon failure to do so, the violator shall pay the costs incurred by the city in connection with its removal. 
Subd. 7. Snow in streets or on sidewalks/trails. 
A.  Placement of snow or ice within street, sidewalk or trail right-of-way. No person, unless acting under a specific contract with the city or with special permission from the city, shall place snow or ice in any travel portion of any street, sidewalk or trail right-of-way or push, blow or otherwise move snow or ice across the travel portion of any public street to be deposited within the public right-of-way on the opposite side of street. A violation of this subdivision is declared to be a public nuisance. 
B.  The owner or occupant of any property who deposits, or employs another who deposits, snow or ice in any travel portion of any street, sidewalk or trail right-of-way shall remove the deposit snow or ice within 12 hours after notice is given by the city. If the owner or occupant fails to remove the snow or ice as required in the notice within the 12 hours, abatement of the public nuisance shall be in accordance with the abatement procedures set [out in] chapter 10 of this Code. 
C.  Violation. Any violation of this subdivision shall be a petty misdemeanor offense. 
Subd. 8. Tracking dirt, clay or soil onto streets/responsibility of vehicle operators. 
A.  It shall be the responsibility of the construction project's development contract obligee, project permit holder or property owner to immediately clean up any siltation, dirt, earth, concrete (including concrete wash wastes and runoff liquids), asphalt or other similar substance deposited upon any street right-of-way as a result of motor vehicle traffic from such construction site or area or improper or insufficient erosion control measures on such site or area. A violation of this subdivision is declared to be a public nuisance. If the construction project's development contract obligee, project permit holder or property owner fails to immediately abate the public nuisance, abatement of the public nuisance shall be in accordance with the provisions therefor in chapter 10. 
B.  Any person who operates a motor vehicle or tows a trailer shall remove any dirt, earth, concrete, asphalt or other similar substance from all tires, frame, and exterior body of any motor vehicle or trailer before driving upon any street in order that such dirt, earth, concrete, asphalt or other similar substance shall not be tracked onto or fall upon the street. 
C.  Any person that operates a motor vehicle or tows a trailer with any load or contents so unsecured or inadequately enclosed or covered that a portion of the load is allowed to fall upon public right-of-way or spill into a storm sewer or catch basin shall be personally liable for and shall pay for all costs incurred by the city for the removal, proper disposal of the load or contents thereof deposited upon the public right-of-way, and any repairs or restoration [of] the public right-of-way. 
Subd. 9. Continuing violation. Each day that any person continues in violation of this section shall be a separate offense and punishable as such. A violation of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance. Any person who is in violation of this section shall immediately remove the obstruction, fill the excavation, recover or abate any illicit discharge in the city's municipal storm sewer system, or otherwise comply with the section upon demand by the city; upon failure to do so, the violator shall pay the costs incurred by the city in connection with its removal or abatement. 
Subd. 10. Condition. Before granting any permit under any of the provisions of this section, the council may impose such insurance or bonding conditions thereon as it, considering the projected danger to public or private property or to persons, deems proper for safeguarding such persons and property. Such insurance or bond shall also protect the city from any suit, action or cause of action arising by reason of such obstruction. 
(Code 1983, § 7.05, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 152, 2nd series, eff. 12-11-92; Ord. No. 227, 2nd series, eff. 11-19-96; Ord. No. 246, 2nd series, eff. 11-27-97; Ord. No. 267, 2nd series, eff. 11-26-98; Ord. No. 299, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 9-14-00; Ord. No. 467, 2nd series, § 1, 12-21-2010; Ord. No. 474, 2nd series, § 1, 4-5-2011; Ord. No. 492, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-8-2012; Ord. No. 504, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 5-15-2012; Ord. No. 536, 2nd series, §§ 1—3, eff. 2-17-2015)  
Sec. 7.06. - Public right-of-way regulations. 
Subd. 1.  Application and scope. This section shall apply exclusively to excavations and obstructions within public rights-of-way by any person who owns or controls, or intends to own or control, any utility service facility therein. All other excavations or obstructions are regulated elsewhere in this Code. 
Subd. 2.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, as used herein, shall have the following meanings: 
Abandoned facility means: (1) a facility no longer in service or physically disconnected from any other facility that is in use or still carries service; and that is deemed abandoned by the owner of the facility. 
Applicant means any public right-of-way user required to obtain a permit under this section. 
City means City of Eagan, Minnesota. 
City management costs. The actual costs incurred by the city for public right-of-way management, including, but not limited to, costs incurred in connection with the registration process, the right-of-way excavation or obstruction permit process, the inspection of project work and restoration and enforcement and correction of non-complying project work, mapping of public right-of-way users and maintenance and regulation of public rights-of-way occupied by public right-of-way users. Management costs do not include payment by a public right-of-way user for the use of the right-of-way, unreasonable fees of a third-party contractor used by a local government unit as part of managing its public right-of-way, including but not limited to any third-party contractor fee tied to or based upon customer counts, access lines, revenue generated by the public right-of-way user, or a local government unit, or the fees and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of the act or any ordinance enacted under the act, or the city fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to this chapter. 
Collocate or collocation. Install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing wireless support structure that is owned privately or by the city or other local government unit. 
Degradation means a decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation or disturbance did not occur. 
Degradation cost subject to Minnesota Rules 7819.1100 means the cost to achieve a level of restoration as determined by the city at the time the permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to 13, set forth in Minnesota Rules parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950. 
Degradation fee means the estimated fee established at the time of permitting by the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation cost. 
Director means the City of Eagan Director of Public Works and his/her designee. 
Emergency means a condition that (1) immediately endangers the life or safety of persons; (2) cause an immediate threat of significant loss or injury to property; or (3) requires immediate repair or replacement in order to restore service to customers. 
Equipment means anything tangible used to install, repair or maintain facilities in any public right-of-way. 
Excavate or excavation means to dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate any public right-of-way ground surface, or any portion thereof. 
Excavation permit means a permit which is issued by the city authorizing the permittee to excavate in a public right-of-way as specifically described in the permit. 
Facility or facilities means anything tangible, including equipment, which is required to provide utility services, including wireless services. 
Hole means an excavation having a length that is equal to or less than the width of the public right-of-way for the section of the roadway where the work is occurring. 
Local representative means a person or designee of such person authorized by a public right-of-way user to accept service and to act and make decisions regarding matters within the scope of this section on behalf of the public right-of-way user. 
Micro wireless facility. A small wireless facility that is no larger than 24 inches long, 15 inches wide, and 12 inches high, and whose exterior antenna, if any, is no longer than 11 inches. 
Obstruct or obstruction means to place or the placement of any object or material within a public right-of-way, or to remove or the removal of an existing structure, or any portion thereof, from a public right-of-way. The term obstruction includes any operation or parking of a motor vehicle, trailer, or equipment within or on boulevards, sidewalks, trails, or other public property within a public right-of-way other than the vehicular traffic portion thereof. 
Obstruction permit means a permit which is issued by the city authorizing the permittee to obstruct a public right-of-way as specifically described in the permit, including the specified portion of the right-of-way, the permitted equipment, material, or other object, the permitted duration of the obstruction, and the permitted work/activity within the right-of-way. 
Patch or patching means a method of roadway surface replacement or restoration that consists of: (1) the compaction of the sub-base and aggregate base; and (2) the replacement, in kind, of the existing roadway surface for a minimum of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions. 
Permittee means a person to whom an excavation or obstruction permit has been issued by the city under this section. 
Person means an individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this state, however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or foreign, whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate, or political. 
Project or project work means any activity, including construction, reconstruction, installation, maintenance, relocation, or replacement of any facility or a public right-of-way in which the facility is located and restoration of the public right-of-way that is regulated under this section. 
Public right-of-way or public rights-of-way means the surface, air space above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, trail, avenue, boulevard, drive, court, concourse, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, skyway, waterway, dock, bulkhead, wharf, pier, easement or similar property or waters within the city owned by or under control of the city, or dedicated or otherwise conveyed to the city for general public use, including, but not limited to, any riparian right, which, consistent with the purposes for which it was created, obtained or dedicated, may be used for the purpose of installing, operating and maintaining utility service facilities. No reference herein to a "public right-of-way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the city that its interest or other right to control or use such property is sufficient to permit its use for the purpose of installing, operating and maintaining utility service facilities. 
Public right-of-way user means any person or entity which owns or controls a facility that is located, or is sought or intended to be located, in a public right-of-way including persons who have installation and maintenance responsibilities by contract, lease, sublease or assignment. 
Restore or restoration means the process, including patching, by which a public right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same condition that existed before any project work. 
Restoration cost means the amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to meet restoration requirements in accordance with plates 1 to 13 of the PUC rules. 
Service or utility service means: 
(1)  Those services provided by a public utility as defined in Minnesota Statutes; 
(2)  Services of a telecommunications right-of-way user, including transporting of voice or data information; 
(3)  Services of a cable communications system as defined in Minnesota Statutes; 
(4)  Services of natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications, including wireless services; 
(5)  Services provided by a cooperative electric association organized under Minnesota Statutes; and 
Small wireless facility means: 
(1)  A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: 
(i)  Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and 
(ii)  All other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility, excluding electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or concealment, is in aggregate no more than 28 cubic feet in volume; or 
(2)  A micro wireless facility. 
Trench means an excavation in the roadway surface having a length that is equal to or in excess of the width of the roadway or sections of roadway where the work is occurring. 
Utility pole means a pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate telecommunications or electric service. 
Wireless facility means: 
(a)  Wireless facility means equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision of wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service network, including: 
(1)  Equipment associated with wireless service; 
(2)  A radio transceiver, antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and 
(3)  A small wireless facility. 
(b)  Wireless facility does not include: 
(1)  Wireless support structures; 
(2)  Wireline backhaul facilities; or 
(3)  Coaxial or fiber-optic cables (i) between utility poles or wireless support structures, or (ii) that are not otherwise immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a specific antenna. 
Wireless service means any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means of a mobile device, that is provided using wireless facilities. Wireless service does not include services regulated under Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including a cable service under United States Code, title 47, section 522, clause (6). 
Wireless support structure means a new or existing structure in a public right-of-way designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities, as reasonably determined by a local government unit. 
Wireline backhaul facility means a facility used to transport communications data by wire from a wireless facility to a communications network. 
Subd. 3.  Franchises. The city may, in addition to the requirements of this section, require any public utility or cable operator who has or seeks to have facilities or equipment located in any public right-of-way to obtain a franchise. 
Subd. 4.  Registration requirement. 
A.  Registration. As of the effective date of this chapter, any public right-of-way user, including any person or entity with installation and maintenance responsibilities by lease, sublease, collocation agreement or assignment, which owns or controls a facility within any public right-of-way, or any portion thereof, shall register with the city. Registration shall be deemed completed upon the public right-of-way user submitting to the city a completed registration form furnished by the city and paying the registration fee. A right-of-way user is required to update its registration within 60 days of any change of the information contained in a current registration statement. 
B.  Transfer of ownership or interest. Whenever any public right-of-way user transfers, sells, assigns or otherwise conveys ownership or interest in facilities or equipment to another person, the registered public right-of-way user shall notify the city of the date of the conveyance and the name of the transferee within 30 days of the conveyance. 
Subd. 5.  Permit requirement. 
A.  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, no person or public right-of-way user may obstruct or excavate any public right-of-way or install or collocate a small wireless facility or support structure without first having obtained the appropriate permit from the city unless another reporting process is approved by the director or his/her designee. An excavation permit is required for any excavation. An obstruction permit is required for any obstruction in connection with the installation, relocation, operation or maintenance of a utility service. 
Any public right-of-way user, which owns or controls a facility within any public right-of-way, or any portion thereof, on the effective date of this section, that subsequently excavates or otherwise obstructs any public right-of-way, or any portion thereof, shall first obtain a permit therefor as required under this section. 
B.  Permit applications. 
1.  An application for a permit shall be on a form furnished by the city and completed and submitted to the city with the following information: 
a.  The applicant's name; business mailing and headquarter location address; e-mail address; telephone number; and facsimile number. 
b.  The local representative's name; address; e-mail address; telephone number; facsimile number; and current information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency. 
c.  The name, address and telephone number of the person(s) or entities, other than the applicant, to perform the project work or any portion thereof. 
d.  A certificate of insurance or self-insurance verifying the coverage as required in this section. 
e.  All mapping data and information in form and substance as required in this section, except a registrant who is not applying for an excavation or obstruction permit need not provide this information. 
f.  A detailed description and drawing to a scale as required by the city of the proposed project and project work, including identification of the obstructions to be placed, the size and depth of any excavation, the schedule for commencement and completion of the proposed project, and the location and size of any trees impacted in the designated work area. 
2.  Permits for multiple telecommunications facilities, including small wireless facilities, may be filed in consolidated applications as required by state law (Minn. Stats. § 237.163, Subd. 3a). Permit applications that propose collocation of facilities shall indicate to extent practicable the owner of the other facility or facilities, and if the city is the owner of those facilities, the application shall include a request for a collocation agreement using a form and providing such information as required by the city. 
C.  Issuance or denial of permit. 
1.  Except as otherwise provided herein for small wireless facility permits, if the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this section, the city shall issue a permit within 90 days of receiving a completed application, or shall provide written reasons for denial of the application if the city believes the requirements have not been satisfied, unless that time period is extended or tolled as specified in state law, (Minn. Stats. § 237.163, Subd. 3c). If the city receives applications within a single seven-day period from one or more applicants seeking approval of permits for more than 30 facilities, the city may extend the 90-day deadline by an additional 30 days. If the city elects to invoke this extension, it must inform in writing any applicant to whom the extension will be applied. 
2.  For applications related to placement of small wireless facilities, the deadline for the city's action on each application will be in accordance with FCC Rules and regulations. As in effect as of December 31, 2018, the city will review and act on an application for collocation of a small wireless facility on an existing support structure no later than 60 days from date of receipt of complete application and an application for placement of a small wireless facility on a new support structure no later than 90 days from date of receipt of complete application. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this section, then a permit will be issued; otherwise the city shall provide written reasons for denial of the application. 
3.  The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and conditions of this section or if the city determines that the denial is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current and future use. The city may deny a permit if the public right-of-way user has failed to comply with previous permit conditions. The city may withhold issuance of a permit until conditions of previous permits are met. 
The denial of a permit must be made in writing and must document the basis for the denial. The city must notify the applicant in writing within three business days of the decision to deny a permit. If an application is denied, the applicant may address the reasons for denial identified by the city and resubmit its application. If the application is resubmitted within 30 days of receipt of the notice of denial, no additional application fee shall be imposed. The city must approve or deny the resubmitted application within 30 days after submission. 
4.  Permit applications that propose collocation of facilities on city-owned poles, buildings, or other structures owned or under the control of the city shall be authorized by the council upon terms and conditions established by the council. A wireless service provider that is granted authority to collocate small wireless facilities on wireless support structures owned or controlled by the city and located within the public roads or rights-of-way is required to enter into a standard small wireless facility collocation agreement, but not an individual license, franchise, or other similar agreement with the local government unit or any other entity. 
Any initial engineering survey and preparatory construction work associated with collocation must be paid by the cost causer in the form of a onetime, nonrecurring, commercially reasonable, nondiscriminatory, and competitively neutral charge to recover the costs associated with a proposed attachment. 
Subd. 6.  Conditions of permit and registration. 
1.  All permits issued and all registrations made under this section shall be subject to the following requirements: 
A.  All permits issued under this section or a copy of the permit shall be conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated project work site and shall be available for inspection immediately upon request by the director or his/her designee. 
B.  If the obstruction or excavation of the public right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the dates specified in the permit, the permittee shall promptly notify the director. 
C.  Installation, placement, location, and relocation of equipment and facilities shall comply with all federal, state and local laws. 
D.  Public right-of-way restoration shall be in accordance with the restoration regulations set forth in this section. 
E.  Installation of all underground utilities shall be in accordance with the underground utilities regulations set forth in this section and all other applicable federal, state and local laws. 
F.  Precautions shall be taken as are necessary to avoid creating unsafe or unsanitary conditions and a permittee shall not obstruct a public right-of-way, except as expressly authorized by the permit, so as to hinder the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways. Personal vehicles of those doing work in the public right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area unless specifically authorized by the permit. 
G.  Project operations and work shall be conducted in a manner so as to ensure the least obstruction to and interference with present and continued use of the public right-of-way. 
H.  Precautions shall be taken to assure the safety of the general public, employees, invitees and those who require access to abutting property, including appropriate signage. 
I.  The permittee shall notify abutting property owners with a 48-hour written notice prior to commencement of any project work that may disrupt the use of and access to the abutting property. 
J.  The permittee involved in underground projects shall register with Gopher State One Call and comply with the requirements thereof. 
K.  The permittee shall comply with the Uniform Traffic Manual for Traffic Control at all times during any project work and shall protect and identify excavations and work operations with barricade flags in the daylight hours and by warning lights at dusk and night. 
L.  The permittee shall comply with all conditions of the permit. 
M.  When any trail or drive has been cut, the appropriate signage must be kept in place and maintained until restoration is complete. 
N.  The permittee shall provide proper trench protection as required by O.S.H.A. to prevent any cave-in; injury to property or persons; or enlargement of the excavation. 
O.  Excavations, trenches and jacking pits off the roadway surface area or adjacent to the roadway or curbing shall be sheathed and braced. When unattended, all excavations, trenches and jacking pits shall be protected to prevent surface drainage. 
P.  The permittee shall protect the root growth of significant trees and shrubbery located within the public right-of-way and adjacent thereto. 
Q.  The permittee shall coordinate project work and installation of facilities in co-locations involving other public right-of-way users. 
R.  The permittee shall maintain access to all properties and cross streets during project work, including emergency vehicle access. 
S.  The permittee shall physically locate property lines abutting the project work. The permittee shall replace, with the services of a Minnesota-licensed surveyor, any property corners or monuments disturbed as a result of the project. 
T.  The permittee shall complete restoration of the public right-of-way in conformance with this section. 
U.  No permittee, or any agent, subcontractor or employee thereof, shall use lugs (steel tracks) on any roadway surfaces. 
V.  The permittee shall remove daily all dirt or debris from sidewalks, trails, public and private roadway surfaces and curbs and gutters during project work. 
W.  The permittee shall obtain all other necessary permits, licenses and approvals, pay all required fees therefore and comply with all requirements of local, state and federal laws. 
X.  The permittee shall not do any work outside the project area as specified in the permit. 
Y.  The permittee shall screen all aboveground facilities and make reasonable accommodations for decorative enclosures, support structures or signs, as required by the director of public works, to be aesthetically compatible with existing streetscape and the ornamental design or theme of the immediate area. Screening methods shall include the use of shrubs, trees and/or with landscape rock or installation using stealth or camouflaged forms of the facility. The director may also impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or relocation requirements when a new support structure is placed in a public right-of-way. No equipment or facilities shall visibly or physically block or in any manner interfere with any existing streetscape, ornamental structures or displays, or other amenities located within the city's right-of-way. 
Z.  Any facility collocated on a city-owned support structure shall be of a color and design so to match the color, design and pattern of the existing support structure(s) and any replacement structures after the issuance of the permit. Any new support structure, and any facility located thereon, erected within a city-owned right-of-way shall be of a color and design so to match the color, design and pattern of existing structures (e.g., light/lampposts) and any replacement structures after the issuance of the permit. 
AA.  Small wireless facilities shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Minn. Stats. ch. 237, if not otherwise set forth herein. 
BB.  The city may impose other reasonable conditions to protect the public health, safety and welfare or, when necessary, to protect the right-of-way and its current and future use. 
2.  Small wireless facility conditions: in addition to the conditions set forth above as applicable, the placement or installation of a new wireless support structure, the collocation of a small wireless facility, or other installation of a wireless facility in the right-of-way shall be subject to the following requirements: 
A.  A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the particular wireless support structure, under those attachment specifications, and at the height indicated in the applicable permit application. 
B.  No new wireless support structure installed within the right-of-way shall exceed 50 feet above ground level in height without the city's written authorization, provided that the city may impose a lower height limit in the applicable permit to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to protect the right-of-way and its current use, and further provided that a wireless support structure that replaces an existing wireless support structure in the public right-of-way that is greater than 50 feet above ground level in height may be placed at the height of the existing wireless support structure, subject to such conditions or requirements as may be imposed in the applicable permit. 
C.  No wireless facility constructed in the right-of-way after May 30, 2017, may extend more than ten feet above a wireless support structure existing on May 30, 2017. 
D.  Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support structure in the right-of-way, the city may impose separation requirements between such structure and any existing wireless support structure or other facilities in and around the right-of-way. Notwithstanding, there shall be no less than 600 linear feet between each support structure on which a small wireless facility(s) is located. 
E.  Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless support structure, sign, or other structure not intended to support small wireless facilities, the city may impose reasonable requirements to accommodate the particular design, appearance, or intended purpose of such structure. 
F.  Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support structure, the city may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or relocation requirements on the replacement of such structure. 
G.  No small wireless facility shall be collocated on any city owned traffic control device. 
H.  No more than three small wireless facilities shall be collocated on a single support structure. 
Subd. 7.  County or state rights-of-way. Any public right-of-way user who is required to obtain any county or state permit for excavation or obstruction in any Dakota County or Minnesota Department of Transportation right-of-way must provide notification of permitting to the city within one week of obtaining the permit but no less than 48 hours before the excavation would begin. 
Subd. 8.  Installation of underground facilities within public rights-of-way. The permittee shall comply with the following requirements when installing underground facilities: 
A.  Underground facilities shall, where reasonably possible, be installed outside the paved or surface area. If unable to install outside the surfaced area, the installation shall be as close to the edge of the roadway surface as possible to allow access thereto without unnecessarily disturbing paved areas of the roadway; 
B.  Public right-of-way alignment and grade shall be maintained; 
C.  Fiber facilities shall be buried in a proper conduit and at a depth of no less than three feet deep and no more than four feet; copper facilities below concrete or bituminous paved roadway surfaces shall be buried no less than three feet deep and no more than four feet deep, and all other copper facilities shall be buried no less than 30 inches deep and no more than four feet deep; 
D.  All underground facilities which cross streets or hard surfaced driveways shall be bored and installed in conduit when requested by the city. Gas does not need to be installed in conduit. 
E.  When required, the permittee shall excavate an observation hole over a city utility to ensure that a city utility is not damaged; 
F.  If the project work involves an open cut, the permittee shall install visual tracers 12 inches over buried facilities. If other construction methods are used, substitute location methods may be used upon approval by the city; 
G.  During plowing or trenching of facilities, a warning tape shall be placed at a depth of 12 inches above copper cables with over 200 pairs and fiber facilities and a locating wire or conductive shield shall be installed above buried telecommunication facilities, except for di-electric cables. 
H.  Restoration of areas disturbed by facilities will include returning the right-of-way to the same condition that existed before excavation as per Minn. Rules 7819.1100 Subject to this standard, plates 1 to 13, shown in parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950, indicate maximum limits of restoration methods and area requirements the local government unit can impose when a right-of-way user excavates in the public right-of-way. The local government unit and right-of-way user may agree to a lesser requirement. The right-of-way user is responsible for all of its work done in the public right-of-way, whether by employees, agents, or independent contractors. All levels of restoration include compaction of the materials placed in the excavation of the sub-grade and aggregate base, plus pavement replacement, in kind. If required by the local government unit, all work must be performed according to the local government unit's specifications and drawings. 
I.  All facilities shall be located so as to not interfere with existing and potential future traffic signals and signs; 
J.  Unless approved by the city, all above ground appurtenances shall be located no closer than ten feet to city hydrants, waterline valves, manholes, lift stations, catch basins; not in front of or within visual sight lines of any city sign, monument or amenity for facilities or parks; and no closer than two feet from sidewalks and trails; 
K.  Underground facilities shall not be installed between a hydrant and an auxiliary valve; 
L.  Where utility easements exist beyond the roadway surface area of the public right-of-way and space is available therein, underground facilities shall not be installed within five feet of hydrants, waterline valves, lift stations, manholes or catch basins. In those areas in which no utility easement exists, placement of an underground facility shall be between the edge of pavement and no closer than three feet to an existing city utility appurtenance, unless approved by the city. 
M.  The location and installation of telecommunications facilities shall comply with the National Electric Safety Code, as incorporated by reference in Minnesota Statutes. 
Subd. 9.  Supplement permit or permit extension. 
A.  Limitation on area. No permittee shall obstruct or excavate an area greater than that specified in the permit without first obtaining a new permit or permit extension therefor by the city. 
B.  Limitation on dates. No permittee shall begin its work before the permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the completion date. 
Subd. 10.  Revocation of permits. 
A.  Grounds for revocation. The city may revoke a permit issued hereunder on the following grounds: 
1.  A material provision or condition of the permit or City Code was substantially breached. 
2.  A material misrepresentation in the application for a permit. 
3.  The permittee failed to maintain the required bonds or other security and insurance. 
4.  The permittee failed to complete the project work within the time specified in the permit unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons beyond the permittee's control. 
5.  The permittee failed in a timely manner to correct work that does not conform to applicable standards, conditions, federal, state or local laws. 
6.  An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the public right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city. 
B.  Notice of revocation. If the director determines that grounds for revocation exists, the director shall provide written notice to the permittee. If the permittee's violation is related to non-complying project work, the director shall notify the permittee of the actions necessary to remedy such violation within a reasonable period of time or be subject to potential revocation of the permit. The director may impose additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate or remedy the violation. 
C.  Right to hearing by city council. In the event that the permittee fails to remedy the violation for which the director gave the permittee notice, a revocation of permit hearing shall be held before the city council at the immediately next city council meeting. The purpose for the hearing shall be to determine whether any of the grounds for revocation as set forth herein exist against the permittee. No suspension or revocation shall take effect, until the permittee has been afforded a hearing as provided in this subparagraph. Such hearing shall be set by the city council upon written notice to the permittee served by U.S. Mail not less than 15 days prior to the hearing date, specifically stating the date, time and purpose thereof. 
D.  Revocation costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall reimburse the city for its reasonable costs (including restoration costs) incurred in connection with the revocation. 
Subd. 11.  Permit fees. 
A.  All permit fees shall be submitted to the city with the application. Permit fees shall be set to recover the city management costs and, where applicable, restoration costs. The permit fees shall be established by city Council resolution. No permit fee shall be refundable. No permit fees shall be required for any obstruction or excavation permit issued to the city, although the city shall be allocated its full portion of the city management costs in calculating the permit fees. Except where an extension permit has been granted, the permittee shall, as a delay penalty, be required to obtain a new permit and pay the associated fee for failure to complete the project work under the initial permit within the required time period. Applicants may jointly apply for permits to excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time. There shall be a single permit and permit fee for joint excavation and obstruction permit applications. Applicants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay and indicate the same on the application. 
B.  Total application fees for a small wireless facility permit must comply with this section with respect to costs related to the permit. For each small wireless facility attached to a wireless support structure owned by the city, the small wireless provider shall pay the following fees: 
1.  $270.00 per year for rent to occupy space on a wireless support structure owned by the city; 
2.  The application fee for collocation or new support structures within city property shall be established by city council resolution; and 
3.  A monthly fee for electricity used to operate a small wireless facility, if not purchased directly from the applicable electrical utility provider, at the rate of: 
(a)  $73.00 per radio node less than or equal to 100 max watts; 
(b)  $182.00 per radio node over 100 max watts; or 
(c)  The actual costs of electricity, if the actual costs exceed the amount in clauses (i) or (ii) above. 
Permit fee for small wireless facilities: as required by state law, a person is not required to pay a small wireless facility permit fee, obtain a small wireless facility permit, or enter into a small wireless facility collocation agreement to solely conduct any of the following activities: 
1.  Routine maintenance of a small wireless facility; 
2.  Replacement of a small wireless facility with a new facility that is substantially similar or smaller in size, weight, height, and wind or structural loading than the small wireless facility being replaced; or 
3.  Installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing utility poles in compliance with national safety codes. 
Prior to the performance of any of the above excepted activities, the small wireless facility provider shall provide the city advance notification of these activities if the work will obstruct a public right-of-way. 
Subd. 12.  Public right-of-way restoration. 
A.  Timing. All project work under a permit shall be completed within the dates specified in the permit, unless the project work could not be completed due to circumstances beyond permittee's control, including seasonal weather prohibitions or inclement weather. 
B.  Restoration costs. The permittee shall restore the public right-of-way and assume all costs therefor unless otherwise agreed upon. The right-of-way user shall remain responsible for replacing and compacting the sub-grade and aggregate base material in the excavation. The city, at its option, may choose to perform its own restoration including any paving. If the city performs the restoration pursuant to this paragraph, the permittee shall pay to the city all costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If following such restoration, the roadway surface, boulevard, sidewalk, curb or related infrastructure settles due to permittee's improper back-filling; the permittee shall, at its option either correct the defect or pay to the city all costs associated with correcting the defective work within 30 days of billing. If the permittee restores the public right-of-way, the city may require, and the permittee shall provide at the time of application for the permit, a city specified type of security, in accordance with PUC rules, to cover the cost of repair and restoration. If within 24 months after completion of restoration of the right-of-way, the director determines the right-of-way has been properly restored, the posted security will be released. 
C.  Standards. All restoration shall be in accordance with the standards and materials specified by the city. The city shall establish written procedures and standards for public right-of-way restoration, which shall comply with PUC standards. Subject to PUC rules, the city shall have the authority to prescribe additional restoration procedures and standards on a case by case basis based on the following considerations: 
1.  The number, size, depth and duration of the excavation, disruption or damage to the public right-of-way; 
2.  The traffic volume carried by the public right-of-way; 
3.  The character of the neighborhood surrounding the public right-of-way; 
4.  The pre-project condition of the public right-of-way; 
5.  The remaining life-expectancy of the public right-of-way due to the project; 
6.  The costs of the restoration method in relation to the prevention of an accelerated depreciation of the public right-of-way that could result due to the project work in the public right-of-way; and 
7.  The likelihood that the particular restoration method would be effective in slowing the depreciation of the public right-of-way that would otherwise occur. 
D.  Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall guarantee the restoration of the public right-of-way for 24 months following its completion (12 months for turf establishment). During the 24-month period, the permittee shall, upon written notification from the city, correct all non-complying restoration work, using the method required by the city. The correction work shall be completed within ten calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the City, not including days during which work cannot be done due to circumstances constituting force majeure or of unseasonable or inclement weather. 
E.  As built drawings. The permittee shall, if not already provided through another filing made within one year of completion of the project; annually submit to the city "as-built" drawings in a format usable by the city, as per state statutes, incorporating project work and restoration. 
Subd. 13.  Inspection. 
A.  Site inspection. The permittee shall make the project work site available to the director, and all others authorized by law, for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the project work. 
B.  Inspection findings and requirements. 
1.  The director may order the immediate cessation of any project work which poses a serious immediate threat to the life, health, safety or welfare of the public. 
2.  The director may order the permittee to correct any project work to comply with the terms of the permit or other applicable standards, conditions or laws. The order shall state the violation, the terms of correcting the violation and that failure to correct the violation within the stated time limits shall be cause for revocation of the permit. If the violation is not corrected within the stated time limits, the director may initiate revocation of the permit. 
C.  Notice of completion. The permittee shall sign a certificate of project completion stating the completion date, identification of the installer and designer of record and certifying that the project work was completed in accordance with the requirements herein. 
Subd. 14.  Permissible work without a permit. 
A.  Emergency exception. All persons with facilities in the public right-of-way shall include the city in its list of those to be notified immediately of any event regarding its facilities that may be considered as an emergency. The owner of the facilities may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency, but shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill all requirements as set forth in this section within two business days after the occurrence of the emergency. These permitting requirements shall not apply if the repair is made within the hole of the permitted excavator. 
If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding facilities, the city will attempt to contact the local representative of each facility affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be assumed and paid by the owner of the facility which occasioned the emergency. 
Subd. 15.  Mapping data. 
A.  Information required. All permittees shall provide mapping information in accordance with Minnesota Rules and as follows: 
1.  The location of underground and above ground appurtenances of the public right-of-way user's mains, cables, conduits, switches and related equipment and facilities, identified by: 
(a)  Offsets from property lines, distances from the centerline of the public right-of-way and curb lines and/or other reference points as requested by the city; or 
(b)  Coordinates derived from the coordinate system being used by the city. 
2.  The type, quantity and size of the equipment; 
3.  A dimensional description of above-ground appurtenances; 
4.  A legend explaining symbols, characters, abbreviations, scale and other data shown on the map; and 
5.  The location of any facilities that were abandoned in conformance with Minnesota Statutes. 
B.  Submittal requirements. 
1.  Within six months after the effective date of this section, all public right-of-way users which own or control facilities within public rights-of-way within the city on the effective date of this section shall submit detailed mapping data in accordance with this subdivision for all facilities and equipment located within the public right-of-way. Following initial mapping, all right-of-way users shall submit detailed mapping data by April 1 st of every year for all new facilities located within public rights-of-way in the city during the preceding calendar year. 
2.  At the request of any public right-of-way user, information required by the city which qualifies as "trade secret" data under the Minnesota Data Practices Act shall be protected accordingly. 
Subd. 16.  General public right-of-way regulations. 
A.  Undergrounding facilities. Any new non-replacement facilities or equipment shall be located underground or contained within buildings or on other structures unless prohibited/restricted in accordance with all applicable federal, state or local laws. 
B.  Corridors. The city may assign specific corridors within the public right-of-way, or portion thereof, as may be necessary for each type of facility. All permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facility at issue. 
C.  Limitation of space. To protect the health, safety, and welfare of the city or when necessary to protect the public right-of-way and its current use, the city may prohibit public right-of-way users from a particular right-of-way after consideration of the public interest, the public's needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the public right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the public right-of-way, and future City plans for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to be in the public interest. 
D.  Relocation of facilities. A public right-of-way user shall promptly, and at its own expense, with due regard to seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and relocate any facility in the public right-of-way when it is necessary to prevent interference and not merely for the convenience of the City, in connection with: (1) a present or future city use of the public right-of-way for a public project; (2) the public health or safety; or (3) the safety and convenience of travel over the public right-of-way. The public right-of-way user shall restore any public rights-of-way in accordance with this section. A right-of-way user is not required to remove or relocate its facilities from a right-of-way that has been vacated and in favor of a non-governmental entity unless and until the reasonable costs to do so are first paid to the right-of-way user. 
E.  Damage to other facilities. Public right-of-way users shall be subject to all restoration requirements provided in this section. Every public right-of-way user shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facility it damages. This provision is intended to include costs for damages to boulevard amenities placed by adjacent property owners, (e.g., sprinkler systems, etc.). Each facility owner shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another occasioned by an emergency related to that owner's facilities. 
Subd. 17.  Public right-of-way vacation. 
A.  Reservation of right. If the city vacates a public right-of-way which contains the equipment or facilities of a public right-of-way user and the vacation does not require the relocation of the equipment or facilities, the city shall reserve, to and for itself and the public right-of-way user, the right to install, maintain and operate any equipment and facilities in the vacated public right-of-way and to enter upon such public right-of-way at any time for the purpose of reconstruction, inspecting, maintaining or repairing the same. 
B.  Relocation of facilities. If the vacation requires the relocation of the public right-of-way user's equipment or facility; and the vacation proceedings are initiated by the public right-of-way user or the city, for a public project, the public right-of-way user shall pay the relocation costs. If the vacation proceedings are initiated by a person or persons other than the public right-of-way user, the initiating person or persons shall pay the relocation costs. 
Subd. 18.  Indemnification and liability. 
A.  Limitation of liability. Upon the issuance of a public right-of-way permit, the city does not assume any liability (i) for injuries to persons, damage to property or loss of service claims by parties other than the registrant or the city, or (ii) for claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the installation, presence, maintenance or operation of equipment or facilities by registrants or permittees or activities of registrants or permittees. 
B.  Indemnification. A registrant or permittee shall indemnify, keep and hold the city, its officials, employees and agents, free and harmless from any and all costs, liabilities, and claims for damages of any kind arising out of the construction, presence, installation, maintenance, repair or operation of its equipment and facilities, or out of any activity undertaken in or near a public right-of-way, whether or not any act or omission complaint of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by a public right-of-way permit. The foregoing does not indemnify the city for its own negligence except for claims arising out of or alleging the city's negligence in issuing the permit or in failing to properly or adequately inspect or enforce compliance with a term, condition or purpose of a permit. This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the registrant, permittee or the city, and the registrant or permittee, in defending any action on behalf of the city, shall be entitled to assert in any action every defense or immunity that the city could assert on its own behalf. 
If the registrant or permittee is required to indemnify and defend, it shall thereafter have control of the litigation, but the registrant or permittee may not settle the litigation without the consent of the city. Such consent will not be unreasonably withheld. 
Subd. 19.  Abandoned facilities. 
A.  Notification. A public right-of-way user shall notify the city when facilities are, abandoned. The public right-of-way user shall submit to the director a plan for the removal of the abandoned equipment or facility. The director may require the public right-of-way user to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the equipment and facilities if the public right-of-way user fails to do so. 
B.  Removal of abandoned facilities. A right-of-way user that has abandoned facilities in the right-of-way shall remove them from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with other right-of-way repair, excavation or construction, at right-of-way user's expense, unless the city waives this requirement. A right-of-way user that has abandoned facilities in the right-of-way shall continue to comply with and complete a "locate" and map/mark the location of the abandoned facility upon all locate requests/orders as required by Minnesota law. When a right-of-way user fails to complete a locate of an abandoned facility when requested or upon issuance of a locate order and such failure results in a city project to be delayed, the right-of-way user shall pay for the city's costs, claims and damages, including the loss of revenue of its project contractors, for forced delay on project due to failure to locate and map abandoned facilities as required herein. 
Subd. 20.  Appeal. A public right-of-way user that: (1) has been denied registration; (2) has been denied a permit; (3) has had permit revoked; or (4) believes that the fees imposed are invalid, may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed by the city council upon written request. The city council shall act on a written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The decision by the city council shall be in writing and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision. 
Subd. 21.  Insurance. All certificate(s) of insurance or self-insurance required under this section shall provide the following: (1) that an insurance policy has been issued to the applicant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the director; (2) verify that the applicant is insured against claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising out of the (i) use and occupancy of the public right-of-way by the permittee, its officers, agents, employees and permittees, and (ii) placement and use of facilities and equipment in the public right-of-way by the permittee, its officers, agents, employees and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground facilities and collapse of property; (3) name the city as an additional insured as to whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be provided as to all such coverages; (4) require that the director be notified 30 days in advance of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term; (5) indicate comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage established by the director in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter: 
	Public Liability, including premises, products and complete operations 
GENERAL LIABILITY: 	Bodily Injury Liability $1,000,000 each person, 
 $3,000,000 each occurrence 
	Property Damage Liability $3,000,000 each occurrence 
	In lieu of (1) and (2) Bodily Injury and Property Damage Combined $3,000,000 single limit 
	Automobile Liability Insurance, including owned, non-owned and hired vehicles 
COMPREHENSIVE: 	Bodily Injury Liability $1,000,000 each person, 
 $3,000,000 each occurrence 
	Property Damage Liability $3,000,000 each occurrence 
	In lieu of (1) and (2) Bodily Injury and Property Damage Combined $3,000,000 single limit 
 
The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies. If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate required to be filed under Minn. Stats. § 300.06 as recorded and certified by the secretary of state. A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such certificate from said commission or other state or federal agency. A franchise agreement may exempt a permittee from this paragraph. 
(Code 1983, § 7.06, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 299, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 9-14-00; Ord. No. 582, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-8-2019)  
Sec. 7.07. - Parades, athletic events, and other special events occurring on city property or public rights-of-way. 
Subd. 1. Purpose . An increased number of events sponsored by private individuals, groups of private individuals, or organizations involving a large number of participants or attendees of the general public have been requested within the city to occur on city-owned property or public rights-of-way. The sponsors of the events have requested or the nature of the events have required city services or resources which would have not been otherwise necessary in the absence of such event, including but not limited to, street closures or restrictions, traffic direction and control, city personnel resources, city resources to provide services for the operation of a special event in whole or part, and other city services to protect the general public health, safety and welfare due to the occurrence of a special event. To protect the participants, attendees, and the general public involved in or affected by the special event, as well as to preserve and protect the city's property, streets, sidewalks and trails, and resources, it is in the best interest of the city to establish a special event permit process, together with rules and regulations for the operation of a special event under the permit. Events subject to this section may include, but are not limited to: parades; athletic events such as a marathon, walk or run event, bicycle rallies or races; farmers' market; art or craft fairs; festivals; or street dances, parties or fairs, provided the event meets the permit requirement criteria set forth in subdivision 3 herein. 
Subd. 2. Definitions . 
Applicant shall mean any person, organization or entity applying for a special event permit from the city to conduct a special event governed by this section. 
Assemblage shall mean two or more persons congregating or gathering together as a group for a common purpose within the vehicular travel portion of a public right-of-way and is not otherwise moving in a procession. 
Athletic event shall mean an event in which a group of persons collectively engage as participants to an organized event in which the group walks, runs, skates, skis or cycles as part of a race, cause or other reason within a public right-of-way, including sidewalks and trails or the use of city property in whole or part for the event within the city. For purposes of this section, an athletic event may be a timed or an untimed event or it may or may not involve an award of prizes for the top finishers. For purposes of this section, an athletic event does not include a group of individuals walking, running, or cycling solely for personal exercise or organized team practice that is not in connection with an organized or sponsored event open to the general public for participation. 
Block party shall mean a festive gathering of persons on a public street requiring the closure of or restriction on the street, or a portion thereof, to vehicular traffic and the use of the street includes street dances, barbecues, picnics, music, games and gathering. A block party in a residential neighborhood that is hosted and attended by the occupants of the properties located along the public right-of-way in which the block party occurs shall not be deemed a "block party" for which a special event permit is required under this section, provided a block party permit has been issued by the director of public works pursuant to the rules and regulations established for neighborhood block parties as adopted by city council. 
Event shall mean a parade, athletic event, or other special event. 
Other special event shall mean an event open to the general public which occurs on city-owned property or a public right-of-way, including any sidewalk or trail. For purposes of this section, other special event includes but is not limited to a farmer's market; art and craft fair or show; block party; soap box derby; motorized vehicle rally; street dance or fair; or similar event. For purposes of this section, an event which its sole purpose is to advertise or sell a product, good, ware, or merchandise of an individual business establishment or vendor and is designed to be held solely for private profit will not be deemed a special event for which a permit may be issued and will not be eligible for a special event permit. 
Parade shall mean any movement of vehicles, persons, or animals, or any combination thereof, which either moves together or as a body as an intended procession or group. The term "parade" shall not include any organized marathon, walk or run event or bicycle event which is otherwise defined as an "athletic event" herein. 
Permittee shall mean any person or organization or group issued a special event permit by the city. 
Procession shall mean the act of moving along or proceeding in orderly succession or in a formal, organized or ceremonious manner. 
Public rights-of-way shall mean the entire area dedicated on a plat or contained in an easement or other conveyance or grant to the city for purposes of public vehicular and pedestrian traffic and shall include, but not be limited to: streets and roadways; boulevards; sidewalks; trails; alleys; and other public property between lateral property lines in which a roadway lies. 
Special event permit committee shall mean a committee comprising of a city employee duly appointed by the director of each of the following city departments: parks and recreation, police, fire, public works, community development, administration, and city clerk. 
Subd. 3. Permit required . A special event permit is required for the use of city property, use of public rights-of-way, including sidewalks and trails, or a combination thereof, in connection with any of the following: 
A.  Athletic events that are timed or for which prizes are awarded to the top finishers, regardless of the number of participants, which include, but are not limited to: marathons; walk, run, skate, or ski events; and cycle rallies or races, unless the chief of police and director of public works determine the event poses no public safety concerns. 
B.  Athletic events that are not timed or for which prizes are not awarded to the top finishers with 500 or more participants in a walk/run event or 50 or more cyclists in a cycle event. 
C.  Events for which street or intersection closures or restrictions are required as determined by the city or as may be requested by the event sponsor. 
D.  Events, due to its location or nature of activities, will significantly interfere with or obstruct the safe and orderly movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic contiguous to the event site or event route. 
E.  Events to occur on city property or within public rights-of-way which will require the use of any city services, including but not limited to: city personnel, city utilities, public safety personnel, use of city traffic controls and devices, sanitary facilities, solid waste disposal facilities, clean up and restoration of city property, that would not otherwise be necessary in the absence of such special event. 
A special event permit is not required for the following: 
A.  Funeral procession; 
B.  A governmental agency activity within the scope of its duties; 
C.  Any event held inside a park building or involving the use of a specific park amenity exclusively (e.g. a ball field/complex, civic center, ice arena, park pavilion) for which a park facility permit is issued. 
D.  Any untimed bike event that commences outside of, but travels through the City of Eagan, has fewer than 50 participants within the city at any one time, and does not require city services or resources, provided: 
1.  The organizer shall submit to the city clerk written certification that fewer than 50 participants will be within the city at any one time; and 
2.  All participants shall obey all traffic laws. 
Subd. 4. Permit issuance . The city clerk is authorized to issue special event permits in accordance with this section. The city clerk shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application for a special event permit in accordance with the provisions of this section. All applications shall be reviewed by the special event permit committee. The special event permit committee, subject to the adoption by the city council, shall establish, and amend as necessary, rules and regulations governing the implementation of this section and all events under a special event permit. 
A special event permit shall be approved or conditionally approved, unless the special event committee determines that one or more of the following exists based upon the application and other pertinent information received: 
A.  The application, along with the application fee, was filed with the city clerk after the filing deadline date as set forth in this section and there is insufficient time to process and review the application or provide the necessary city services required for the proposed event. 
B.  Information contained in the application, or supplemental information requested from the applicant, is found to be false in any material detail. 
C.  The applicant/sponsoring organization of the event has, within the preceding 24 months, violated a previously issued special event permit or its conditions, including the rules and regulations applicable to special event permits, violated any term or condition of any previous park facility permit or reservation to use the city's property, or violated any city or state law in connection with the use of city property or public rights-of-way. 
D.  The applicant failed to complete or sign the application form by the required deadline after having been notified of the additional information or documents required, including the provision of traffic and emergency plans. 
E.  The traffic plan and/or emergency plan, if required by the city to be submitted by the applicant, does not meet the approval of the chief of police or director of public works. 
F.  The sole purpose of the event is advertising or sale of the product, good, ware, or merchandise of an individual business establishment or vendor and is designed to be held solely for private profit. This provision does not apply to the sale of products, goods, wares, or merchandise as part of a farmers' market, art or craft fair, or the like and does not apply if the advertising is secondary to or as a sponsoring organization of the event. 
G.  The application for the event is a walk/run/cycle event proposing to use city sidewalks or trails and the estimated number of participants in the event is 50 or more cyclists in a cycle event, 100 or more participants in a timed athletic event, or 500 or more participants in an untimed athletic event or parade. A cycle event exceeding 50 participants and a timed athletic event exceeding 100 participants proposing to use any sidewalk or trail may be permitted under this clause if the use of city sidewalks or trails first occurs one-half or more mile(s) past the start of the event. 
H.  Two special event permit applications have been previously received, or have already been approved, to hold an event (1) on the same date and same location requested by the applicant; or (2) within the same month at the same location; or (3) on the preceding or following weekend of another event at the same location, or so close in time and place as to cause undue traffic congestion or the inability of city personnel to meet the needs for city services for both events. 
I.  The time, route, or size of the event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the event site or route or disrupt the use of a street at a time when it is usually subject to great traffic congestion. 
J.  The concentration of persons, vehicles or animals, or a combination thereof, at the site of the event or the assembly and disbanding areas around an event will prevent or hinder proper police, fire, or ambulance services to areas contiguous to the event or significantly cause harm or damage to city property. 
K.  The type or size of the event will significantly impact the general public's use of the city's park, park amenities or other public uses, or require diversion of so great a number of city personnel, including police, to protect participants in or attendees of the event; to insure that participants stay within the boundaries or route of the event; to ensure the protection of the city's resources at the event site, or to police the operation of the event for assurance of compliance with city and state laws as to prevent the normal operation and protection to the rest of the city's residents. The permit may be denied if the city personnel whose presence at the time of the event is required is not available at the time proposed for the event. 
L.  The proposed date of the event is during the period of the city's winter parking restrictions or snow removal services would be required for the safety of the participants or attendees of the event. 
M.  The location of the event will substantially interfere with, or has been deemed unsafe by reason of any construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon or along the city streets, or a previously granted encroachment permit. 
N.  The event is proposed at a time when a school is in session at a route or location adjacent to the school or class thereof, and the noise created by the activities of the event would substantially disrupt the educational activities of the school or class thereof. 
When the grounds for denial of an application for permit based upon subsections E through N above can be corrected by altering the date, time, duration, route, or location of the event, the city clerk shall, instead of denying the application, conditionally approve the application upon the applicant's acceptance of conditions for permit issuance based upon the revised date, time, duration, route, or location of the event in order to meet the subsections above. 
Subd. 5. Permit application procedure and fees. 
A.  Filing of application. An application for a special use permit shall be on a form provided by the city and contain all information requested therein and shall contain such other information as the city may require. The application shall be filed along with a non-refundable permit application fee in the amount set by city council resolution. When the special event permit committee finds that supplemental information is reasonably necessary in order to act on the application, the applicant shall file with the city clerk all supplemental information requested within five business days of the request. 
An application for a special use permit shall be filed with the city clerk no less than 60 days prior to the proposed event date. In calculating the 60 days, the date on which the application is filed and the day of the event shall not be counted. If an application is filed after the filing deadline or the filed application is not signed or fully completed, the permit application shall be denied by the city clerk, unless the city clerk, upon a showing of good cause by the applicant, has determined that there is sufficient time to process and review the application and provide the necessary city services required for the proposed event. 
B.  Requirements upon approval, but before issuance of permit. Upon the approval of the application, but prior to the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall submit to the city the following: 
1.  The permit applicant and authorized officer of the sponsoring organization, if any, shall sign an indemnification agreement with the city as prepared by the city under which the applicant/permittee/sponsoring organization agrees to (1) defend the city against and indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liability, action, cause, suit, or claim by any person resulting from any damage or injury occurring in connection with the permitted event; (2) reimburse the city for any costs incurred by it in repairing damage to city property or public rights-of-way occurring in connection with the special event; and (3) to reimburse the city for all expenses and costs incurred by the city for its services related to the event that are not otherwise covered or in excess of the city services/resource fee deposit paid by the applicant. 
2.  The applicant/sponsoring organization of the event shall obtain and maintain commercial general liability insurance on an occurrence basis to protect against loss from liability imposed by laws for damages on account of bodily injury or property damage arising from the event. Such insurance shall name the City of Eagan, its officers, employees and agents, on the policy or by endorsement, as additional insureds. The insurance coverage shall be maintained for the duration of the event with a minimum $1,000,000.00 combined single limit and a minimum $2,000,000.00 aggregate limit. 
If food or non-alcoholic beverages are sold or provided at the event, whether by the permittee or a registered vendor, the insurance policy shall also include an endorsement for product liability in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00. 
If alcoholic beverages are sold or provided at the event, the insurance coverage shall include an endorsement for liquor liability in an amount as otherwise required in the city's regulations governing the sale and licensing of alcoholic beverages. 
A copy of the policy or a certificate of insurance, clearly identifying the City of Eagan as an additional insured, shall be filed with the city clerk not less than five business days before the date of the event. If a copy of the policy or the certificate of insurance is not filed with the city as required herein, the permit shall not be issued and the event shall not occur. 
3.  Upon approval of the application for a special event permit, the city clerk shall provide the applicant with a statement of the estimated cost of the expenses incurred by the city in connection with providing city personnel, services and resources necessary for the event. The applicant/permittee shall be required to pay, as deposit of the city services/resources fee, the amount equal to 125 percent of the estimated costs as determined in the statement no later than seven business days prior to the date of the event. If the applicant/permittee fails to remit the payment of the city services/resources fee deposit as required herein, the permit shall not be issued and the event shall not occur. The city services/resources fees shall be in the amounts as set by city council resolution. 
4.  Upon approval of the application, and not less than five days prior to the event, the applicant/permittee shall notify in writing all properties abutting any public rights-of-way in which the event will occur and said notice shall advise of the event, including the date, duration of time and any street restrictions imposed as a result of the event. The applicant permittee shall also post signs, as approved by the city, at all affected street intersections. 
Subd. 6. Conditions of permit . All special events permits shall be subject to the following conditions: 
A.  The permittee shall comply and conduct the event in compliance with all conditions imposed with the issuance of a special event permit. The permittee, or an authorized designee, shall establish in advance of the event and maintain at all times during the event means to have immediate contact with and access by city staff. 
B.  The permittee/sponsoring organization of the event shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees, agents, or volunteers working in the event and shall take all steps necessary to ensure the employees, agents, or volunteers working in the event comply with the permit conditions set forth in this section and all conditions set forth in the permit. 
C.  The event shall have an emergency medical first response team on site specifically assigned to the event. The city may require additional emergency medical resources on site for the event if deemed necessary due to the nature of the event. The city, in its sole discretion, may waive this requirement if deemed unnecessary due to type of event and number of participants. 
D.  The permittee shall comply with all city, county, state and federal laws and regulations relevant to the event, including any animal protection laws and regulations. 
E.  No electronic sound system or audio equipment or any other device designed to produce or reproduce audio sound shall be used unless specifically approved under the permit. 
F.  No sale or furnishing of food or non-alcoholic beverages shall occur at the special event, unless the vendor thereof has a vendor permit from the city and all required licenses from the State of Minnesota. 
G.  No sale or furnishing of alcoholic beverages shall occur at the event unless a license is first obtained from the city. Provided the appropriate license has been issued for the sale or furnishing of alcoholic beverages at the event, the sale shall be subject to all city and state laws relative to the sale or furnishing of alcoholic beverages and shall be conducted in accordance with the licensed conditions. 
H.  No sale of any goods, products or merchandise shall be sold at the event unless all vendor have a vendors permit issued by the city. 
I.  No signs or banners shall be posted unless specifically approved under the permit. 
J.  No public rights-of-way, including sidewalks, trails and paths, shall be written upon or otherwise marked with any permanent substance. A fee, the amount of which shall be duly adopted by council resolution, will be charged to the event organizer if this provision is violated. 
Subd. 7. Appeal right and procedure . The applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit application, the conditions of a permit, or the amount of the city service/resource fee deposit imposed upon the applicant to the city council. A request for appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk within seven days after the mailing or delivery of the notice of denial or conditional approval or the city service/resource fees. The appeal must be filed no later than 12:00 noon one calendar week preceding a city council meeting to be placed on the next regular city council meeting agenda. The city council shall hear the applicant or a designated representative, receive any relevant information and documents, and act on the appeal at the regular meeting. The decision of the city council is final. 
Subd. 8. Unlawful acts. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to interfere with events permitted under this section. The following acts are prohibited when done with the intent to cause interference: 
1.  Blocking, obstructing, or impeding the passage of participants, vehicles, or animals along the route of any parade or athletic event. 
2.  Walking, running, driving a motor vehicle or other motorized vehicle, skating, or riding a cycle or skateboard through, between, with, or among participants, vehicles, or animals of any parade or athletic event. 
3.  Dropping, throwing, rolling, or flying any object toward, among, or between participants, vehicles, or animals of any parade or athletic event. 
4.  Grabbing at, taking hold of, hitting, pulling, or pushing any participant, vehicle, or animal or anything in the possession of any participant of any parade or athletic event. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any food or merchandise at an event or along the route of any parade or athletic event without first having obtained a vendor permit from the director of parks and recreation. This provision shall not apply to the parade held in connection with the Eagan July 4th Funfest. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to participate in an assemblage within the vehicular travel portion of any public right of way unless it is in connection with an event for which a special event permit or block party permit has been issued by the city and is not otherwise in violation of any traffic direction or control order of a police officer. 
(Code 1983, § 7.07, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 490, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-8-2012; Ord. No. 514, 2nd series, §§ 1—3, eff. 2-5-2013; Ord. No. 569, 2nd series, §§ 1—3, eff. 11-17-2017)  
Sec. 7.08. - Regulation of grass, weeds, trees, and landscaping. 
Subd. 1.  City to control landscaping and irrigation. 
A.  In no cases shall prohibited species be planted within street rights-of-way. Prohibited species are defined as the following trees: 
Ginkgo (female only) 
Box elder 
Non-disease-resistant elm species 
Nonhybrid cottonwood species 
B.  The city shall have control and supervision of planting shrubs and trees and installation of landscaping and irrigation systems upon, within or overhanging all city streets or other public property. The city shall establish and enforce uniform standards relating to the species, varieties and sizes of trees and shrubs to be planted, and the installation, standards, and the placement of trees, shrubs, landscaping and irrigation system. These standards shall be on file in the office of the city forester. 
C.  Any owner or occupant of a lot or land parcel abutting a public street shall, prior to the planting of trees and shrubs or installation of landscaping or irrigation systems within the street right-of-way, obtain a written permit from the city. Permits, when so issued, shall identify the species to be planted, size, location thereof, and timeline for installation and the terms of which, in addition to the regulations of this Code, shall be met. The city shall retain the authority to regulate, authorize or deny any request for said permit in the interest of ensuring the public's safety and general orderliness of improvements within street rights-of-way. 
D.  The placement of trees and shrubs in public places and street rights-of-way and alongside private streets serving more than 20 units shall be in compliance with the following requirements: 
1.  Trees and shrubs shall not be planted within ten feet, horizontally, of any sewer line, water line or driveway or within four feet of any public trail or sidewalk. 
2.  The placement of trees and shrubs within public rights-of-way and within ten feet of private streets shall not disturb any ground within two feet, horizontally, of any gas lines, electric lines, phone lines, or cable television lines, except in those specific cases where utility easements provide for wider setback requirements. 
3.  Any new trees and shrubs planted within a public street right-of-way or alongside a private street shall be spaced no closer than 20 feet apart and must be at least ten feet from the back of curb in an urban section or 20 feet from the edge of pavement in a rural section. 
4.  Trees, shrubbery, and other plant material shall not be planted or maintained on public or private property in such a manner as to obscure or impede the visual sight lines required to ensure the safe and efficient circulation of vehicles and pedestrians on streets, intersections, trails, and sidewalks. Trees, shrubbery or other plant material shall not be planted as to block the visibility of any regulatory, warning, or street identification sign or block the illumination of streetlights. The city shall have the authority to determine the minimal amount of required setback and clear zones in such circumstances. Property owners in violation of said requirements shall be given written notice, which notice shall be given by mail to their last known address, to remove, relocate, or trim all related plant materials in compliance with the directives given therein. If any owner or occupant fails to assume the responsibility of these requirements, the city may proceed to order the work done in accordance with subsections D.5. and D.6. of this subdivision. 
5.  Overhanging branches of all deciduous trees within public street rights-of-way and within ten feet of private streets shall, at the time of maturity, be at least thirteen and one-half feet above street surfaces and at least eight feet above the ground for all other public places. This requirement includes trees that are planted on private property, but overhang within public areas or rights-of-way. 
6.  The city may establish a master plan for street tree planting. The plan shall identify those streets that have been designated by the council for the planting of said boulevard trees. In accordance with the master plan, responsibility for the planting and maintenance of boulevard trees shall be the responsibility of the city, except for new subdivisions where the developer shall be responsible for planting boulevard trees. The planting and maintenance of trees within public residential street rights-of-way, not included in the city's master street tree planting plan, shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owners. In such cases, the property owner shall first obtain, from the city forester, a written permit to plant, in accordance with the requirements of this subdivision. 
E.  Any tree, shrub or landscaping within a street right-of-way, which is in violation of this section, shall be trimmed or removed, as the city shall require, as to ensure elimination of any threat to public safety due to sight line or physical obstruction. The city shall have the authority to remove or trim any tree, shrub or landscaping, without first notifying the property owner, in the case where imminent public danger exists if removal or trimming is not immediately completed. It shall be the property owner's responsibility to trim, or remove when necessary, any shrub or landscaping within the street right-of-way which is in violation of this subdivision. It shall be the responsibility of the city to trim and the responsibility of the property owner to remove when trimming is not a feasible option, any tree in violation of this subdivision. The city may perform the work that is the responsibility of the property owner when the property owner has failed to do so. The city may charge the property owner the cost incurred by the city in performing any work required under this paragraph pursuant to subdivision 5 herein. 
F.  The city shall establish and enforce uniform standards for the maintenance of trees, shrubs and landscaping planted or located within the street right-of-way. Such standards shall be kept on file in the office of the city forester. 
G.  It is unlawful for any person to deface, destroy, or tamper with any trees or landscaping on public property, including trees within a street right-of-way. 
H.  A tree within a public right-of-way shall not be used for signs, permanent lighting, television antennas, or other inappropriate uses. 
I.  Removal of trees and shrubs from public property shall be by city permit only. 
Subd. 2.  Duty of property owners to establish turfgrass within street rights-of-way. It is the primary responsibility of any owner or occupant of property abutting on any street to establish suitable turfgrass, from the line of such property nearest to such street to the centerline of such street, within a period of one full growing season from the completion of final grading or date of occupancy, whichever is sooner. 
Subd. 3.  Duty of property owners to maintain turfgrass within street rights-of-way. Every owner of property abutting on any street shall be responsible for the maintenance of suitable turfgrass from the line of such property nearest to such street to the curbline of such street. If the grass or weeds in such a place attain a height in excess of six inches, it shall be prima facie evidence of a failure to comply with this subdivision. 
Subd. 4. Duties to maintain street right-of-ways . 
A.  Duty of property owners to maintain shrubs and landscaping within street rights-of-way . Every owner of property abutting city street rights-of-way shall, in accordance with this section and the standards on file in the office of the city forester, maintain and trim, all shrubs and landscaping or remove any nonconforming trees, shrubs or landscaping located within the boulevard area of a street right-of-way. 
B.  Duty of city to maintain trees in street rights-of-way . The city shall have responsibility for the trimming of trees within the street right-of-way. Any tree within a street right-of-way that does not comply with the requirements of this section or the standards on file with the city engineer, may be trimmed by the city as determined necessary by the city and the costs thereof assessed against the abutting property owner in accordance with chapter. 
Subd. 5. City may order work done and assess costs . If any such owner or occupant fails to assume the responsibility of this section, the city may abate the violation and assess the costs therefor in accordance with chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 7.08, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 106, 2nd series, eff. 7-27-90; Ord. No. 247, 2nd series, eff. 11-27-97; Ord. No. 295, 2nd series, eff. 7-27-00; Ord. No. 504, 2nd series, §§ 3—5, eff. 5-15-2012)  
Sec. 7.09. - Limiting time of railway-street crossing obstruction. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person operating or in charge of a railroad train, car, engine, locomotive, or other railroad equipment or combination thereof to so operate, park or leave the same standing upon the railroad at its intersection with a street, so as to prevent unobstructed vehicular traffic on such street for a period longer than 15 minutes. 
(Code 1983, § 7.09, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 7.10. - Curb and gutter, street and sidewalk painting or coloring. 
It is unlawful for any person to paint, letter or color any street, sidewalk or curb and gutter for advertising purposes or to paint or color any street, sidewalk or curb and gutter for any purpose, except as the same may be done by city employees acting within the course or scope of their employment. Provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to uniformly coloring concrete or other surfacing or uniformly painted house numbers, as such coloring may be approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1983, § 7.10, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 7.11. - Motorized vehicles prohibited on boulevards and sidewalks. 
Except as provided in this chapter or chapter 11, it is unlawful for any person to drive, operate or park a motor vehicle on any boulevard, public sidewalk or public property designated for use as a pedestrian walkway or bicycle trail, except when crossing the same for ingress and egress via a driveway to private property lying on the other side thereof. 
(Ord. No. 152, 2nd series, eff. 12-11-92)  
Sec. 7.12. - Certain motorized vehicles permitted on boulevards—Regulation. 
Subd. 1.  Public utility maintenance vehicles. Notwithstanding the provisions of the City Code under which motor vehicles are prohibited on boulevards and sidewalks, any person who is an employee or agent of a public utility company or cooperative and, within the course and scope of such employment or agency, needs direct access to an area within a boulevard for the exclusive purpose of maintaining any public utilities, excluding any activity that requires a public improvement to be removed, replaced or modified, may drive, operate or park a motor vehicle on such boulevard within the course and scope of such activity upon the city's issuance of an annual permit to the public utility company or cooperative that employs such person. 
Subd. 2.  Construction vehicles. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 7.11 herein, any person requiring temporary access upon any boulevard or across any boulevard to such person's abutting private property, for construction or other similar purposes, may drive, operate or park or permit another to drive, operate or park any construction vehicle, construction equipment or any other motor vehicle upon or across any boulevard or public sidewalk within the course and scope of such construction or other similar activity upon the issuance of a written permit by the city. 
Subd. 3.  City vehicles. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 7.11 herein, any city employee acting within the course and scope of his employment or a contractor acting within the course and scope of a contract with the city may drive, operate or park a motor vehicle on any boulevard without a permit issued by the city, subject to any regulations under any administrative policy adopted by the city. 
Subd. 4.  Performance standards. All persons permitted to drive, operate and park a motor vehicle as in accordance with subdivisions 1 and 2, above, shall be subject to those standards and regulations set forth in any permit issued pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 152, 2nd series, eff. 12-11-92)  
Sec. 7.13. - Street names and numbers. 
In accordance with the statutory authority set forth in Minn. Stat. § 412.221, the names and numbers of streets under the city's jurisdiction shall be determined by the city by and through city personnel as directed by the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 503, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 5-15-2012)  
Secs. 7.14—7.98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 7.99. - Violation a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor. 
Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
Subd. 1.  Where the specific section, subdivision, paragraph or provision specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he stands convicted of violation of any provision of this chapter, exclusive of violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended vehicle, within the immediate preceding 12-month period for the third or subsequent time, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
Subd. 2.  As to any violation not constituting a misdemeanor under the provisions of subdivision 1 hereof, he shall be punished as for a petty misdemeanor. 
(Code 1983, § 7.99, eff. 1-1-83)  
Chapter 8 - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS[1] 
(SEE CHAPTER 7 FOR DEFINITIONS, SCOPE AND APPLICATION RELATING TO THIS CHAPTER) 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Police department, § 2.31; disposal of abandoned motor vehicles, § 2.70; streets and sidewalks generally, ch. 7; parking regulations, ch. 9; abandoning of motor vehicle, § 10.50; junk cars, § 10.51; prohibited use and parking of mobile homes and recreational camping vehicles, § 10.52; traffic visibility, § 11.10, subd. 7. 
State Law reference— Traffic regulations, Minn. Stat. § 169.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8.01. - Minnesota Statutes, chapters 168, 169 and 171 adopted by reference. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in chapters 7 and 9 of this Code, the regulatory and procedural provisions of Minn. Stat. ch. 168, ch. 169 (commonly referred to as the Highway Traffic Regulation Act) and ch. 171, as amended through Laws 1996, are hereby incorporated herein and adopted by reference, including the penalty provisions thereof. 
(Code 1983, § 8.01, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 182, 2nd series, eff. 6-24-94)  
Sec. 8.02. - Truck route. 
It is unlawful for any person to drive a tractor, agricultural implement, truck over 9,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, truck-trailer, tractor-trailer or truck tractor in through traffic, upon any street except those which have been designated and signposted as truck routes. For the purpose of this chapter, "through traffic" means originating without the city and with a destination without the city, as distinguished from "local traffic," which means traffic either originating or having a destination within the city. 
(Code 1983, § 8.02, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 8.03. - U-turns. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle by turning so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street except at a street intersection, and then only if the street intersection is not signposted prohibiting a U-turn or otherwise controlled by a traffic signal; provided that any person making a permitted U-turn shall yield the right-of-way to all other vehicles. 
(Code 1983, § 8.03, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 8.04. - Left turns prohibited. 
The chief of police may, in his discretion and with the consent of the council, prohibit left turns entirely or during specified hours at certain intersections. It is unlawful for any person to make a left turn at any intersection signposted prohibiting the same or make a left turn during the hours of such signposted prohibition. 
(Code 1983, § 8.04, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 8.05. - Exhibition driving. 
Subd. 1.  Prima facie evidence. It is prima facie evidence of exhibition driving when a motor vehicle stops, starts, accelerates, decelerates, or turns at an unnecessary rate of speed so as to cause tires to squeal, gears to grind, soil to be thrown, engine backfire, fishtailing or skidding, or, as to two-wheeled or three-wheeled motor vehicles, the front wheel to lose contact with the ground or roadway surface. 
Subd. 2.  Unlawful act. It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any exhibition driving on any street, parking lot, or other public or private property, except when an emergency creates necessity for such operation to prevent injury to persons or damage to property; provided that this section shall not apply to driving on a racetrack. For purposes of this section, a "racetrack" means any track or premises whereon motorized vehicles, horses, dogs, or other animals or fowl legally compete in a race or timed contest for an audience, the members of which have directly or indirectly paid a consideration for admission. 
(Code 1983, § 8.05, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 8.06. - Snowmobile rules and regulations. 
Subd. 1.  Purpose and construction. This section is enacted in part pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 471.62, as amended, and other applicable laws of the state. The purpose of this section is to provide rules for the regulation of snowmobiles operated within the city. 
Subd. 2.  Certain statutes adopted. Minn. Stat. §§ 84.81—84.89 and 171.03, as amended, together with rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, are hereby adopted by reference, incorporated herein, and made a part hereof, except as otherwise provided herein. 
Subd. 3.  Additional rules and regulations. 
A.  Private property. It is a misdemeanor for any person to operate a snowmobile on the private property of another without the permission of the owner or tenant having control of the property. Further, pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 604A.22, except as specifically recognized by or provided in Minn. Stat. § 604A.25, an owner of land (1) owes no duty of care to render or maintain his land safe for entry or use by other persons with a motorized recreational vehicle for recreational purposes; (2) owes no duty to warn those persons of any dangerous condition on the land, whether patent or latent; (3) owes no duty of care toward these persons except to refrain from willfully taking action to cause injury; and (4) owes no duty to curtail his use of land during its use for recreational purposes. 
B.  Public property. It is a misdemeanor for any person to operate a snowmobile at any time on school property or city park property, except on designated trails or areas. 
C.  Place of operation. It is a misdemeanor for any person to operate a snowmobile at any time, whether on private or public property, within 150 feet of any designated play area or area being used for skating, sliding, or other seasonal activities, except when traveling on streets or adjoining residential lands. However, such person may travel between 150 feet and 300 feet of any designated play area or area being used for skating, sliding or other seasonal activities at speeds not in excess of five miles per hour. 
D.  Public streets and sidewalks. It is a misdemeanor: 
1.  For any person to operate a snowmobile on streets except to and from his or a passenger's residence by the most direct route, and at a speed greater than five miles per hour. 
2.  For the operator of a snowmobile to enter or cross any intersection, public roadway or street without first making a complete stop. 
3.  For any person to operate a snowmobile other than on the farthest righthand portion of any street or public roadway, to ride side-by-side with any other snowmobile, or to pass any other vehicle, including snowmobiles, while operating on any street or public roadway. 
4.  For any person under 14 years of age to operate a snowmobile on streets or highways, or make a direct crossing of a street or highway. 
5.  For any person 14 years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age, to operate a snowmobile on streets or highways, as permitted under this section, or make a direct crossing thereof unless he has in his immediate possession a valid snowmobile safety certificate issued by the commissioner of natural resources as provided by statute. Provided, however, that such person may cross a street at an angle of 90 degrees to the direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing. 
6.  For any person to operate a snowmobile on any sidewalk or boulevard. 
7.  For any person to operate a snowmobile on any street which has been posted by order of the council prohibiting snowmobiles. 
E.  Hours of operation. It is a misdemeanor for any person to: 
1.  Operate a snowmobile in any area between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Sunday through Thursday. 
2.  Operate a snowmobile in any area between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Friday, Saturday and the days preceding official holidays. 
3.  Operate a snowmobile between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. of any day within 300 feet of any residential structure, at a speed in excess of five miles per hour, other than in single file, and other than at a distance of 100 feet between groups of six machines. 
4.  Leave his place of residence by snowmobile after 10:00 p.m. 
5.  Operate a snowmobile on streets after 10:00 p.m., except when such person is within one mile of his residence. Provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to county and state highways. 
Subd. 4.  Other unlawful acts. 
A.  It is a misdemeanor for the operator of any snowmobile to intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any animal, whether wild or domestic. 
B.  It is a misdemeanor for the owner of a snowmobile to permit the snowmobile to be operated contrary to the provisions of this section. 
Subd. 5.  Exception. Notwithstanding any prohibition to this section, a snowmobile may be operated on a public thoroughfare in an emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile impractical. 
(Code 1983, § 8.06, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 8.07. - Recreational motor vehicle rules and regulations. 
Subd. 1.  Purpose and intent. This section is enacted in part pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 471.62, as amended, and other applicable laws of the state. The purpose of this section is to provide rules for the regulation of recreational motor vehicles other than snowmobiles on public and private property. It is intended to protect life, property and to prevent public nuisances. Nothing in this section shall be construed to minimize regulations set forth in Minn. Stat. chs. 168, 169 and 171. 
Subd. 2.  Definition. The term "recreational motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle designed for, used, or capable of use on land for sport, amusement or recreation, other than motor homes, pickup campers or the like, whether or not eligible to be licensed for use upon streets, including but not limited to motorbikes, motor scooters, trail bikes, minibikes, motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles, dune buggies, go-carts, hovercraft, but excluding motor vehicles designed for commercial, industrial or agricultural use. 
Subd. 3.  Unlawful operation. It is a misdemeanor for any person to operate a recreational motor vehicle: 
A.  On public property, including, but not limited to, parks, whether leased or owned, schools, playgrounds and recreation areas except those areas specifically designated by the council. Provided, however, that parking is permitted in parking areas designated by the council. 
B.  On private property without the prior written permission of the owner or tenant having control of such property. 
C.  Within 150 feet of a residence or area being used for recreational purposes, or within 150 to 300 feet of a residence at speeds in excess of ten miles per hour, except when traveling on streets or adjoining residential land. 
D.  In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property or to cause damage or injury thereto. 
E.  Performing stunts, drills, acrobatics, racing or playing games of any sort without the prior approval of the chief of police. 
F.  In a manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary noise which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace and quiet of other persons. 
G.  While under the influence of beer or liquor, as those terms are defined in chapter 5 of the City Code, or a controlled substance as defined by statute. 
H.  To intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any animal, wild or domestic. 
I.  On a sidewalk, walkway, boulevard easement, or other area provided or used for pedestrian traffic. 
J.  On streets or to cross them unless the operator has a valid driver's license with a two-wheeled vehicle endorsement. 
Subd. 4.  Other unlawful act. It is a misdemeanor for any person to wash, grease or repair a recreational motor vehicle upon any public property or street, except when such repairs are necessary because of an emergency. 
Subd. 5.  Certain statute adopted. Minn. Stat. § 84.90 is hereby adopted by reference, incorporated herein, and made a part hereof, except as otherwise herein provided. 
(Code 1983, § 8.07, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 8.08. - Motorized golf cart use by persons with mobility impairment. 
Subd. 1.  Motorized golf cart use by persons with mobility impairment—Permit required. Any person with a mobility impairment or any person assisting a person with a mobility impairment may operate a motorized golf cart upon all streets within the city, except those expressly designated as prohibited streets by resolution of the council. It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorized golf cart under this section without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city. The fees for a permit hereunder shall be established by the council, by resolution, from time to time. Each permit hereunder shall be issued for a period of one year from its date of issuance. 
Subd. 2.  Permit application. An application for a permit hereunder shall be filed with the city clerk upon an application form furnished by the city. The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  The names and addresses of the following persons: 
1.  The applicant signed thereto; and 
2.  The person with mobility impairment for which the permit is sought if such person is not the applicant; 
B.  The make and model and any identification number of the motorized golf cart to be operated under the permit; 
C.  A certificate of a medical doctor, duly licensed to practice medicine in the state, which certificate shall state that the applicant, if such applicant is a person with mobility impairment, is able to safely operate a motorized golf cart on the designated street; and 
D.  Any other and further information as the city deems necessary. 
Subd. 3.  Granting or denying issuance of permit . The city clerk may grant a permit hereunder. No permit shall be issued hereunder until a certificate of insurance, evidencing coverage for liability in compliance with the provisions of Minn. Stat. § 65B.41-65B.71, is filed with the city clerk. The city clerk may deny a permit hereunder for any of the following reasons: 
A.  The application is incomplete and contains false, fraudulent or deceptive statements. 
B.  The applicant has not complied with one or more of the provisions hereunder. 
C.  The applicant has been convicted of a violation under this section. 
Subd. 4.  One person permit. No permit shall be issued to more than one person; the permit shall apply to the individual, not the motorized golf cart. 
Subd. 5.  Conditions of permit. A permit granted by the council hereunder shall be subject to the following conditions and to such other conditions as the council may deem necessary and expedient for the protection of health, safety and general welfare of the city: 
A.  Operation by permit holder only. It is unlawful for any person other than the person to whom the permit was issued to operate a motorized golf cart under this section. Any permit holder hereunder who is not a person with a mobility impairment shall not operate a motorized golf cart hereunder unless the person with the mobility impairment for whom the permit was issued is present in the motorized golf cart during operation thereof. 
B.  Possession of permit. The permit holder shall have in possession at all times when operating the motorized golf cart and shall produce on demand of a peace officer a valid permit for operation of the motorized golf cart. 
C.  Operation on designated streets. It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorized golf cart on any street designated as a prohibited street for such operation, unless it is necessary to cross such prohibited street because it intersects a permitted street. Any permit holder crossing a prohibited street that intersects a permitted street must do so at the marked intersection thereof. 
D.  Compliance with state statute. The permit holder shall comply with the provisions of Minn. Stat. § 169.045, governing the operation of motorized golf carts permitted under provisions of the City Code. 
E.  Effective liability insurance. The permit holder shall have liability insurance coverage in compliance with the provisions of Minn. Stat. §§ 65B.41—65B.71 in full force and effect when operating the motorized golf cart under this section. 
F.  Nontransferability of permit. Any permit issued hereunder shall be nontransferable except upon application to and with the consent of the council. An application for the transfer shall be made as an application for issuance of the initial permit and shall conform in all respects with the provisions of this section governing the filing of the original application. The application for transfer is to be accompanied by a transfer fee as to be determined by the council by resolution. 
G.  Operation prohibited within pedestrian walkways and parks. It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorized golf cart upon any sidewalk, trailway, path or other pedestrian walkway within the city or to operate such motorized golf cart at a speed in excess of 25 miles per hour. 
Subd. 6.  Permit renewal. A permit hereunder may not be renewed unless an application for permit renewal is filed in accordance with the provisions of this section governing the filing of the original permit application. 
Subd. 7.  Revocation of permit. Any violation of any provision of this section or any conditions of the permit issued hereunder or any misdemeanor and petty misdemeanor conviction of the permit holder under this section shall constitute grounds for revocation of a permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 159, 2nd series, eff. 3-26-93; Ord. No. 496, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-21-2012)  
Sec. 8.09. - Regulation of traffic signal preemption system. 
Subd. 1.  Purpose and scope of application. The purpose of a traffic signal preemption system ("TSPS") in the city is to afford authorized emergency vehicles the ability to perform emergency responses and services in a safer and more timely manner by temporarily controlling motorized vehicular traffic flow at signalized intersections within the city. The city council recognizes that the public has come to recognize that the operation or activation of a traffic signal preemption system at a controlled signalized intersection signals to other vehicular traffic that an emergency vehicle is approaching, entering or traveling through the intersection. The city council determines that the public safety and welfare is adversely affected and at risk when operators of vehicles, other than authorized emergency vehicles, operate, engage or activate a TSPS for purposes other than an emergency response or services. 
Subd. 2.  Definitions. 
Authorized emergency vehicle shall have the meaning as provided in Minnesota Statutes, Section 169.01. 
Traffic signal preemption system shall mean a traffic control system, sometimes referred to as "OPTI-COMM," designed for the use by authorized emergency vehicles to improve traffic movement by temporarily controlling signalized intersections. The traffic signal preemption system is comprised of four separate components; an emitter, a detector, an indicator; and a phase selector. The emitter (a high intensity light source) is attached to the authorized emergency vehicle and functions like a strobe light, pulsating at a frequency in excess of ten pulses per second and as an emergency vehicle approaches the intersection, this pulsating light is received by the detector that is located at or near the traffic signal. The detector relays the coded message to the phase selector, which is located in the traffic light control box, which then either holds the existing green light in favor of the approaching authorized emergency vehicle or accelerates the normal cycle of the signal change to provide green by the time the vehicle reaches the intersection. The indicator is a light source located near the detector which is directed towards the on-coming authorized emergency vehicle to indicate to the driver to indicate whether or not the traffic signal has been pre-empted in the approaching authorized emergency vehicle's favor. 
City, county or state maintenance personnel shall mean employees, agents, or contractors of the city, Dakota County, or the State of Minnesota whose duty or responsibilities within the scope of employment or contract require testing, maintenance, repair or adjustment to the traffic signal preemption system. 
Subd. 3.  Prohibition. No person, other than an authorized emergency vehicle operator while responding to an emergency, shall operate, engage, or activate a traffic signal preemption system within the city. This subdivision shall not apply to any city, county or state maintenance personnel, who may activate the traffic signal preemption system for purposes of testing, maintaining, repairing, or adjusting the system, or to any railroad/train operator who may activate the traffic signal preemption system for purposes of traffic control at railroad crossings or nearby intersections. 
(Ord. No. 381, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 8-26-04)  
Sec. 8.10. - Utility vehicle operation on city streets. 
Subd. 1. Authority and scope . This section is adopted under the authority of Minn. Stat. §169.045, (2014 and as may be amended), and other applicable laws of the state. This section permits the operation of a utility vehicle, as defined herein, on specifically designated public streets, or portions thereof, under the city's authority pursuant to a valid permit issued by the city. This section does not apply to or authorize the operation of a utility vehicle on any state or county highway or roadway. The lawful operation of a utility vehicle under this section is subject to all the provisions herein. 
Subd. 2. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms are defined as: 
All-terrain vehicle means a motorized vehicle of not less than three, but not more than six low pressure or non-pneumatic tires, that is limited in engine displacement of less than 1,000 cubic centimeters and has a total dry weight of less than 1,800 pounds. 
Designated use district means a geographic area of which the boundaries are established by expressly designated city streets by resolution of council. One or more designated use districts may be established within the city by council resolution and any designated use district may be expand or reduced from time to time by council resolution. 
Mini truck means a motor vehicle that has four wheels; is propelled by an electric motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal combustion engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters or less; has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds; contains an enclosed cabin and a seat for the vehicle operator; commonly resembles a pickup truck or van, including a cargo area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle; and was not originally manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards required of motor vehicles in the Code of Federal Regulations, a motor vehicle that meets or exceeds the regulations in the Code of Federal Regulations, title 49, section 571.500, and successor requirements. A mini truck does not include a neighborhood electric vehicle or a medium-speed electric vehicle; or a motor vehicle that meets or exceeds the regulations in the Code of Federal Regulations, title 49, section 571.500, and successor requirements 
Motorized golf cart means any 4-wheeled self-propelled vehicle whose top speed is not greater than 25 miles per hour and is designed to be used to provide transportation on a golf course. 
Utility task vehicle means a side-by-side, four-wheel drive, off-road vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an internal combustion engine with a piston displacement capacity of 1,200 cubic centimeters or less, and has a total dry weight of at least 1,800 but less than 2,600 pounds. 
Utility vehicle means a motorized golf cart, all-terrain vehicle, utility task vehicle and mini trucks. 
Subd. 3. Permit required . It is unlawful for any person to operate a utility vehicle upon any public street or highway, or any portions thereof, within the city unless said operation is pursuant to a valid permit issued by the city and in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit. It is unlawful for any permit holder to operate a utility vehicle outside the designated use district or on any street within the designated use district that is not designated for utility vehicle use. 
Subd. 4. Permit application. An application for a permit under this section, along with the permit fee, shall be filed with the city clerk. The application shall be on a form furnished by the city. The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  The full name, date of birth and residential address of the person seeking the permit. 
B.  The year, make, and model of the vehicle(s) and the vehicle identification number, if any, to be operated under the permit. 
C.  The full name and address of the owner of each utility vehicle to be operated under the permit. If the owner is a business or legal entity, the registered name and registered address of the business or entity with the Minnesota Secretary of State. 
D.  Identification of the designated use district for which the permit is sought. 
E.  Identification of the reason(s) for which operation on city streets within the designated use district are necessary and the business or commercial use for which the operation serves. 
F.  Proof of liability insurance coverage (in the form and amounts set forth herein) for the applicant and all utility vehicles to be operated under the permit. 
G.  Any other and further information as the city deems necessary. 
Subd. 5. Insurance coverage. Prior to issuance of a permit, the applicant must file with the city clerk the following: 
A.  A certificate of insurance, evidencing coverage for liability of the permit holder in compliance with the provisions of Minn. Stat. §§ 65B.41-65B.71; and 
B.  A certificate of insurance evidencing coverage for liability of the owner of the utility vehicle(s) to be used under the permit issued hereunder. The certificate of insurance shall name the city as an additional insured and shall provide that the city be notified upon expiration or cancellation of the insurance coverage. 
Subd. 6. Issuance of permit . The city clerk shall have the authority to grant or deny a permit under this section. The city clerk shall deny a permit under this section for any of the following reasons: 
A.  The permit applicant is not age 18 or older. 
B.  The permit applicant is not an employee or agent of a business or commercial use within a designated use district or abutting a city street within a designated use district on which a utility vehicle may be operated. 
C.  The operation of a utility vehicle on city streets, as to be identified in the application, is not for the necessary or required operations of the business for whom the applicant is employed. 
D.  The application is incomplete. 
E.  The application contains false, fraudulent or deceptive statements. 
F.  Proof of liability insurance coverage, as required herein, has not been filed with the city clerk. 
G.  The applicant has been convicted of a violation under this section. 
Subd. 7. One person permit. One permit shall be issued to one person; the permit shall apply to an individual, not the utility vehicle. 
Subd. 8. Conditions of permit. A permit granted hereunder shall be subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Operation by permit holder only . It is unlawful for any person other than the person to whom the permit was issued to operate a utility vehicle under this section. 
B.  Possession of permit . The permit holder shall have in his/her possession at all times when operating the utility vehicle and shall produce on demand of a peace officer a valid permit for operation of the utility vehicle. 
C.  Compliance with state statute . The permit holder shall comply with the provisions of Minn. Stat. § 169.045. 
D.  Effective liability insurance . The permit holder shall have liability insurance coverage in compliance with the provisions of Minn. Stat. §§ 65B.41—65B.71 in full force and effect when operating the utility vehicle under this section. 
E.  Nontransferability of permit . Any permit issued under this section shall be nontransferable. 
F.  Operation prohibited within pedestrian walkways and parks . It is unlawful for any person to operate a utility vehicle upon any sidewalk, trail, path or other pedestrian walkway. 
G.  Speed limit . It is unlawful for any person to operate a utility vehicle at a speed in excess of 25 miles per hour. 
H.  Times of operation . Utility vehicles may only be operated on designated streets or in a designated district from sunrise to sunset, unless equipped with original equipment headlights, taillights, and rear-facing brake lights. 
I.  Operation prohibited in inclement weather . Utility vehicles shall not be operated in inclement weather or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions, or at any time when there is insufficient visibility to clearly see persons and vehicles on the street at a distance of 500 feet. 
J.  Equipment . All equipment required by state law for the utility vehicle must be in good, working condition at all times when such utility vehicle is in operation. 
K.  Operation on permitted designated streets. Utility vehicle shall be operated only on permitted designated streets within the designated use district for which the permit was issued and it shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to know the permitted designated streets. 
L.  Safe operation. The permit holder shall operate the utility vehicle in accordance with all traffic laws as applicable to motor vehicles and shall operate in a safe and prudent manner. 
Subd. 9. Permit term and renewal. The term of a permit issued under this section shall be from the date of issuance to June 30 of the subsequent odd-numbered year. A permit hereunder may not be renewed unless an application for permit renewal is filed in accordance with the provisions of this section governing the filing of the original permit application. The permit shall automatically terminate when: 
A.  The permit holder ceases employment with or is no longer working for the business or commercial operation for which the utility vehicle use was operated; or 
B.  The liability coverage required under this section lapses or is canceled. 
Subd. 10. Revocation of permit. The following shall constitute grounds for revocation of a permit issued under this section: 
A.  Any violation of any provision of this section or any conditions of the permit issued hereunder; 
B.  Upon clear and convincing evidence that the permit holder cannot safely operate the utility vehicle due to physical conditions; 
C.  Upon clear and convincing evidence that the permit holder failed to safely operate the utility vehicle. 
Subd. 11. Exception. This section does not apply to the use of a utility vehicle upon streets within the city by any of the following: 
A.  An employee or contractor of the City of Eagan operating a city-owned or contracted vehicle; or 
B.  A person with mobility impairment or any person assisting a person with mobility impairment to whom a permit was issued and as regulated elsewhere in the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 538, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-3-2015)  
Secs. 8.11—8.98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8.99. - Violation a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor. 
Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
Subd. 1.  Where the specific section, subdivision, paragraph or provision specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he stands convicted of violation of any provision of this chapter, exclusive of violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended vehicle, within the immediate preceding 12-month period for the third or subsequent time, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
Subd. 2.  As to any violations not constituting a misdemeanor under the provisions of subdivision 1 hereof, he shall be punished as for a petty misdemeanor. 
Subd. 3.  As to any violation of a provision adopted by reference, he shall be punished as specified in such provision, so adopted. 
(Code 1983, § 8.99, eff. 1-1-83)  
Chapter 9 - PARKING REGULATIONS[1] 
(SEE CHAPTER 7 FOR DEFINITIONS, SCOPE AND APPLICATION RELATING TO THIS CHAPTER) 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Police department, § 2.31; streets and sidewalks generally, ch. 7; traffic regulations, ch. 8; prohibited use and parking of mobile homes and recreational camping vehicles, § 10.52. 
 
Sec. 9.01. - Presumption. 
As to any vehicle parking in violation of chapters 7, 8 and 9 when the driver thereof is not present, it shall be presumed that the owner parked the same or that the driver was acting as the agent of the owner. 
(Code 1983, § 9.01, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 9.02. - General parking prohibitions. 
It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the specific directions of a police officer or traffic control device in any of the following places: (1) on a sidewalk or trailway; (2) in front of a public or private driveway or trailway; (3) within an intersection; (4) within ten feet of a fire hydrant or mailbox; (5) on a crosswalk; (6) within 20 feet of a crosswalk at any intersection; (7) in a signposted fire lane; (8) within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway; (9) within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; (10) within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of said entrance when properly signposted; (11) alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; (12) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; (13) at any place where official signs prohibit or restrict stopping, parking or both; (14) in any alley, except for loading or unloading and then only so long as reasonably necessary for such loading and unloading to or from adjacent premises; or (15) on any boulevard which has been curbed. 
(Code 1983, § 9.02, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 153, 2nd series, eff. 12-11-92)  
Sec. 9.03. - Recreational camping vehicle parking. 
Subd. 1.  Definition. The term "recreational camping vehicle" means any of the following: 
A.  Travel trailer means a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses, permanently identified "travel trailer" by the manufacturer of the trailer. 
B.  Pickup coach means a structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation. 
C.  Motor home means a portable, temporary building to be used for travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 
D.  Camping trailer means a folding structure, mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation and vacation uses. 
Subd. 2.  Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person to leave or park a recreational camping vehicle on or within the limits of any street or right-of-way for a continuous period in excess of 24 hours, except where signs are erected designating the place as a campsite or in a mobile home park. Provided, however, that during such 24-hour period, such vehicle shall not be occupied as living quarters. 
(Code 1983, § 9.03, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 9.04. - Unauthorized removal. 
It is unlawful for any person to move a vehicle not owned by such person into any prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1983, § 9.04, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 9.05. - Direction to proceed. 
It is unlawful for any person to stop or park a vehicle on a street when directed or ordered to proceed by any police officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. 
(Code 1983, § 9.05, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 9.06. - Parallel parking. 
Except where angle parking is specifically allowed and indicated by curb marking or signposting or both, each vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way road where there is an adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the righthand wheels of the vehicle parallel with and within 12 inches of the righthand curb, and, where painted markings appear on the curb or the street, such vehicle shall be within such markings, front and rear; provided that upon a one-way roadway all vehicles shall be so parked, except that the lefthand wheels of the vehicle may be parallel with and within 12 inches from the lefthand curb, but the front of the vehicle in any event and, with respect to the remainder of the vehicle, shall be in the direction of the flow of traffic upon such one-way street; and it is unlawful to park in violation of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 9.06, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 9.07. - Streets without curb. 
Upon streets not having a curb, each vehicle shall be stopped or parked parallel and to the right of the paving, improved or main traveled part of the street, and it is unlawful to park in violation of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 9.07, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 9.08. - Parking hours. 
Parking on streets shall be limited as follows: 
Subd. 1.  The chief of police may, when authorized by resolution of the council, designate certain streets, blocks or portions of streets or blocks as prohibited parking zones, or five-minute, ten-minute, 15-minute, 30-minute, one-hour, two-hour, four-hour, six-hour, eight-hour, 24-hour, morning or afternoon rush hour limited parking zones and shall mark by appropriate signs any zones so established. Such zones shall be established whenever necessary for the convenience of the public or to minimize traffic hazards and preserve a free flow of traffic. It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave standing any vehicle in a prohibited parking zone, for a period of time in excess of the signposted limitation, or during signposted hours of prohibited parking. 
Subd. 2.  It is unlawful for any person to remove, erase or otherwise obliterate any mark or sign placed upon a tire or other part of a vehicle by a police officer for the purpose of measuring the length of time such vehicle has been parked. 
Subd. 3.  For the purpose of enforcement of this section, any vehicle moved less than one block in a limited time parking zone shall be deemed to have remained stationary. 
(Code 1983, § 9.08, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 9.09. - Winter season parking. 
Subd. 1.  The winter season in which the following parking restrictions are applicable is hereby defined as beginning on November 15 of each year and continuing through April 15 of the following year. 
Subd. 2.  Parking. 
A.  On odd-numbered days parking shall be permitted only on that side of the street with odd-numbered addresses for a period of 12 hours beginning at 6:00 a.m. and continuing until 6:00 p.m. 
B.  On even-numbered days parking shall be permitted only on that side of the street with even-numbered addresses for a period of 12 hours beginning at 6:00 a.m. and continuing until 6:00 p.m. 
C.  The director of public works may post signs along the frontage roads located north and south of Diffley Road between Rahn Road and Nicols Road prohibiting parking on either side of the street until it is plowed to its full width following a snowfall of two inches or more. The signs shall state "No Parking Both Sides Until Plowed Entire Width 2 Inches of Snow or More." 
D.  The city council may establish parking restrictions by resolution and direct signs be posted for applicable streets that have either even addresses on both sides of the street or odd addresses on both sides of the street. 
Subd. 3.  Impounding and removing vehicles. If any vehicle is parked, abandoned, or left standing in violation of the terms of this section, the vehicle may be moved by the city in accordance with the terms of section 9.12 of this Code entitled Impounding and Removing Vehicles. 
(Code 1983, § 9.09, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 78, 2nd series, eff. 3-31-89; Ord. No. 403, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 10-3-06)  
Sec. 9.10. - Truck, trailer and commercial vehicle parking. 
Subd. 1.  It is unlawful to park a detached semitrailer upon any street, city-owned parking lot, or other public property, except streets as specifically designated by the council by resolution and signposted. 
Subd. 2.  It is unlawful to park a semitrailer, truck tractor, or a combination thereof within an area zoned as a residential district, except for the purpose of loading or unloading the same. 
Subd. 3.  It is unlawful to park a truck of more than 9,000 pounds gross vehicle weight upon any street in the business district which has been duly signposted prohibiting the same, but parking of such vehicle for a period of not more than 20 minutes shall be permitted in such space for the purpose of necessary access to abutting property while actively loading or unloading when such access cannot reasonably be secured from an alley or from an adjacent street where truck parking is not so restricted. 
Subd. 4.  It is unlawful to park a truck or other vehicle using or equipped with a trailer or extended body or other extension or projection beyond the original length of such vehicle or any passenger bus diagonally along any street except for a time sufficient to load or unload, and in such case only parallel parking shall be permitted. Provided, however, that a truck may stand backed up to the curb if the weight or bulk of the load makes parallel parking impracticable, but then only for a period of time sufficient to load or unload. 
Subd. 5.  Parking of commercial vehicles is permitted in duly designated and signposted loading zones and in alleys, for a period of up to 20 minutes, provided that such alley parking does not prevent the flow of traffic therein, all of which shall be for the purpose of access to abutting or adjacent property while actively loading or unloading. 
Subd. 6.  It is unlawful to park any detached trailer upon any street for a continuous period of more than 24 hours. 
Subd. 7.  It is unlawful to park any vehicle in excess of 9,000 pounds gross vehicle weight upon any residential street for a continuous period of more than six hours. 
(Code 1983, § 9.10, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 85, 2nd series, eff. 6-16-89; Ord. No. 293, 2nd series, eff. 7-27-00)  
Sec. 9.11. - Parking rules in city parking lots and ramps. 
In city-owned parking lots and ramps, the council may limit the sizes and types of motor vehicles to be parked thereon, hours of parking, and prescribed method of parking, provided that such limitations and restrictions are marked or signposted thereon. It is unlawful to park or leave standing any vehicle backed into a parking place, to drive in a direction opposite the flow of traffic marked by "one-way" signs or arrows, or to park any vehicle in any city-owned parking lot or ramp contrary to the restrictions or limitations marked or signposted therein. 
(Code 1983, § 9.11, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 9.12. - Impounding and removing vehicles. 
Subd. 1.  Vehicles in violation of parking regulations and subject to removal. When any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or city-owned parking lot in violation of any parking regulation, such officer is hereby authorized to require the driver or other person in charge of such vehicle to remove the same to a position in compliance with this chapter. When any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street or city-owned parking lot in violation of any parking regulation or is otherwise subject to towing and impoundment under Minnesota state laws, the officer is hereby authorized to impound such vehicle and to provide for the removal thereof to a convenient garage or other facility or place of safety. 
Subd. 2.  Release of impounded vehicles. Any motor vehicle impounded under this section shall only be released from impoundment: 
A.  To the registered owner or person authorized by the registered owner, a lienholder of record, or a person who has purchased the vehicle from the registered owner who provides proof of ownership of the vehicle, proof of valid state driving privileges, and proof of insurance required by law to cover the vehicle; 
B.  If the vehicle is subject to a rental or lease agreement, to a renter or lessee with valid state driving privileges who provides a copy of the rental or lease agreement and proof of insurance required by law to cover the vehicle; or 
C.  To an agent of a towing company authorized by the registered owner, renter or lessee if the owner provides proof of ownership of or the renter or lessee provides a copy of the rental or lease agreement for the vehicle and proof of insurance required by law to cover the vehicle; and 
D.  Upon payment of any charge placed against such vehicle for cost of removal or storage or both by anyone called upon to assist therewith. 
Subd. 3.  To whom information provided. The proof of ownership, valid driving privileges and insurance, and, when applicable, the copy of the rental or lease agreement shall be provided to a licensed police officer at the police department or to an agent of the towing company acting on behalf of the police department. 
(Code 1983, § 9.12, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 160, 2nd series, eff. 3-26-93; Ord. No. 553, 2nd series, eff. 6-7-2016)  
Sec. 9.13. - Unattended vehicle. 
Subd. 1.  It is unlawful for any person to leave a motor vehicle unattended while the engine is running. 
Subd. 2.  It is unlawful for any person to leave a motor vehicle unattended with the key in the ignition. 
(Code 1983, § 9.13, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 9.14. - Vehicle repair on street. 
It is unlawful for any person to service, repair, assemble or dismantle any vehicle parked upon a street or attempt to do so, except to service such vehicle with gasoline or oil or to provide emergency repairs thereon, but in no event for more than six hours. 
(Code 1983, § 9.14, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 9.15. - Parking for the purpose of advertising or selling merchandise. 
It is unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle or vehicle on any street or city-owned property for the purpose of advertising such motor vehicle or vehicle for sale, for the purpose of advertising for sale or selling merchandise thereon or therefrom, or advertising a forthcoming event. This section shall not apply to any person who is selling merchandise from a motor vehicle that travels through the streets and stops only to make an immediate sale and does not park to await customers or sales. This section shall not apply to any person who is (1) a registered vendor with the city or an organization or entity that was granted a park facility permit or special event permit from the city; and (2) granted a vendor permit from the city's director of parks and recreation as governed elsewhere in this Code. 
It is unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle or vehicle on private property for the purpose of advertising such motor vehicle or vehicle for sale. The foregoing provision shall not apply to private residential property provided the vehicle is parked in a private driveway and not within any roadway or common area. It is unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle or vehicle on private property for the purpose of offering for sale or selling merchandise therefrom, unless the person has the property owner's consent and the sale of merchandise on the property is authorized under the zoning regulations set forth elsewhere in this Code. 
For purposes of this section only, the terms "motor vehicle" and "vehicle" shall have the meanings provided in Minn. Stat. § 168.002 and the term "vehicle" shall include devices moved by human power or any vehicle not originally constructed primarily for use on public roads and highways. 
(Code 1983, § 9.15, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 61, 2nd series, eff. 6-24-88; Ord. No. 475, 2nd series, § 1, 4-5-2011; Ord. No. 493, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-8-2012)  
Sec. 9.16. - Physically handicapped parking. 
Subd. 1.  Statutory parking privileges for physically handicapped shall be strictly observed and enforced. Police officers are authorized to tag vehicles on either private or public property in violation of such statutory privileges. 
Subd. 2.  It is unlawful for any person, whether or not physically handicapped, to stop, park, or leave standing, a motor vehicle (1) in a signposted fire lane at any time, or (2) in lanes where and during such hours as parking is prohibited to accommodate heavy traffic during morning and afternoon rush hours. 
(Code 1983, § 9.16, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 15, 2nd series, eff. 4-27-84) 
State Law reference— Parking privileges for physically disabled, Minn. Stat. § 169.345 et seq.  
Sec. 9.17. - Special parking regulations. 
Subd. 1.  Resident permit parking. 
A.  Stafford Place Neighborhood. It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, as defined in Minn. Stat. Chapter 168, on any street within the Stafford Place Neighborhood that is duly designated as a prohibited street by resolution of the city council (hereinafter "resident permit parking zone") or violation of any parking restriction duly adopted by resolution of the Eagan City Council, unless a resident parking permit has been issued by the city and is displayed in the vehicle. A map depicting the prohibited streets and parking restrictions thereon in Stafford Place Neighborhood shall be available for public inspection in the public works department. 
This section shall not supercede and shall be in addition to all other parking restrictions and regulations under this Code or state law. 
B.  Permit regulations. 
1.  Only persons who can verify permanent residence at a residential property which abuts the street within the resident permit parking zone shall be eligible to obtain a resident parking permit from the city. 
2.  The permit shall be issued for the residential property address and shall be in effect so long as the resident who obtained the permit resides at the property. 
3.  The permit issued hereunder shall be conspicuously displayed from the rear view mirror inside the vehicle while parked on the street during the restricted parking hours. 
4.  No more than three permits shall be issued for any one residential property. 
5.  The permit may be used by or for any vehicle with the consent of the resident permit holder. 
C.  Permit application and fee. 
1.  A resident parking permit may be obtained by an eligible person, subject to the permit regulations stated herein, upon completing and filing with the city a permit application on a form provided by the city. 
2.  Any eligible resident may obtain a duplicate or replacement resident parking permit for any permit previously issued that is lost or destroyed. The permit for which the duplicate permit is issued shall be invalidate and no longer in effect. 
3.  The permit fee and any duplicate permit fee shall be established by city council resolution. 
D.  Exemption. 
1.  Persons who are performing services, maintenance, repairs, or emergency assistance at a residence within the resident permit parking zone shall be exempt from the parking restrictions set forth in this subdivision, provided the person's vehicle has exterior markings or signage identifying the service provider and no parking shall be permitted at any time immediately upon and after the completion of the services or assistance. 
2.  This subdivision shall not apply to any city-owned or contracted vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 362, 2nd series, eff. 7-24-03)  
Secs. 9.18—9.98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 9.99. - Violation a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor. 
Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
Subd. 1.  Where the specific section, subdivision, paragraph or provision specifically makes violation a misdemeanor, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he stands convicted of violation of any provision of this chapter, exclusive of violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended vehicle, within the immediate preceding 12-month period for the third or subsequent time, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
Subd. 2.  As to any violation not constituting a misdemeanor under the provisions of subdivision 1 hereof, he shall be punished as for a petty misdemeanor. 
(Code 1983, § 9.99, eff. 1-1-83)  
Chapter 10 - PUBLIC PROTECTION, CRIMES AND OFFENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Police department, § 2.31. 
State Law reference— Criminal Code, Minn. Stat. ch. 609. 
 
Sec. 10.01. - Storage, deposit and disposal of refuse. 
Subd. 1.  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
A.  Garbage means all putrescible wastes, including animal offal and carcasses of dead animals, but excluding human excreta, sewage and other water-carried wastes. 
B.  Refuse means ashes, nonrecyclable glass, crockery, cans, paper, boxes, rags and similar nonputrescible wastes (does not decay or have foul odor), and construction or demolition debris, and wood except when stored as firewood in compliance with section 11.10 subd. 32.C. 
C.  Recyclables means materials that are separated from mixed municipal solid waste for the purpose of recycling, including paper, glass, plastics, metals, automobile oil, and batteries. Refuse-derived fuel or other material that is destroyed by incineration is not a recyclable material. 
D.  Yard waste means leaves, lawn clippings, garden waste, weeds, Christmas trees and prunings up to six inches in diameter or other materials as may be defined by council resolution. 
E.  Residential dwelling means any single building consisting of one through four dwelling units with individual kitchen facilities for each. 
F.  Multiple dwelling means any building used for residential purposes consisting of more than four dwelling units with individual kitchen facilities for each. 
G.  Commercial establishment means any premises where a commercial or industrial enterprise of any kind is carried on, and shall include restaurants, clubs, churches, and schools. 
H.  Association means all cooperative organizations of residential dwelling owners formed for the purpose of joint management of property or services. 
I.  Curbside means the collection point for garbage, yard wastes and recyclables, whereby water tight containers shall be located within the driveway apron or boulevard area behind the street curb and shall not be within the roadway surface area of a street, except where the topography, slope or other impediment of the driveway or boulevard prevent the safe storage of the container and open containers or refuse not placed in containers shall be located not less than three feet from the street or curb. 
J.  Composting means any aboveground microbial process that converts yard waste to organic soil amendment or mulch, excluding winter plant protection coverings less than one foot in height. 
K.  Kitchen waste means rinsed egg shells, coffee grounds and chopped vegetables and fruit remains. 
L.  Construction or demolition debris means waste building materials, packaging and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of buildings. 
Subd. 2.  Storage. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to store garbage or refuse on residential dwelling premises for more than one week. All such storage shall be in watertight, metal or plastic containers of not less than five gallons with tightfitting covers, which shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; provided, that yard waste may be stored in biodegradable bags, and tree limbs must be stored in watertight, metal or plastic containers of not less than five gallons with tightfitting covers or closable plastic or paper bags, and tree limbs must be stored in bundles weighing no more than 60 pounds and no longer than four feet. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to store garbage or refuse or recyclables on multiple dwelling premises for more than one week. Such storage shall be in containers as for residential dwelling premises, except that so called "dumpsters" with close fitting covers may be substituted. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to store garbage or refuse on commercial establishment premises for more than one week, or for a shorter period when collection must be made at more frequent intervals to protect the public health or at the direction of the city. It is unlawful for any person to store recyclables on commercial establishment premises for more than one week. Such storage shall be in containers as for residential dwelling premises, except that so called "dumpsters" with closefitting covers may be substituted. 
D.  In residential dwelling areas, storage containers for garbage, refuse and recyclables shall be permitted at curbside or other permitted collection point from 6:00 p.m. of the night preceding collection day until 6:00 a.m. on the day after designated collection day. At all other times, such containers must be stored inside the dwelling unit or garage or at a point behind the front of the dwelling unit or garage. 
E.  Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions of this subdivision, it shall be unlawful for any person to store any construction or demolition debris on any premises except in a proper container or enclosure as required herein. Any and all construction and demolition debris shall be stored in a roll-off or dumpster-like container or a wire or other temporary constructed enclosure. Any wire or other temporary constructed enclosure that is used for the storage of construction or demolition debris shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Not exceed 160 square feet in area, provided no side of the enclosure shall be greater than 20 feet in length; 
(2)  It shall not exceed five feet in height; 
(3)  It shall be constructed in such a manner that all debris will be adequately maintained if kept within the enclosure; 
(4)  It shall be maintained in good repair and shall not be left at any time in a collapsed conditioned; 
(5)  It shall not be located on an individual lot or parcel for more than six months during any twelve-month period; 
(6)  It shall not be used for storage of any refuse other than construction or demolition debris; and 
(7)  The construction or demolition debris stored within the enclosure shall not exceed three feet in height from the top of the enclosure. 
The containers and enclosures permitted herein shall be clearly labeled with the name and telephone number of the container owner, on the construction or demolition site. 
F.  Backyard composting. 
1.  Requirements. No composting shall be permitted except in residential dwelling districts and agricultural districts upon compliance with the following requirements: 
(a)  Yard waste shall be composted within an enclosure with a minimum of three sides or circular, not to exceed a total of 100 cubic feet in volume for the residential lots of 12,000 square feet or less or 150 cubic feet for residential lots with an area of more than 12,000 square feet. The containers shall be of durable material such as wood, plastic, fiberglass, or metal fencing material; 
(b)  Only yard waste, sawdust, wood ash, straw, kitchen wastes, which have been placed initially in the center of the compost pile, and commercially available compost ingredients to accelerate composting may be placed in the compost enclosure; 
(c)  No meat, bones, fat, oils, dairy products, food other than kitchen waste as defined in subdivision 1, subparagraph K, synthetic fibers, human or pet waste, or diseased plants shall be placed in the compost enclosure; 
(d)  Compost shall be properly maintained to minimize odor generation and to promote effective decomposition of the materials; and 
(e)  The compost enclosure shall be located behind the residential dwelling and shall not be within 30 feet of any habitable building, 30 feet of a public right-of-way, and five feet of any property line. 
(f)  The compost enclosure must be located above the 100-year high water level for the closest adjacent pond. 
G.  Noncompliance. Any violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this subdivision shall constitute a public safety and health hazard and is declared to be a public nuisance. The abatement of the public nuisance shall be in accordance with this chapter. 
Subd. 3.  Deposit. It is unlawful for any person to deposit garbage or other refuse from any source, in any place other than a licensed solid waste facility or county-designated facility. It is unlawful for any person to deposit recyclables or yard waste from any source in any place other than a licensed recycling facility or yard waste processing facility or use other than proper disposal methods as approved by the council. 
Subd. 4.  Fire danger. It is unlawful for any person to store, deposit or dispose of any garbage or other refuse which is in flames or heated to the point where it could cause danger of fire in other refuse. 
Subd. 5.  Disposal. 
A.  Sanitary landfill. The council may, by resolution, adopt and from time to time amend, adjust and revise such rules, regulations, rates and charges as it deems necessary or proper for the operation and management of a licensed sanitary landfill. It may give notice of any such action as it deems necessary. 
B.  Garbage and refuse collection. Every household in residential and multidwelling districts and all commercial establishments shall have garbage and refuse collection. Such collection must be made by a garbage and refuse hauler that is licensed with the city, except commercial establishments and households in a residential district need not contract with a licensed hauler when it hauls its garbage and refuse from its own property and complies with the standards defined in section 6.37, subdivision 3 of the City Code or provided the garbage and refuse is disposed of in an environmentally sound manner. 
Subd. 6.  Joint management hauling contracts. Occupants of residential dwelling properties jointly managed by associations or others shall have the same opportunity to recycle afforded to occupants of other residential dwelling units. It is unlawful for any residential dwelling association or other residential dwelling joint management entity to negotiate, execute or maintain a contract for residential garbage or other refuse collection unless it includes as a part of that contract or as part of a separate contract weekly collection of recyclables occurring on the same day as their refuse collection. 
A.  Occupants of multiple/residential dwelling properties managed by associations or other management entities shall have the same opportunity to recycle afforded to occupants of other residential dwelling units. It is unlawful for any multiple/residential dwelling association or other multiple/residential dwelling joint management entity to negotiate, execute or maintain a contract for multiple/residential garbage or other refuse collection unless it includes as a part of that contract or as part of a separate contract a minimum of weekly collection of recyclables. 
(Code 1983, § 10.01, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 94, 2nd series, eff. 12-15-89; Ord. No. 137, 2nd series, eff. 5-15-92; Ord. No. 223, 2nd series, eff. 9-12-96; Ord. No. 264, 2nd series, eff. 8-13-98; Ord. No. 296, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, 7-27-00; Ord. No. 375, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-25-04; Ord. No. 433, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 11-6-08; Ord. No. 505, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 5-15-2012; Ord. No. 522, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 7-2-2013) 
Cross reference— Municipal and public utilities, ch. 3. 
State Law reference— Waste management, Minn. Stat. ch. 115A.  
Sec. 10.02. - Toilet installation required. 
It is the duty of every owner or occupant of any property within the city, having a dwelling house or business building situated thereon, which property is abutting a street in which there are city water and sewer mains, to install a toilet in such dwelling or business building and make connection thereof with such water and sewer mains. A violation of this section shall constitute a public nuisance and the abatement thereof shall be in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 10.02, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 505, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 5-15-2012) 
Cross reference— Municipal and public utilities, ch. 3.  
Sec. 10.03. - Maintenance of individual sewer systems. 
It is unlawful for the owner or tenant of any premises to permit an individual sewage disposal system to overflow or expose the contents thereof above ground. 
(Code 1983, § 10.03, eff. 1-1-83) 
Cross reference— Municipal and public utilities, ch. 3.  
Secs. 10.04—10.09. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10.10. - Dangerous weapons and articles. 
Subd. 1.  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
A.  Use means, with respect to a weapon, to brandish, assault with, threaten with, or otherwise employ in a manner calculated and likely to cause death, bodily harm, or the reasonable and immediate fear thereof. 
B.  Weapon means any device designed as a weapon and capable of producing death, bodily harm, or any other device or instrumentality which, in the manner it is used or intended to be used, is calculated or likely to produce death, bodily harm, or the reasonable and immediate fear thereof. Weapon includes, but is not limited to, Chinese throwing star, nunchaku, sharp stud, metal knuckles, sand club, switch knife, trench knife, butterfly knife, stiletto knife, or any double-edged knife, and any firearm or gun or explosive. 
Subd. 2.  Firearms regulation. The provisions of the Minnesota Statutes regulating firearms and as they may be hereafter amended are incorporated into this section. It is a violation of this section for any person to engage in any conduct proscribed in the incorporated statutes. 
Subd. 3.  Acts prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to: 
A.  Recklessly handle or use a gun or other weapon or explosive so as to endanger the safety of another. Among the actions and circumstances that may support a reasonable belief that a person's conduct is reckless are the following: 
1.  Intentionally point a gun of any kind, capable of injuring or killing a human being and whether loaded or unloaded, at or toward another; or 
2.  Intentionally draw a loaded firearm from a pocket or from a holster, sheath, bag, or other container. 
B.  Manufacture, sell, transfer, possess, carry or control for any unlawful purpose any weapon as described in subdivision 1.B, above. 
C.  Possess any other dangerous article or substance for the purpose of being used unlawfully as a weapon against another; and 
D.  Sell, transfer, carry, control or have in his possession any device designed to silence or muffle the discharge of a firearm; or 
E.  Permit, as a parent or guardian, any child under 14 years of age to handle or use, outside the parent's or guardian's presence, a firearm or airgun of any kind or any ammunition or explosives; or 
F.  Furnish a minor under 18 years of age with a firearm, airgun, ammunition or explosive without the written consent of his parent or guardian or of the police department. 
G.  Fire or discharge any cannon, gun, pistol or other firearm, firecracker, sky rocket or other fireworks, airgun, air rifle, or other similar device commonly referred to as a BB gun. 
Subd. 4.  Exception. Subdivision 3 of this section shall not apply to: 
A.  A display of fireworks by an organization or group of organizations operating under a permit issued by the council pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 624.22. Proof of liability insurance in an amount set by council resolution shall also be required. This insurance shall name the city as an additional insured party. 
B.  A person in the lawful defense of person, family or property. 
C.  The discharge of firearms within an indoor firearms shooting range operating under a license issued by the city after January 1, 2015, at the Apple Valley/Eagan police firearm range, or in or at an approved firearms shooting range operating under a permit issued by the council prior to August 15, 1989. 
D.  Law enforcement or military personnel while in the course of their duties. 
E.  Any person participating in a special hunting season, which season may not conflict with state law or regulations, established by the council for purposes of wildlife management, provided that person has obtained a special hunting permit. Any person under 18 years of age participating in a special hunting season organized by the DNR and established by the council, for purposes of wildlife management, must be accompanied by an adult selected to participate. 
F.  Any person, who is 14 or 15 years of age and accompanied by a parent or guardian who is 16 years of age or older, actively participating in a game of paintball within a licensed paintball facility under chapter 6 of the City Code. 
G.  Any person duly appointed and designated by the police chief and issued a special permit or any law enforcement personnel while in the course of and for the purposes of wildlife management and control at the direction of the police chief. For purposes of this clause, the term "wildlife" shall mean wild animals or animals living in a natural, undomesticated condition, including, but not limited to: coyote, skunk, raccoon, possum, bear, or fox. 
Subd. 5.  Carrying and transporting of firearms. Except where otherwise specifically authorized by law, it is unlawful to carry any firearm unless it is unloaded and encased in a proper case or to transport any firearm in a motor vehicle unless it is in the trunk, unloaded, and encased in a proper case. In motor vehicles which do not have a trunk, it shall be in that portion thereof not designed for carrying passengers. 
Subd. 6.  Possession and sale of fireworks. It is unlawful for any person to sell, possess or have in possession for the purpose of sale, except as allowed in subdivision 4 of this section, any firecrackers, sky rockets or other fireworks. 
Subd. 7.  Exposure of unused container. It is unlawful for any person, being the owner or in possession or control thereof, to permit an unused refrigerator, icebox, or other container, sufficiently large to retain any child and with doors which fasten automatically when closed, to expose the same accessible to children, without removing the doors, lids, hinges or latches. 
Subd. 8.  Use of bow and arrow. It is unlawful for any person to shoot a bow and arrow except in the physical education program in a school supervised by a member of its faculty, a communitywide supervised class or event specifically authorized by the chief of police, or a bow and arrow range, or by any person participating in a special bow and arrow hunting season, which season may not conflict with state law or regulations established by the council for the purpose of wildlife management, or such other place during such time or times as authorized by the council. 
(Code 1983, § 10.10, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 171, 2nd series, eff. 10-29-93; Ord. No. 212, 2nd series, eff. 2-15-96; Ord. No. 389, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 6-25-05; Ord. No. 541, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-17-2015)  
Sec. 10.11. - Dog, cat, ferret and horse regulation and dog licensing. 
Subd. 1.  Definitions. 
At large . With regard to dogs, cats and ferrets, at large means off the premises of the owner and is neither controlled by a leash or voice command of owner of suitable age nor confined in a vehicle or cage. With regard to horses, at large means not picketed, confined in a corral or otherwise restricted by a properly constructed and maintained fence. With regard to miniature pigs, at large means either (1) off the premises of the owner and neither controlled by a leash nor confined in a vehicle or cage; or (2) on the premises of the owner but not restricted within a properly constructed and maintained fence. 
Business day means a day during which the city hall is open to the public. 
Cat means any domesticated feline animal, male or female, whole or neutered. 
Dog means any domesticated dog, male or female, whole or neutered. Any wolf or wolf hybrid shall be deemed as an animal wild by nature and shall not be deemed as a "dog" under this section. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that has: 
1.  Without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a human being on public or private property; 
2.  Killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's property; or 
3.  Been found to be potentially dangerous, and after the owner has notice that the dog is potentially dangerous, the dog aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals. 
Ferret means any male or female domesticated polecat, whole or neutered. 
Great bodily harm means bodily injury which creates a high probability of death, or which causes serious permanent disfigurement, or which causes a permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ or other serious bodily harm. 
Hearing officer means the city administrator, or any other city employee, as duly appointed by the city administrator. 
Horse means any domesticated horse, pony or equine animal, male or female, whole or neutered. 
Miniature pig means domesticated swine that at maturity weighs less than 200 pounds. 
Off-leash dog area means a city-designated area within a city park wherein dogs may be permitted to be unrestrained in compliance with this chapter and city park regulations. 
Owner means any person, firm, corporation, organization, or department possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in, or having care, custody, or control of a dog, cat, ferret, horse, or miniature pig. 
Physical restraint means the dog is controlled or kept as to prevent it from running at large through any of the following means or methods: 
1.  Kept inside of a residence; 
2.  Kept inside a pen, cage or fenced area which is constructed strong enough to contain the dog; 
3.  A picketed cable or leash, which is short enough to keep the dog from leaving the property or entering upon any public right-of-way, yet which is long enough to not unreasonably interfere with the dog's movement; 
4.  Kept inside the perimeter of a buried electronic barrier/collar system, provided the dog is trained in accordance with the system, the dog is wearing the collar, and the electronic barrier system is properly functioning; 
5.  Collar leash or chain no longer than six feet, and under the control of an accompanying person while off the owner's property; or 
6.  Temporarily secured within a vehicle. 
Potential dangerous dog means any dog that has: 
(1)  When unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human or domestic animal on public or private property. 
(2)  When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person, including a person on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private property, other than the dog owner's property, in an apparent attitude of attack; or 
(3)  Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or domestic animals. 
Pound means any facility or establishment of the city or a private agency, person, society or corporation, having the custody and possession of animals which are seized under the authority of the city pursuant to the City Code. 
Pound master means the individual in charge of the daily operations of the pound, as defined herein. 
Proper enclosure means securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the animal from escaping and providing protection from the elements for the dog. A proper enclosure does not include a porch, patio, or any part of a house, garage, or other structure that would allow the dog to exit of its own volition, or any house or structure in which windows are open or in which door or window screens are the only obstacles that prevent the dog from exiting. 
Provocation means an act that an adult could reasonably expect may cause a dog to attack or bite. 
Substantial bodily harm means bodily injury which involves a temporary but substantial disfigurement, or which causes a temporary but substantial loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ, or which causes a fracture of any bodily member. 
Subd. 2.  Running at large prohibited. It is unlawful for the owner of any dog, cat, ferret, horse or miniature pig to permit such animal to run at large. The police officer or animal control officer may seize, impound or restrain any dog, cat, ferret, horse, or miniature pig found running at large. Subdivisions 4 and 5 shall apply to any dog, cat, ferret, horse, or miniature pig impounded under this subdivision. This subdivision shall not apply to a dog running at large within the confines of an off-leash dog area, provided that the owner of the dog, as defined herein, is present within the confines of the off-leash dog area and within close enough proximity to the dog to be able to physically restrain the dog when necessary or if so directed by a police officer or animal control officer. 
Subd. 3.  Dog license required . It is unlawful for the owner of any dog, four months of age or more, to keep said dog within the city without first obtaining a license therefor from the city. Within ten days of the date the owner acquired the dog or the owner of the dog moved into and made residence within the city, the owner of the dog shall obtain the dog license. 
A.  Application . Application for a dog license shall be upon a form supplied by the city. The application shall be fully completed by providing all information requested. By submitting an application, whether by paper or electronic format, the dog owner shall be deemed to have certified that all information provided is true and correct and to have granted authorization for release of information by the dog's veterinarian to verify the status of the dog's rabies inoculation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to provide false information on the license application. A license based on false information shall be deemed null and void. 
B.  Period and fees . All dog licenses shall expire on February 20 of each even-numbered year. All fees for the licensing of dogs, including penalties for late application, shall be fixed and determined by a duly adopted resolution of the city council. 
C.  Tag required . Upon payment of the license fee, the city clerk-treasurer shall deliver one appropriate tag to the owner of the said licensed dog. It is unlawful for the owner of any dog to fail to have the tag firmly affixed to a collar, which shall at all times be kept on the dog for which the license is issued. A duplicate for a lost tag may be issued by the city upon presentation of the receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the current year. Tags shall be nontransferable, and no refund shall be made on any license fee because of leaving the city or death of the dog before the expiration of the license. 
D.  Impoundment . The police officers or duly appointed animal control officer may seize, impound or restrain any unlicensed dog or any dog without the license tag found in the city. The fact that a dog is without a tag attached to a collar shall be presumptive evidence that the dog is unlicensed. To enforce this section, said officers are empowered and instructed to enter upon any public or private property on which they have reasonable cause to believe there is a dog that is not licensed or tagged as required under this subdivision. 
Subd. 3(a).  Miniature pig license required. 
A.  It is unlawful for the owner of any miniature pig, two months of age or more, to keep said miniature pig within the city without first obtaining a license therefor from the city. Within ten days of the date the owner acquired the miniature pig or the owner of the miniature pig moved into and made residence within the city, the owner of the miniature pig shall obtain the miniature pig license. 
B.  Application . Application for a miniature pig license shall be upon a form supplied by the city. The application shall be fully completed by providing all information requested. By submitting an application, whether by paper or electronic format, the miniature pig owner shall be deemed to have certified that all information provided is true and correct and to have granted authorization for release of information by the miniature pig's veterinarian to verify the status of the miniature pig's rabies inoculation and spay/neuter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to provide false information on the license application. A license based on false information shall be deemed null and void. 
C.  Period and fees. All miniature pig licenses shall expire on February 20 of each even-numbered year. All fees for the licensing of miniature pigs, including penalties for late application, shall be fixed and determined by a duly adopted resolution of the city council. 
D.  Tag required. Upon payment of the license fee, the city clerk-treasurer shall deliver one appropriate tag to the owner of the said licensed miniature pig. It is unlawful for the owner of any miniature pig to fail to have the tag firmly affixed to a harness, which shall be kept on the miniature pig for which the license is issued whenever the miniature pig is outside its fenced enclosure. A duplicate for a lost tag may be issued by the city upon presentation of the receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the current year. Tags shall be nontransferable, and no refund shall be made on any license fee because of leaving the city or death of the miniature pig before the expiration of the license. 
E.  Impoundment . The police officers or duly appointed animal control officer may seize, impound or restrain any unlicensed miniature pig or any miniature pig found in the city without the license tag. The fact that a miniature pig is without a tag attached to a harness shall be presumptive evidence that the miniature pig is unlicensed. To enforce this section, said officers are empowered and instructed to enter upon any public or private property on which they have reasonable cause to believe there is a miniature pig that is not licensed or tagged as required under this subdivision. 
F.  Conditions of license . No person may keep or harbor a miniature pig within the city and no license will be issued or renewed unless the following requirements are met: 
1.  The miniature pig shall be spayed or neutered and the license application shall include verification from a veterinarian duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine by the state of Minnesota or other state within the United States; 
2.  The property at which the miniature pig will be kept, maintained and harbored is a parcel or lot zoned for single-family detached dwelling; miniature pig may not be kept, maintained or harbored within any other zoning district except agriculture; 
3.  The property has and will maintain a fence no less than four feet in height, with the enclosed area of no less than 250 square feet, and in accordance all zoning regulations for fences set forth elsewhere in this Code and the fence shall be of a type that will fully enclose and keep the miniature pig within the owner's property; and 
4.  Slaughtering of a miniature pig on any property zoned for residential use is prohibited. 
A license may be revoked upon a finding that any of the above conditions are not met by the owner of the miniature pig. 
Subd. 4.  Disposition of impounded dogs, cats, ferrets, horses and miniature pigs. 
A.  Notice of impounding . The officer who seized, impounded or restrained any dog, cat, ferret, horse or miniature pig pursuant to subdivisions 2 and 3 of this section shall, without delay, notify the owner, personally or through the United States mail, if such owner be known to the officer or can be ascertained with reasonable effort, but if the owner be unknown or cannot be ascertained, then the officer shall make available to the police department, city hall and impounding kennel for public inspection the following information: 
(1)  A description of the dog, cat, ferret, horse, or miniature pig as applicable; 
(2)  Location of impoundment; and 
(3)  The condition for its release. 
B.  Redemption . All dogs, cats, ferrets, horses and miniature pigs (hereinafter "the animal") seized, impounded or restrained pursuant to this section must be held by the pound master for redemption by the owner for at least five regular business days of the pound, except in the case of horses, ten regular business days. For the purpose of this section, "regular business day" means a day during which the pound is open to the public not less than four consecutive hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. If, after the expiration of the required holding period set forth above the owner does not claim the animal, then any right of redemption shall be deemed to have been waived, and the animal shall be disposed of as provided in subparagraph C. of this subdivision. Any impounded animal shall be released to its owner upon payment of fees in connection with the impoundment, and in the case of a dog, cat, or ferret harbored or kept within the city, the owner shall, in addition to paying any fees for impoundment, obtain a license, if required and provide proof of rabies immunization of the animal within 48 hours of release, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. 
C.  Disposition of unclaimed dogs, cats, ferrets, horses or miniature pigs. Any dog, cat, ferret, horse, or miniature pig which is not claimed within the required holding period, as defined in subparagraph B of this subdivision, must be made available to any licensed institution which has requested the animal as required by Minn. Stat. § 35.71. If a tag affixed to the animal or a statement by the animal's owner after the animal's seizure specifies that the animal may not be used for research, the animal must not be made available to any such institution and may, in the discretion of the pound, be sold for not less than the amount of the required licensing fee, if applicable, to anyone desiring to purchase the animal, or be destroyed in a proper and humane manner after the expiration of the five-day period. 
Subd. 5.  Animal pound records. Upon the impoundment of any dog, cat, ferret, horse, or miniature pig pursuant to this section, an accurate record of the time of such impoundment shall be kept on each animal. Impoundment records shall be preserved for a minimum of six months and shall show (1) the description of the animal by species, breed, sex, approximate age, and other distinguishing traits; (2) the location at which the animal was seized; (3) the date of seizure; (4) the name and address of the person from whom any animal was received; and (5) the name and address of the person to whom any animal three months of age or over was transferred. 
Subd. 6.  Public nuisance. It is unlawful for the owner of any dog, cat, or miniature pig to: 
A.  Unlawful acts. It is unlawful for the owner of any dog, cat or miniature pig to: 
1.  Permit such animal to habitually bark, cry, whimper, howl, whine, or emit any other loud or unusual noises; 
2.  Permit such animal to damage or defecate in or upon public property or the property of another; 
3.  Permit dog, cat, or miniature pig feces to accumulate on the owner's premises for more than 24 hours; 
4.  Interfere with any police officer or other city employee in the performance of his duty to enforce this section; 
5.  Keep or own four or more dogs, or cats, or miniature pig or combination thereof over four months of age on a property without a kennel permit. 
B.  Impoundment . The animal control officer or police officer may seize, impound or restrain any dog, cat, or miniature pig which has been permitted to habitually bark, cry, whimper, howl, whine or emit any other loud or unusual noise for a period of two or more hours whenever the owner of such animal cannot be immediately located or has failed, upon order by the animal control officer or a police officer, to prevent such animal from habitually making such noises. Subdivisions 4 and 5 of this section shall apply to any dog, cat or miniature pig impounded under this subdivision. 
Subd. 7.  Potentially dangerous or dangerous dogs. 
A.  Minn. Stat. §§ 347.50—347.565 adopted by reference. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the regulatory and procedural provisions of Minn. Stat. §§ 347.50—347.565 (commonly referred to as the dangerous dog regulations), as amended, are hereby incorporated herein and adopted by reference, including the penalty provisions thereof. 
B.  Declaration of potentially dangerous or dangerous dog. A city police officer, community service officer or animal control officer may declare a dog to be potentially dangerous or dangerous when the officer has probable cause to believe that the dog is potentially dangerous or dangerous as defined herein. A written notice declaring the dog potentially dangerous or dangerous shall be delivered or mailed to the owner of the dog, or posted at the place where the dog is kept, or delivered to a person residing on the property where the dog is kept, and by telephone, if possible. The officer shall provide a copy of the notice served upon the dog owner, along with an affidavit of service, to the city clerk. 
For purposes of declaring a dog potentially dangerous or dangerous, the notice must include a copy of the provisions of this section and Minn. Stat. §§ 347.50—347.565 and a form, with instructions, to request an appeal of the declaration of the owner's dog as potentially dangerous or dangerous. 
Beginning 180 days from the date a dog is declared dangerous or the date of the hearing officer's written findings of fact and conclusions affirming the declaration of the dog as dangerous if the owner appealed the notice of declaration of dangerous dog, the dog owner may request annually that the city review the designation. The owner shall provide clear and convincing evidence that the dog's behavior has changed due to the dog's age, neutering, environment, completion of obedience training that includes modification of aggressive behavior, or other factors rendering the dog no longer dangerous. The hearing officer shall review the evidence without hearing and if the hearing officer finds sufficient evidence that the dog's behavior has changed and the dog is no longer dangerous, the hearing officer may rescind the dangerous dog designation. 
C.  Appeal. Any owner of a dog declared potentially dangerous or dangerous may appeal the declaration by serving upon the city clerk, within 14 days of receipt of the notice declaring the dog potentially dangerous or dangerous, inclusive of the date the notice is received, a written notice of appeal. The dog owner shall deposit the sum of $1,000.00, as and for hearing expenses, with the city clerk at the time of filing a written notice of appeal for a dangerous dog declaration. 
The appeal hearing shall be heard by the hearing officer within 14 days of receipt of the owner's written request to appeal to determine the validity of the potentially dangerous or dangerous dog designation. The appeal hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner and the Minnesota Rules of Civil Procedure and Rules of Evidence shall not be strictly applied. The hearing need not be transcribed, but may be transcribed at the sole expense of the party who requests transcription. 
After considering all evidence submitted and within ten days after the hearing, the hearing officer shall make written findings of fact and conclusions on the issue of whether the dog is a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog. The findings and conclusions shall be delivered to the dog's owner by hand delivery or registered mail as soon as practical. 
An owner's right to appeal or otherwise contest a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog declaration shall be deemed waived if the owner fails to serve a written request for appeal as required herein or fails to appear at the scheduled appeal hearing date. 
If a dangerous dog designation is upheld by the hearing officer, the dog owner shall pay the city's actual expenses of the hearing, not to exceed $1,000.00 which has been deposited by the dog owner at the time of filing request for appeal. 
D.  Compliance with dangerous dog regulations. Immediately upon receipt of the notice declaring the dog dangerous, the owner shall confine the dog in a proper enclosure and shall notify the city in writing of the dog's subsequent death or relocation. If no timely appeal is received by the city clerk or the appeal hearing officer finds the owner's dog is dangerous, the owner shall comply with the requirements of this section, the provisions of Minn. Stat. §§ 347.50—347.565 and the following: 
The owner of a dangerous dog for which a certificate of registration is required under this paragraph shall pay an annual registration fee, in addition to a fee for the cost of the dangerous dog warning symbol and tag. The fees shall be in the amounts as determined by city council resolution. The owner of a dangerous dog must annually renew the certificate of registration with the city so long as the dangerous dog is located within the city. 
E.  Compliance with potentially dangerous dog regulations. If no timely appeal is received by the city clerk, the owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall implant a microchip in the dog for identification within 14 days of the date of the notice of potentially dangerous dog and provide to the city the name of the microchip manufacturer and identification number. If a hearing is requested and the appeal hearing officer finds the owner's dog is potentially dangerous, the dog owner shall implant a microchip in the dog for identification within 14 days of the hearing officer's findings of fact and conclusion and provide to the city the name of the microchip manufacturer and identification number. All costs related to the purchase and implementation of the chip must be paid by the dog's owner. 
Immediately upon receipt of the notice declaring the dog potentially dangerous, the owner shall maintain the dog under physical restraint at all times including during the pendency of any appeal, and until or unless the declaration is properly rescinded by the city or a court of competent jurisdiction. An owner utilizing a buried electronic barrier/collar system to maintain a potentially dangerous dog under physical restraint, shall file with the police chief documentation verifying the purchase and installation of the system within five days of installation. 
F.  Declaration by another jurisdiction. Any dog declared potentially dangerous by any jurisdiction shall be maintained under physical restraint at all times that the dog is present within the city. The owner of any dog declared potentially dangerous by any other jurisdiction shall: 
1.  Notify the city that the dog has been declared potentially dangerous; 
2.  Implant, or cause to be implanted, a microchip in the dog for identification; and 
3.  Provide to the city the name of the microchip manufacturer and identification number for the microchip implanted within seven days of the date the microchip was implanted. 
Proper notice to the city that another jurisdiction has declared a dog potentially dangerous shall only be completed upon presentation of a copy of the other jurisdiction's notice declaring the dog potentially dangerous. This clause shall apply to any dog that is kept or harbored within the city for more than 48 hours. 
G.  Notice of disposition of potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs. The owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog shall notify the city, in writing, of the death of the dog or its transfer to a new jurisdiction within 30 days of the death or transfer. Following the notice, the owner shall, if requested by the city, execute an affidavit under oath setting forth the circumstances of the dog's death and disposition, or the complete name, address, and telephone number of the person to whom the dog was transferred. 
Subd. 8.  Disposition of certain animals. 
A.  Generally. The hearing officer is authorized to order the destruction or other disposition of any animal upon a finding that: 
(1)  The dog has habitually destroyed property or habitually trespassed in a damaging manner on the property of persons other than the owner; 
(2)  The animal has been declared dangerous, the owner's right to appeal under this section has been exhausted or expired and the owner has failed to comply with the provisions of this section or Minn. Stat. §§ 347.50 through 347.56; or 
(3)  The animal that habitually barks, cries, whimpers, howls, whines, or emits any other loud or unusual noises. 
In the event the hearing officer waives his/her authority under this subparagraph, a sworn complaint of any person that any one of the foregoing facts exist may be brought before a district court judge in this county. Said judge shall issue a summons directed to the owner or person having possession of said animal commanding such person to appear before said judge to show cause why said animal should not be seized and killed or otherwise disposed of by the poundmaster or any police officer or animal control officer. Such summons shall be returnable not more than five days from the date thereof and shall be served at least three days before the time of appearance mentioned therein. Upon such hearing and finding of the facts true as complained of, the judge may either order the animal killed or order the owner to remove it from the city or may order it confined to a designated place or may order its sale or other disposition as herein provided for the impounded animals. 
B.  Notice and hearing. The hearing officer, after having been advised of the existence of such animal as defined in subparagraph A of this subdivision and having decided to retain its authority under this subdivision, shall proceed as follows: 
1.  The owner of the offending animal shall be notified in writing as to the reasons the animal is subjected to disposition under this subdivision and, where applicable, the dates, times, and places of animals and persons bitten, attacked, injured or disfigured or of other violations and shall be given ten days to request a hearing for determination as to the disposition of the animal. If the owner does not request a hearing within ten days of the notice, the council shall make an appropriate order including destruction or other proper disposition of the animal. The owner shall immediately make the animal available to the animal control officer for the ordered disposition. 
2.  If the owner requests a hearing for determination as to the disposition of the animal, the hearing shall be held before the hearing officer at a date not more than three weeks after demand for the hearing. The records of the animal control officer shall be admissible for consideration without further foundation. After considering all evidence, the hearing officer shall make an appropriate order within 30 days of hearing, including destruction or other proper disposition of the animal. The owner shall immediately make the animal available to the animal control officer for the ordered disposition. 
3.  The hearing officer may apply to the district court of the county for subpoenas for hearings under item 2, above. 
C.  Concealing of animals. It is unlawful for any person to harbor, hide or conceal an animal which has been ordered into custody for destruction or other proper disposition. 
Subd. 9.  Immobilization of dogs, cats, ferrets, horses, or miniature pigs. For the purpose of enforcement of this section, any peace officer, animal control officer, or other person assisting a police officer or animal control officer may use a so-called "tranquilizer gun" or other instrument for the purpose of immobilizing or seizing, impounding, or restraining any animal reasonably believed to be in violation of this section. 
Subd. 10.  Rabies control. 
A.  Inoculation . Any owner of a dog, cat, ferret, or miniature pig four or more months of age must have such dog, cat, ferret, or miniature pig inoculated against rabies in accordance with this subdivision and possess a certificate of a veterinarian duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state; which certificate shall state the date on which the animal was inoculated against rabies and the date on which the inoculation expires, thereby establishing that the dog, cat, ferret, or miniature pig has a current inoculation against rabies. 
B.  Animal bites. 
1.  Persons bitten. 
(a)  Whenever any dog, cat, ferret, or miniature pig has bitten a person, the owner, having been so notified, either orally or in writing, must: (1) provide a certificate of current rabies inoculation; and (2) immediately quarantine the dog, cat, ferret, or miniature pig at the owner's home or other suitable place of confinement as directed by the responsible officer of the city for a period of ten days after the occurrence. In the event that a certificate of current rabies inoculation is not provided, the dog, cat, ferret, or miniature pig may not be released from quarantine restrictions until the owner provides a certificate of a veterinarian duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine within the state of Minnesota, which certificate shall state that the animal was examined by the veterinarian and determined to not have rabies and has been inoculated against rabies providing the date thereof as of the indicated date on the certificate. 
(b)  During the quarantine, the dog, cat, ferret, or miniature pig shall be securely confined in a proper enclosure as defined in this chapter. 
(c)  If the dog, cat, ferret, or miniature pig dies or shows signs of illness or if it escapes, the animal control officer or police department must be notified immediately. 
(d)  Any animal, other than a dog, cat, ferret, or miniature pig, which has bitten a person may be destroyed and taken to the university diagnostic lab to be determined if the animal has been infected with rabies. 
2.  Dog, cat, ferret, or miniature pig bitten. 
(a)  Whenever any dog, cat, ferret, or miniature pig has bitten another dog, cat, ferret, or miniature pig or has been bitten or otherwise exposed to a non-domestic animal (such as a raccoon, wood chuck, opossum), the owner of the dog, cat, ferret, or miniature pig that bit or has been bitten having been so notified, either orally [or] in writing, must provide the care or destruction of the dog, cat, ferret, or miniature pig as required by the rules and regulations of the state board of animal health. 
3.  Impoundment . A police officer or animal control officer may seize and impound or direct the location of the quarantine of any dog, cat, ferret, or miniature pig if (1) there is probable cause that the owner has not or will not maintain the quarantine of the subject animal as required herein, or the dog, cat, ferret, or miniature pig may be rabid; (2) the owner notified the city that the subject animal has signs of illness; (3) the owner has violated or has had prior violations of this chapter; or (4) the dog has been declared a dangerous dog. The animal seized shall be subject to the necessary tests by a doctor of veterinary medicine. The confinement, testing, and treatment costs, in addition to all other expenses incurred, shall be at the sole expense of the owner of the animal. 
(Code 1983, § 10.11, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 135, 2nd series, eff. 4-17-92; Ord. No. 165, 2nd series, eff. 5-14-93; Ord. No. 203, 2nd series, eff. 7-13-95; Ord. No. 252, 2nd series, eff. 1-15-98; Ord. No. 263, 2nd series, eff. 6-25-98; Ord. No. 270, 2nd series, eff. 12-24-98; Ord. No. 281, 2nd series, eff. 9-21-99; Ord. No. 305, 2nd series, §§ 1—6, eff. 9-20-01; Ord. No. 324, 2nd series, §§ 1—8, eff. 11-22-01; Ord. No. 370, 2nd series, §§ 1—5, eff. 12-11-03; Ord. No. 432, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 11-6-08; Ord. No. 439, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 6-16-09; Ord. No. 460, 2nd series, §§ 1—3, eff. 9-7-10; Ord. No. 487, 2nd series, §§ 1—3, eff. 11-15-2011; Ord. No. 507, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 6-5-2012; Ord. No. 551, 2nd series, §§ 1—5, eff. 4-5-2016) 
Cross reference— Kennels, § 6.38; pet shops, § 6.43. 
State Law reference— Animals generally, Minn. Stat. § 346.01 et seq.; dogs and cats, Minn. Stat. § 347.01 et seq.  
Sec. 10.12. - Animals and fowl—Keeping, transporting, treatment, housing. 
Subd. 1.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  Farm animals means cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats, swine (except miniature pig for which a valid license pursuant to chapter 10 herein is issued), ponies, ducks, geese, turkeys, chickens, guinea hens and honey bees. 
B.  Animals include farm animals and all other animals, reptiles, and feathered birds or fowl, except dogs, cats, ferrets, gerbils, hamsters, rabbits, and caged household birds. 
Subd. 2.  Keeping. It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any animal, not in transit, except (1) farm animals kept in that portion of the city zoned agricultural and containing not less than five acres, or (2) animals kept as part of a show licensed under the City Code, or (3) animals used in a parade for which a permit has been issued, or (4) animals kept in a laboratory for scientific or experimental purposes, or (5) animals kept in an animal hospital or clinic for treatment by a licensed veterinarian, or (6) animals kept in a pet shop licensed under the City Code, or (7) as otherwise provided in this section. 
Subd. 2(a).  Kennels. It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a total of four or more dogs, cats, ferrets, rabbits, or miniature pigs or a combination thereof, over six months of age, without first obtaining a kennel license from the city as regulated in chapter 6 of this Code. 
Subd. 3.  Animals in transit. It is unlawful for any person to transport animals unless they are (1) confined within a vehicle, cage or other means of conveyance, or (2) farm animals being transported in a portion of the city zoned agricultural, or (3) restrained by means of bridles, halters, ropes or other means of individual restraint. 
Subd. 4.  Treatment. It is unlawful for any person to treat any animal, as herein defined, or any other animal in a cruel or inhumane manner. 
Subd. 5.  Housing. It is unlawful for any person to keep any animal, as herein defined, or any other animal in any structure infested by rodents, vermin, flies or insects or inadequate for protection against the elements. 
Subd. 6.  Trespasses. It is unlawful for any person to herd, drive or ride any animal over and upon any grass, turf, boulevard, city park, cemetery, garden or lot without specific permission therefor from the owner. 
Subd. 7.  Harboring carrier pigeons. 
A.  Definitions. As used in this subdivision, the following definitions shall apply: 
1.  Carrier pigeon means any homing or racing pigeon which has the name of the owner stamped upon the wing or tail or is banded upon the leg with the name or initials of the owner or with an identification or registration number stamped on the band. 
2.  Homing pigeon and racing pigeon mean a pigeon registered with a national pigeon racing organization and used as a game and competitive bird. Homing and racing pigeons shall not constitute "fowl" as otherwise used in this section unless such pigeons are raised for food or for similar commercial purposes. 
3.  Loft means one or more structures in which carrier pigeons are housed. 
4.  Pigeon means a member of the family Columbidae. 
B.  Carrier pigeon permit required. It is unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, maintain, possess, or otherwise control any carrier pigeon without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city. The fees for a permit hereunder shall be established by the council, by resolution, from time to time. Each permit hereunder shall be issued for a period of one year from its date of issuance. 
C.  Permit application. An application for a permit hereunder shall be filed with the city clerk upon an application form furnished by the city. A permit hereunder may not be renewed unless an application is filed pursuant to this subdivision and the animal control officer inspects the premises and lofts thereof. All applications for permit renewal shall be filed within 60 days prior to the expiration of the present operating permit. The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  The name and addresses of the following persons: 
(a)  The applicant signed thereto; and 
(b)  The owner or owners of the premises on which carrier pigeons are sought to be kept for which the application is submitted; 
2.  The location and legal description of the premises on which carrier pigeons are sought to be kept; 
3.  The number of carrier pigeons kept and harbored on the premises; 
4.  Verification of identification marks stamped on each carrier pigeon or each carrier pigeon is banded upon the leg with the name or initial of the owner or an identification registration number stamped on the band; 
5.  A sketch plan of the premises on which carrier pigeons are sought to be kept, including the location, dimensions and design of the loft; and 
6.  Any other and further information as the city deems necessary. 
D.  Granting or denying issuance of permit . The city clerk may grant a permit hereunder. The city clerk shall deny a permit hereunder for any of the following reasons: 
1.  The application is incomplete and contains false, fraudulent or deceptive statements. 
2.  The applicant has not complied with one or more of the provisions hereunder. 
3.  The premises or loft thereof for which the permit is sought is not in compliance with all provisions of this subdivision, other City Code provisions or state laws relating to zoning, health, fire, building or safety regulations. 
4.  The applicant or owner of the premises or carrier pigeons harbored or kept thereon has been convicted of a violation under this subdivision. 
5.  The applicant is not the owner of the pigeon(s) and is not the occupant of the property for which the permit is issued. 
6.  The applicant is not a member in good standing of an organized pigeon club, such as the American Racing Pigeon Union, Inc., the International Federation of Racing Pigeon Fanciers, the National Pigeon Association, the American Tippler Society, the International Roller Association, the Rare Breeds Pigeon Club, or a local club that has rules that will help preserve the peace and tranquility of the neighborhood. 
No permit shall be issued for any property less than one-half acre in size. 
E.  Conditions of permit. A permit granted by the council hereunder shall be subject to the following conditions and to such other conditions as the council may deem necessary and expedient for the protection of health, safety and general welfare of the city: 
1.  Inspection. The premises and loft(s) thereon for which a permit is issued shall at all reasonable times be open to inspection by the animal control officer or any other city official to determine compliance with this subdivision, other City Code provisions or state laws relating to zoning, health, fire, building or safety regulations. 
2.  Transferability of permit . Any permit issued hereunder shall be nontransferable except upon application to and with the consent of the city clerk. An application for the transfer shall be made as an application for issuance of the initial permit and shall conform in all respects with the provisions of subparagraph B, above, governing the filing of the original application. The application for transfer is to be accompanied by a transfer fee as to be determined by council resolution. 
3.  Specifications. The construction and location of the loft shall be in compliance with the building and zoning regulations of the city and the following requirements: 
(a)  No more than two lofts, of which each shall not be greater in size than 24 feet × 12 feet × 14 feet shall be on the premises. 
(b)  No more than 100 pigeons over three months of age shall be kept or harbored on the premises for which the permit applies. 
(c)  No loft shall be within 25 feet of any inhabited dwelling. 
(d)  Each loft shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and kept in good repair, including the removal and disposal of all pigeon waste weekly or more often as required to keep the loft in a sanitary and odor-free condition. 
(e)  Each loft shall have at least two square feet of floor space for each mature carrier pigeon kept therein. 
(f)  All carrier pigeons shall be fed within the confines of the loft, and all feed for the carrier pigeons shall be stored in such containers as to protect against infestation of rodents and other vermin. 
(g)  All pigeons shall be confined to the loft, except for limited periods necessary for exercise, training and competition; provided no carrier pigeon shall be released for flying within eight hours of its feeding. 
(h)  No pigeon shall perch or linger on the buildings or property of others. 
F.  Revocation of permit. Any violation of any provision of this section or any conditions of the permit issued hereunder or any misdemeanor and petty misdemeanor conviction of the permit holder under this subdivision shall constitute grounds for revocation of a permit issued hereunder. 
Subd. 8. Harboring and keeping of chickens. 
A.  Definitions . As used in this subdivision, the following definitions shall apply: 
1.  Chicken means a fowl of the genus Gallus and species Gallus domesticus that is commonly referred to as domesticated fowl. 
2.  Chicken coop means any structure used for the housing of chickens. 
3.  Chicken run means a fenced outdoor area for the keeping and exercising of chickens. 
4.  Rooster means a male chicken. 
B.  Chicken permit required . It is unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, maintain, possess, or otherwise control any chicken within the city, except: 
1.  In an area zoned as agricultural; or 
2.  Pursuant to a permit issued by the city under this subdivision on a parcel of record zoned for single family detached dwelling. 
C.  Permit application and permit fees . An application for a permit hereunder shall be filed with the city clerk upon an application form furnished by the city. The permit fee, which shall be paid and filed with the permit application, shall be in an amount established by city council resolution. A permit issued hereunder shall be for duration of one year from its date of issuance. An application for permit renewal shall be filed 60 days prior to the expiration of the current permit. The permit application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  The full name and address of the following persons: 
(a)  The applicant signed thereto; and 
(b)  The owner(s) of the premises on which chickens are sought to be kept and for which the permit would apply; 
2.  The street address of the premises on which chickens are sought to be kept; 
3.  The number of chickens to be kept on the premises; 
4.  A detailed sketch plan of the premises on which chickens are sought to be kept, including the location, the dimensions and design of the coop and run, establishing compliance with the chicken coop and run specifications provided in this subdivision; 
5.  A statement certifying whether the property's homeowners' association rules, if any, prohibit the keeping of chickens on the property for which the application is sought; 
6.  If the applicant is not the fee owner of the premises on which the chickens are sought to be kept and for which the permit would apply, the application shall be signed by all fee owners of the premises. 
7.  Any other and further information as the city deems necessary. 
D.  Granting or denying issuance of permit . The city clerk may grant an initial or renewal permit under this subdivision; however, a permit may not be issued or renewed unless the application filed demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this subdivision. A permit shall not be issued or renewed until the animal control officer inspects and approves the premises, including the chicken coop and run, at which chickens are sought to be kept. The city clerk shall deny a permit hereunder for any of the following reasons: 
1.  The application is incomplete or contains false, fraudulent or deceptive statements. 
2.  The applicant does not or has not complied with one or more of the provisions of this subdivision. 
3.  The premises for which the permit is sought, including, but not limited to, the proposed or existing chicken coop or run, is not in compliance with any provisions of this subdivision, other City Code provisions or state laws relating to zoning, health, fire, building or safety. 
4.  The proposed chicken coop would result in a violation of or be inconsistent with the accessory structure zoning regulations elsewhere in this Code. 
5.  The applicant or owner of the premises where the chickens are to be kept has been convicted of a violation under this subdivision. 
6.  The applicant is not the owner of the chickens proposed to be kept on the premises. 
7.  The applicant is not the occupant of the premises for which the permit is sought to be issued. 
E.  Conditions of permit . A permit granted under this subdivision shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Ownership . The owner of the chickens must occupy the premises for which the permit is issued. 
2.  Inspection . The premises, including the coop and run thereon, for which a permit is issued shall at all reasonable times be open to inspection by the animal control officer or any other city official to determine compliance with this subdivision, other City Code provisions and state laws relating to zoning, health, fire, building or safety. 
3.  Transferability of permit . A permit issued hereunder shall be nontransferable. It is unlawful to keep, harbor, maintain, possess, or otherwise control any chicken on property that is not identified on the permit. 
4.  Specifications for feeding chickens . All feed for the chickens shall be stored in water-tight and vermin-proof containers. 
5.  Specifications of chicken coop and run . A chicken coop and run are required. The construction and location of the chicken coop and run shall be in compliance with the applicable building and zoning regulations of the city and the following requirements: 
(a)  The interior floor space of the chicken coop shall be a minimum size of two square feet for each chicken authorized under the permit. 
(b)  The exterior finish materials of the chicken coop shall be: (i) weather-resistant, protective covering material, decay-resistant wood, or if exterior finish wood is not decay resistant, then the wood finish shall be protected from the elements and decay by paint or protective covering (e.g., siding, fascia wrap); and (ii) in accordance with the accessory structure regulations set forth in the zoning regulations in this Code. 
(c)  The construction of and materials used for the chicken coop and run must be adequate to prevent access by rodents. 
(d)  The chicken run shall be attached to the chicken coop. The chicken coop and run shall be deemed as a single structure and subject to the accessory structure regulations set forth in the zoning regulations of this Code. 
(e)  The floor area of the chicken run shall be a minimum size of five square feet for each chicken authorized under the permit. 
(f)  The chicken run shall be fully enclosed by fencing or other similar material. 
(g)  No chicken coop or run, or any portion thereof, shall be within 25 feet of the outer perimeter of any inhabitable building. 
(h)  The chicken coop and run shall be setback at least ten feet from the rear lot line and at least five feet from the side lot lines. On properties zoned estate, the coop and run shall be setback at least ten feet from the rear and side lot lines. The chicken coop and run, or any portion thereof, shall not be located in the front yard, which is defined as any area located between the front lot line and the front setback line or front building line, whichever is further from the front lot line, running from side lot line to side lot line. 
(i)  The chicken coop and run shall be kept in good repair as to be in compliance with the property maintenance regulations elsewhere in this Code. 
(j)  The chicken coop and run shall be kept in a sanitary and odor-free condition, including the regular and frequent removal and proper disposal of any accumulated chicken feces or waste, dirt or filth that could create a safety or health hazard. 
(k)  The chicken coop and run shall be immediately removed if a permit granted under this subdivision expires or is revoked. 
6.  Regulations . The keeping, harboring, maintaining, or possessing of any chicken under a permit issued pursuant to this subdivision shall be in accordance with the following: 
(a)  No more than five chickens shall be kept or harbored on the premises to which the permit applies. 
(b)  Roosters are prohibited. 
(c)  Slaughtering of chickens on any property zoned for residential use is prohibited. 
(d)  No chickens shall be kept, maintained, housed or permitted inside any residential dwelling or any garage. 
(e)  No chicken shall be permitted to run at large. The term "run at large" is defined as any chicken freely roaming in any area not on the premises to which the permit applies. The chicken shall be deemed to be permitted to run at large when the premises to which the permit applies is not securely enclosed by a proper boundary fence as to prevent a chicken from leaving the premises. 
(f)  If the chickens are not contained at all times to the coop and run and allowed to freely roam within the yard, the property shall be enclosed by a fence in accordance with the fence regulations set forth in the zoning regulations of this Code and which by material and design prevents a chicken from leaving the premises. 
(g)  Chickens shall not be kept in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance. Any violation of the provisions of this subdivision shall be deemed a public nuisance. 
(h)  No chicken eggs shall be sold or offered for sale; all chicken eggs shall be for personal use or consumption. 
7.  Revocation of permit . A violation of any provision of this subdivision or any provisions of the permit issued hereunder shall constitute grounds for revocation of a permit. 
Subd. 9 Keeping of honeybees. 
A.  Definitions. As used in this subdivision, the following definitions shall apply: 
Apiary means the assembly of one or more colonies of honey bees on a single lot. 
Apiary site means the lot upon which an apiary is located. 
Applicant or Permit holder means any beekeeper and any other person who has applied for or has been issued a permit under this subdivision. 
Beekeeper means a person who: (i) owns or has charge of one (1) or more colonies of honey bees; or (ii) who owns or controls the property on which a honey bee colony is located whether or not the person is intentionally keeping honey bees. 
Beekeeping equipment means anything used in the operation of an apiary, including but not limited to: hive bodies; brood boxes; supers; hive frames; top and bottom boards, including any platforms; beekeeping tools or supplies; and extractors. 
Colony means an aggregate of honey bees, consisting generally of one queen bee, worker bees, drone bees, or any combination thereof, and at times including brood, comb, pollen and honey. 
Hive means the receptacle intended for the habitation of a colony, which may be a "top bar" hive or a traditional multistoried 8-10 frame hive that has one or more brood boxes, plus any honey supers as may be added. 
Honey bee means all life stages of the common domestic honey bee, apis mellifera species. 
Lot means one unit of a recorded plat, subdivision or registered land survey, or a recorded parcel described by metes and bounds. 
Nucleus hive means a hive receptacle or hive body that is nine and five-eighths inches deep, and holds three to five frames and a small quantity of honey bees, which may include a queen, for particular beekeeping purposes, such as starting a new colony, introducing of a new queen to an existing colony, or rearing a new queen. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, company, limited liability company, other entity, or unincorporated association. 
Swarming means the process where a queen bee leaves a colony with a large group of worker bees. 
Undeveloped property means any lot that is not improved with a structure that has or is required to have a certificate of occupancy. 
B.  Beekeeping permit required. It is unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, maintain, possess, or otherwise control any honey bee colony within the city, except: 
1.  In an area zoned as agricultural; or 
2.  Pursuant to a permit issued by the city under this subdivision on a lot or parcel of record zoned for single family detached dwelling. 
C.  Permit application and permit fees . An application for a permit hereunder shall be filed with the city clerk upon an application form furnished by the city. The permit fee, which shall be paid and filed with the permit application, shall be in an amount established by city council resolution. A permit issued hereunder shall be for duration of one year from its date of issuance. An application for permit renewal shall be filed 60 days prior to the expiration of the then current permit. The permit application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  The full name and address of the following persons: 
(a)  The applicant (person signing the application form); and 
(b)  The owner(s) of record of the premises on which colony(s) are sought to be kept and for which the permit would apply. 
2.  The street address of the lot on which colony(s) are sought to be kept. 
3.  The number of colony hives to be kept on the premises. 
4.  A detailed sketch plan of the lot on which colony(s) are sought to be kept, including the lot dimensions, the proposed location of all colony hives, the accurate measurements in feet and inches of the proposed location of all colony hives to each of the lot's property lines, and the accurate measurements in feet and inches from all colony hives to each dwelling unit on all adjacent lots, including any attached garage or deck, patio, swimming pool area, or other outdoor living space of the adjacent lot(s). 
5.  A statement certifying whether the property's homeowners' association rules, if any, prohibit the keeping of bees on the property for which the application is sought; 
6.  If the applicant is not the fee owner of the premises on which the honey bees are sought to be kept and for which the permit would apply, the application shall be signed by all fee owners of the premises. 
7.  Proof of successful completion of a beekeeping basics course (minimum of 8 hours of class time) through the University of Minnesota—BeeLab, a community education program or a local beekeeper club/association within 12 months of the date of application or proof of three or more consecutive years of actual beekeeping experience, established by substantiated evidence thereof, within five years immediately preceding the date of application. 
8.  If a flyaway barrier is required due to the proposed location of the colony hive(s), the applicant shall submit a detailed description of the material to be used for the barrier and the proposed location, which shall be subject to the city's review and approval before the issuance any permit hereunder. 
9.  Any other and further information as the city deems necessary. 
D.  Granting or denying issuance of permit. The city clerk may grant an initial or renewal permit under this subdivision; however, a permit may not be issued or renewed unless the application filed demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this subdivision. The city clerk shall deny a permit hereunder for any of the following reasons: 
1.  The application is incomplete or contains false, fraudulent or deceptive statements. 
2.  The applicant does not or has not complied with one or more of the provisions of this subdivision. 
3.  The premises for which the permit is sought, including, but not limited to, the proposed or existing location of the colony hives, is not in compliance with any provisions of this subdivision, other City Code provisions or state laws relating to zoning, health, fire, building or safety. 
4.  The applicant or owner of the premises where the colony(s) are to be kept has been convicted of a violation of this subdivision. 
5.  The applicant is not the owner of the colony(s) proposed to be kept on the premises. 
6.  The applicant is not the occupant of the premises for which the permit is sought to be issued. 
E.  Conditions of permit. 
1.  Honey bee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames. The hive body and all frames shall be kept in good repair and in sound and bee-healthy condition. Any hive body part that has been painted shall be free of peeling and flaking paint. No hive body shall be rotted or in a rotting condition. 
2.  Each colony shall be provided with a source of clean water either through the use of a boardman feeder or other non-stagnant water source located on the apiary site. Every effort shall be made to ensure that the water source is free of chemicals. 
3.  All hive or colony debris, including, but not limited to: dead bees, comb wax, burr comb, honey, or propolis, shall be promptly cleaned up and disposed of in a tight fitting waste container or stored indoors and shall not be allowed to remain outdoors, including within any accessory structure. 
4.  For each colony hive permitted to be maintained under this subdivision, no more than one nucleus hive with no supers, is permitted, and in no case shall an aggregate total of one nucleus hive for every two colony hives that are permitted hereunder be permitted after the nucleus hive's initial summer season. 
5.  Beekeeping equipment shall be maintained in good repair and condition, including keeping the hives painted if they have been painted but are peeling or flaking. 
6.  No beekeeping equipment or unused hives, frames or nucleus hive boxes shall be stored outdoors. 
7.  Each hive shall be continuously managed with best beekeeping practices to provide adequate and healthy living space for the resident honey bees in order to prevent swarming. 
8.  When bees of a colony exhibit aggressive behavior that is consistently frequent, such as stinging and attacks, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to promptly determine the cause thereof and correct the cause, including replacing the queen ("re-queening" the colony), if necessary. 
9.  Fruit trees and other flowering trees while in full bloom and any other vegetation that are located on an apiary site shall not be sprayed with any pesticide or other substance which is injurious to honey bees. 
10.  The permit issued hereunder applies only to the premises for which the permit was obtained. The permit shall not be transferable to any other property or site within the city. 
11.  Prior to relocating the hive colonies on the apiary site to a location other than as described at time of permit issuance, the permit holder shall notify the city and upon written approval of the new proposed location on the apiary site. 
12.  Upon the issuance of the permit and full set up of the first hive colony on the apiary site, the permit holder shall permit the city's designated personnel to inspect the apiary site, the colony hives and the location where all beekeeping equipment is stored for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this subdivision. 
13.  All colony hives shall comply with the colony location and colony density requirements as set forth herein. 
14.  No queen bees shall be reared for the purpose of sale to a third party or sold from the apiary site. 
15.  No colony hive shall be kept or located on any rooftop. 
F.  Colony location on apiary site requirements. All hive colonies under a permit issued under this subdivision shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Excluding lots that are zoned agricultural or are ten acres or more in size, no hive shall be located in the front yard or the side yard. For the purposes of this subdivision, a corner lot shall be considered to have two front yards regardless of the orientation of the primary residence or driveway. 
2.  In no instance shall any part of a hive be located within 20 feet of any lot line. 
3.  In no instance shall any part of a hive be located within 30 feet of any dwelling unit, or any deck, patio, swimming pool area or other outdoor living space thereof, on any adjacent lot to the apiary site. This paragraph applies to any residential dwelling located in any zoning district. 
4.  While following best beekeeping practices by orienting a colony hive's front entrance in an east to southeast direction, the permit holder shall nevertheless have all colony hives on the apiary site in a location that best results in the front entrance of all colony hives facing into the apiary site's lot and not toward or into an adjacent lot. 
5.  Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, if any part of a hive is kept within 25 feet of a lot line of the apiary site or within 35 feet of a dwelling unit, or any deck, patio, swimming pool area or other living space therefor, on an adjacent lot, then a flyway barrier of at least six feet in height shall be establish and maintain along but within the apiary site lot line in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  The flyway barrier shall be either a stone wall, solid fence, dense vegetation or a combination thereof, in order that honey bees must fly over, rather than through, the material to reach the colony. All flyover barriers shall be constructed of high quality, durable material and maintained in accordance with all City Code provisions herein. 
b.  If a flyway barrier is created by dense vegetation, then the initial planting may be four feet in height, so long as the vegetation reaches a height of six feet or higher within two years of planting. The vegetation shall be of such specie and cultivation that it provides a dense screening from six inches from grade to the top of the vegetation year round. 
c.  The flyway barrier shall continuously run parallel to the apiary site's lot line for a distance of ten feet in both directions in front of each hive entrance side; unless the barrier is installed to completely surround the hive(s). 
d.  A flyway barrier is not required for any hive if the lot abutting the apiary site lot is: 
(1)  Undeveloped property; or 
(2)  Zoned agricultural or ten acres or more in size. 
If, at any time subsequent to the issuance of a permit hereunder, the lot abutting the apiary site lot is developed or rezoned or subdivided to lots less than ten acres, the permit holder shall install a flyaway barrier if otherwise required hereunder. 
6.  The permit holder shall comply with the home occupation regulations set forth in the zoning regulations of this Code, with the exception that hives may be visible from the street and activity related to the keeping of bees and harvesting of honey may be conducted within an attached garage or detached accessory structure on the apiary site lot. 
G.  Density restrictions of colony hive(s). 
1.  The number of colony hives permitted on an apiary site pursuant to a permit issued hereunder is restricted as follows based on the size of the lot on which the apiary is located: 
• Less than one-half acre: two colony hives. 
• One-half acre to three-fourth acre: four colony hives. 
• More than three-fourth acre to one acre: six colony hives. 
• More than one acre to five acres: eight colony hives. 
• More than five acres: no restriction. 
2.  If any person, within the city, collects a honey bee swarm or removes a honey bee colony from a location where they are not desired, then the person shall not be deemed to be in violation of this subdivision, provided the person notifies the city within 12 hours of acquiring the honeybees and the colony is kept or maintained no more than 30 days on the apiary site of a beekeeper who has a valid permit under this subdivision. 
H.  Revocation or suspension of permit. 
A violation of any provision of this subdivision or any condition placed on the permit issued hereunder shall constitute grounds for revocation or suspension of a permit, in addition to any of the following: 
1.  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements on the permit application, regardless if first discovered after the issuance of the permit or renewal of the permit. 
2.  The keeping of honey bees in an unlawful manner or a manner so as to constitute a public nuisance or to otherwise adversely affect the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
Subd. 10.  Harboring and keeping of goats—For prescribed grazing by permit. 
A.  Definitions. As used in this subdivision, the following definitions shall apply: 
Prescribed grazing shall mean the use of goats as a landscape management technique to control the growth of undesirable vegetation, including noxious weeds and invasive plant or trees at a specific location for a defined length of time. For the purpose of this definition, goats used for prescriptive grazing are not considered pets or farm animals. 
B.  Prescribed goat grazing permit required. It is unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, maintain, possess, or otherwise control any goat within the city, except pursuant to a permit issued by the city under this subdivision. A permit hereunder may be granted only for: (1) a parcel or lot of record that is 0.5 acres or more in size; or (2) a prescribed grazing area located on more than one parcel or lot provided the grazing areas on each parcel/lot are contiguous and an aggregate of 0.5 acres or more in size. No goat may be kept, maintained or harbored on or in any other property, except agriculture containing not less than five acres. 
C.  Permit application and permit fees. An application for a permit hereunder shall be filed with the city clerk upon an application form furnished by the city. The permit fee, which shall be paid and filed with the permit application, shall be in an amount established by city council resolution. The permit application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  The full name and address of the following persons: 
(a)  The applicant signed thereto; and 
(b)  The owner(s) of the premises on which prescribed goat grazing is sought to occur and for which the permit would apply; 
2.  The street address of the premises on which prescribed grazing is sought to occur and for which the permit would apply; 
3.  The number of goats to be kept on the premises under the permit, not to exceed two goats per every one-tenth acre of the prescribed grazing area; 
4.  The full name, address, and 24-hour contact telephone number of the person who owns the goats to be used for the prescribed grazing; 
5.  The type of fencing to be used for the required enclosure; 
6.  Date the temporary fence will be installed; 
7.  Date the goats will arrive on the premises for which the permit would apply; 
8.  The latest date the goats will be removed from the premises for which the permit would apply; 
9.  A detailed site plan of the premises on which prescribed grazing is sought to occur, including the location and the dimensions of the proposed grazing area, a list of the vegetation existing on the site and sought to be controlled by the prescribed grazing, the location and delineation of any wetland or public water shoreline, and the location of the proposed enclosure fencing. 
10.  A statement certifying whether the property's homeowners' association rules, if any, prohibit the keeping of goats on the property for which the permit is sought; 
11.  If the applicant is not the fee owner of the premises on which the goats for prescribed grazing is sought to be kept and for which the permit would apply, the application shall be signed by all fee owners of the premises; and 
12.  Any other and further information as the city deems necessary. 
D.  Granting or denying issuance of permit. The city clerk may grant a permit under this subdivision; however, a permit may not be issued unless the application filed demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this subdivision. A permit shall not be issued until the city forester or designee inspects and determines the existence and need for control of undesirable vegetation, as well as review of any ecologically sensitive areas, on the premises at which prescribed grazing is sought to be implemented. The city clerk shall deny a permit hereunder for any of the following reasons: 
1.  The application is incomplete or contains false, fraudulent or deceptive statements. 
2.  The applicant does not or has not complied with one or more of the provisions of this subdivision. 
3.  The premises for which the permit is sought, including, but not limited to, the proposed grazing area, is not in compliance with any provisions of this subdivision, other City Code provisions or state laws relating to zoning, health, fire, building or safety. 
4.  The applicant or owner of the premises where the prescribed grazing is to occur has been previously convicted of a violation under this subdivision within the past two years. 
5.  The applicant is not the occupant of the premises for which the permit is sought to be issued. 
6.  The owner of the goats has violated any provision hereunder, or on more than two prior occasions, the owner's goats have been found running at large. 
E.  Conditions of permit. A permit granted under this subdivision shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Ownership/occupancy of premises. The permit holder under this subdivision must occupy the premises for which the permit is issued at all times that the permit is in effect and goats are present on the premises. 
2.  Inspection. The premises for which a permit is issued shall, at all reasonable times, be open to inspection by the city forester or any other city official to determine compliance with this subdivision, other City Code provisions and state laws relating to zoning, health, fire, building or safety. 
3.  Transferability of permit. A permit issued hereunder shall be nontransferable. It is unlawful to keep, harbor, maintain, possess, or otherwise control any goat on any property that is not permitted on the permit. 
4.  Specifications for feeding and care of goats. All supplemental feed for the goats shall be securely stored in water-tight and vermin-proof containers. All goats on the premises shall have daily access to fresh drinking water (not from nearby lakes, ponds, etc.). All goats used under the permit shall receive proper veterinary treatment and regular deworming. In the event that a prescribed grazing goat becomes ill, hurt, or perishes, the permit holder and the owner of the goat is responsible for immediate on-site care or removal of the goat from the property. 
5.  Number of goats permitted. No more than two goats per every one-tenth acre of the prescribed grazing area shall be on the premises at one time under the permit. 
6.  Natural resources protection. Prescribed grazing must comply with the shore land regulations and wetland regulations set forth elsewhere in this Code. The permit may restrict the permissible grazing area to protect ecologically sensitive areas on the premises. Prescribed grazing activities shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Prescribed grazing activities shall comply with the best management practices established by the Minnesota Department of Agriculture, the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, Dakota County Soil and Water Conservation District, and all other pertinent agencies. 
(b)  Prescribed grazing activities shall not impair water quality as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act. 
(c)  Threatened or endangered plant species shall not be negatively impacted by prescribed grazing activities. 
7.  Proper enclosures. The prescribed grazing area shall be fully and securely enclosed with proper enclosures, and fully maintained for the duration of the prescribed grazing period, as required and provided herein. It is unlawful and a violation of the permit for any goat to be allowed to run at large as the term is defined elsewhere in this chapter. The prescribed grazing activity shall be fully and properly enclosed at all times. 
Proper enclosure means any combination of temporary or permanent fences or structures designed to prevent the escape of the goats used for the prescribed grazing and to protect the goats from the intrusion of other predatory animals. All sides of the enclosure(s) shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the enclosures shall be constructed or secured in a manner as to prevent the goats from escaping over or under the enclosure(s). An enclosure shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Permanent enclosures. Fences and structures constructed to enclose prescribed grazing goats, but intended to remain at the expiration of the prescribed grazing activity, shall comply with the regulations for the zoning district in which the prescribed grazing is located and shall be permitted separately from the prescribed grazing activity. 
(b)  Temporary enclosures. Temporary fencing and structures for the sole purpose of enclosing prescribed grazing goats shall be allowed for the duration of the prescribed grazing. All temporary fencing or structures shall be removed within five days of the removal of the goats from the premises as required under the permit. 
(c)  Temporary fences may be electric or electrified as specified in the approved prescribed grazing permit. Where electric fences are used, a double fence system with a non-electric outer fence, maintained a minimum of three feet from the electric fence, is required to serve as a safety barrier to reduce the possibility of the public coming in contact with the electric fence. If an existing natural barrier or permanent structure exist as to prevent contact with or serve as a barrier to the electric fence, then the second outer fence may not be required for the applicable segment of fencing. 
(d)  Any electric or electrified fence in association with a prescribed grazing activity must have a warning sign posted on every boundary of the enclosure at least every 50 feet along each side of the fence. The warning sign shall clearly identify the electric fence. No single sign shall exceed four square feet in area. Each sign shall be clearly visible on the approach to the fence and be posted on or within one foot of the electric or electrified fence. 
(e)  The outer fence line shall be inside the property line of the premises on which the permit applies, and shall not be located within any public or private right-of-way. 
8.  Conservation easements. If the proposed prescribed grazing area is within a conservation easement, all requirements of the conservation easement must be met. If the terms of the conversation easement do not allow prescribed grazing, then the permit will be denied. 
9.  Unneutered male goats. Unneutered male goats over six months of age are prohibited. 
10.  Liability insurance. The owner of the goat(s) to be utilized under the permit shall have and maintain insurance coverage for claims arising from prescribed grazing activity in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $2,000,000.00 general aggregate and shall provide to the city proof of coverage prior to the issuance of the permit. 
11.  Signage. The permit holder shall install and maintain signs on the premises for the duration of the permit as follows: 
(a)  Signs warning of the hazardous condition of the presence of the goats; the information sign, such as "do not enter—goat defoliation area" or "do not enter—goat invasive species treatment area—no petting or feeding." 
(b)  A sign shall be located on each side of the enclosed area. The sign shall be a minimum of four square feet and not exceed 16 square feet in area. 
(c)  The signs shall not contain advertising, however the contact information of the owner of the goat(s) may be listed on the signs for emergency purposes. 
(d)  The signs shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from property line if freestanding, or placed on the enclosure fence. 
(e)  All signs shall be removed when goats are removed from the premises. 
F.  Duration of permit. The duration of a permit under this section shall be as follows: 
(a)  Properties under two acres in area. On properties with an area of less than two acres, prescribed grazing shall not be permitted for more than 30 consecutive days. No more than two prescribed grazing permits may be issued within one calendar year for the property. There shall be a minimum of 60 days between the expiration of the first permit issued and the second permit issued in a 12-month period. 
(b)  Properties two or more acres in area. On properties with an area of two or more acres, the duration of the prescribed grazing activity shall be as specified in the permit, determined solely within the discretion of the city clerk as may be guided by city personnel trained in control and maintenance of noxious and invasive weed/plant vegetation. 
G.  Revocation of permit. A violation of any provision of this subdivision or any condition of the permit issued hereunder shall constitute grounds for revocation of a permit. The clerk may summarily revoke a permit if a permit holder's goat(s) have been found running at large on two or more occurrences within the term of the permit. 
(Code 1983, § 10.12, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 149, 2nd series, eff. 10-30-92; Ord. No. 270, 2nd series, eff. 12-24-98; Ord. No. 307, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 9-20-01; Ord. No. 406, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 7-6-06; Ord. No. 497, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 511, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 10-16-2012; Ord. No. 539, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-7-2015; Ord. No. 551, 2nd series, §§ 6, 7, eff. 4-5-2016; Ord. No. 567, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 11-17-2017) 
Cross reference— Kennels, § 6.38; pet shops, § 6.43.  
Sec. 10.13. - Trapping prohibited; exceptions. 
Subd. 1.  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
A.  Trap means any device, snare, artificial light, net, bird line, ferret, hawk, vehicle or contrivance whatever used to catch, snare, kill, or otherwise restrain the free movement of animals or birds. 
B.  Trapping means the act of setting, laying or possession with intent to set or lay a trap. 
Subd. 2.  Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person to do any trapping. 
Subd. 3.  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to: 
A.  Owners of platted lots of five acres or more, and then only if it is done by the owner, a member of the owner's family, or by written consent of the owner; provided, that such trapping is not done upon or within 100 feet of the boundary of any city, county or state park; organized recreational area; or other public property. 
B.  Quick-kill trapping if the traps are designed to kill only rats, mice, gophers or moles. 
C.  Employees or duly authorized representatives of the city, county, state or federal government acting within the course and scope of their employment. 
D.  Teachers trapping for educational programs or scientists for the purpose of studying animals, wildlife or birds, which will be returned to their natural environment uninjured. 
E.  Any person duly appointed and designated by the police chief and issued a special permit or any law enforcement personnel while in the course of and for the purposes of wildlife management and control at the direction of the police chief. For purposes of this clause, the term "wildlife" shall mean wild animals or animals living in a natural, undomesticated condition, including, but not limited to: coyote, skunk, raccoon, possum, bear, or fox. 
(Code 1983, § 10.13, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 2, 2nd series, eff. 4-26-83; Ord. No. 389, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 6-25-05) 
Cross reference— Kennels, § 6.38.  
Secs. 10.14—10.19. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10.20. - Shade tree disease control and prevention. 
Subd. 1.  Policy and purpose. The city has determined that the health of oak and elm trees is threatened by fatal diseases known as oak wilt and Dutch elm disease. It has also been determined that the health of many tree species may be threatened by diseases of an epidemic nature. It has further been determined that the loss of oak, elm and other trees threatened by epidemic diseases on public and private property would substantially depreciate the value of property and impair the safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of the public. It is declared to be the intention of the council to control and prevent the spread of these diseases and provide for the removal of dead or diseased trees as nuisances. 
Subd. 2.  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
A.  Shade tree disease means Dutch elm disease, oak wilt, or any other tree disease of an epidemic nature as declared by the council. 
B.  Nuisance means: 
1.  Any living or standing trees infected to any degree with a shade tree disease. 
2.  Any logs, branches, stumps, or other parts of any dead or dying tree so infected unless such parts have been fully burned or treated under the direction of the city forester or tree inspector. 
3.  Any standing dead trees or limbs on public or private property which may threaten human health or property. 
C.  Forester means a qualified person, holding a combination of education and experience equivalent to a four year college degree in urban forestry, hired to perform the duties of the city forester as designated by the council. The forester shall exercise the powers and duties necessary to enforce the provisions of this section. The forester shall be a certified pesticide applicator and a certified tree inspector under the laws of the state. The powers and duties of the forester may be assigned to other qualified persons in his absence. 
D.  Duties of city forester. It is the duty of the city forester to administer all activities of the city relating to the control and prevention of Dutch elm disease, oak wilt, and other epidemic diseases of shade trees. Each year the city forester shall recommend the details of a program for the control of said diseases and perform the duties incident to such a program. The city forester shall also act as liaison between the city and the public, keeping the public informed of new changes, modifications or developments related to city policies or tree maintenance. 
E.  Duties of tree inspectors. It is the duty of tree inspectors, under direction and control of the city forester, to know the appropriate state laws and rules relative to oak wilt, Dutch elm, and other epidemic diseases of shade trees and to know the approved control methods of these diseases. The inspectors must know the proper method of collecting samples for the purpose of diagnosing disease. The inspector, when so designated, shall assist the city forester in the planning and control of shade tree diseases. 
Subd. 3.  Scope and adoption by reference. Minn. Stat. § 18.023, is hereby adopted by reference, together with the rules and regulations of the state commissioner of agriculture relating to shade tree diseases; provided, that this section shall supersede such statutes, rules and regulations, only to the extent of inconsistencies. 
Subd. 4.  Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or permit, upon premises owned by him or upon public property where he has the duty of tree maintenance, any nuisance as herein defined. 
Subd. 5.  Inspection, diagnosis and abatement. It is the power and duty of the city forester or tree inspector to enter upon public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting for and diagnosing and, if necessary, abating shade tree disease. In the case of suspected shade tree disease and in performance of his duties, the tree inspector or city forester may remove such specimens or samples as may be necessary or desirable for diagnosis. 
Subd. 6.  Abatement of nuisance. Abatement of a nuisance, defined herein, shall be by spraying, removing, burning, or otherwise effectively treating the infected tree or wood to prevent spread of shade tree disease. Such abatement procedures shall be carried out in accordance with current technical and expert methods and plans as may be designed by the commissioner of agriculture of the state. The city shall establish specifications for tree removal and disposal methods consistent therewith. Such standards shall be kept on file in the office of the city forester and shall be revised from time to time based on current research. 
Subd. 7.  Procedure for removal of infected trees and wood. 
A.  Whenever the city forester or tree inspector finds, with reasonable certainty, that the infection or danger of infection exists in any tree or wood on any public or private property, he shall proceed as follows: 
1.  If the tree inspector or city forester finds that the danger of infection of other trees is not imminent because of dormancy of shade tree disease, he may choose to reinspect said tree either later the same growing season or at the beginning of the following growing season. If at that time the tree has not recovered, the tree inspector or city forester shall proceed by abating the nuisance as a public improvement under Minn. Stat. ch. 429. 
2.  If the tree inspector or city forester finds that danger of infection of other trees is imminent, he shall notify the owner of the property by certified mail that the nuisance will be abated by a specific time, not more than 20 days from the date of receipt of such notice. After the expiration of the notice the tree inspector may abate the nuisance. 
3.  If the tree inspector or city forester finds with reasonable certainty that immediate action is required to prevent the spread of shade tree disease, he may proceed to abate the nuisance forthwith. When an outside contractor is hired to abate said nuisance, that contractor must meet the licensing requirements as stated in section 7.08, subdivision 1, of the City Code. The city forester shall, upon the completion of the nuisance abatement, ascertain the cost attributable to each lot. The city clerk-treasurer shall certify to the county auditor a statement of the amount of the cost incurred by the city. Such amount together with interest shall be entered as a special assessment against such lot or parcel of land and be collected in the same manner as real estate taxes. 
B.  The tree inspector shall keep a record of the costs of abatements done under this subdivision and shall report monthly to the city clerk-treasurer all work done for which assessments are to be made stating and certifying the description of the land, lots, parcels involved and the amount chargeable to each. 
C.  On or before September 1 of each year, the city clerk-treasurer shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this section. The council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof against the property involved as a special assessment under Minn. Stat. § 429.101 and other pertinent statutes for certification to the county auditor and collection the following year along with current taxes. 
D.  No damage shall be awarded the owner for destruction of any tree, wood or part thereof pursuant to this section. 
Subd. 8.  Spraying trees. 
A.  Whenever the city forester or tree inspector determines that any tree or wood is infected or threatened with infection, he may spray or treat all nearby high value trees with an effective pesticide or fungicide or both. Activities authorized by this subdivision shall be conducted in accordance with technical and expert specifications or, where appropriate, the plans of the commissioner of agriculture. 
B.  The notice and assessment provisions of subdivision 7 apply to spraying and treatment operations conducted under this subdivision. 
Subd. 9.  Transporting wood prohibited. It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to transport any elm wood into or through the city unless the same is debarked or, in the months of April, May or June, to transport any oak wood, without having obtained a permit from the tree inspector. The tree inspector shall grant such permits only when the purposes of this section will be served thereby. 
Subd. 10.  Interference prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city forester or tree inspector while he is engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this section. 
Subd. 11.  Diseased trees in streets. The rights, duties and responsibilities of property owners set forth in this section shall be equally applicable to and binding upon abutting property owners with tree maintenance responsibilities under section 7.08 of the City Code entitled Regulation of Grass, Weeds and Trees. 
Subd. 12.  Subsidies. The duty of any property owner to bear the cost of removing or maintaining trees, whether by private contract or assessment, may be subject to a subsidy policy, if any, established by the city for the treatment or removal of trees infected with shade tree disease. 
(Code 1983, § 10.20, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 107, 2nd series, eff. 7-27-90)  
Sec. 10.21. - Planting and maintenance of trees and grass on private property. 
Subd. 1. Purpose and application. The regulations set forth in this section are for the purposes of protecting and promoting the public health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city by regulating the planting and maintenance of trees in order to protect trees and to prevent and abate hazardous and nuisance trees and conditions within the city. It is also the purpose of this section to regulate establishment of turf grass or other permitted vegetation to promote proper maintenance of vegetation, control noxious weeds, and encourage the planting and maintenance of other permitted vegetation to provide diversity and environmental benefits. This section applies to all private property at all times on a continuing basis. 
Subd. 2. Definitions. 
Permitted vegetation means established vegetation that is one or a combination of the following: turf grasses; low maintenance ground cover; ornamental plants; rain garden; meadow; and edible vegetation when planted with other permitted vegetation. Permitted vegetation does not include unmanaged vegetation or any prohibited tree species as defined herein. 
Edible vegetation means any herb plant or fruit or vegetable producing plant which all or a part thereof is edible. 
Invasive species plant(s) means any plant species that is not native to Minnesota or its regional ecosystem that can spread or be spread into any non-cultivated soil site and establish itself, expanding the plant species' population by its own volition and generally harm, destroy or prevent native plants. Invasive plant species include, but are not limited to those plants identified as invasive species in the Minnesota Forest Invaders: A Guide to Invasive Species published by the Minnesota SFI Implementation Committee. 
Landscape bed means an area or tiered areas delineated by landscape material or established turf grasses as its border(s) and is designed for and maintained with ornamental plants or native grasses and forbs or edible vegetation. 
Low maintenance turf grasses or ground covers means turf grasses and ground covers of a species which is of a cultivar that requires little or no water or mowing once established. 
Meadow means an area of grasses and forbs (flowering broadleaf plants) that are native or adaptive to this state, excluding noxious weeds and turf grasses, but including and not limited to: sedge meadow, mesic prairie, dry prairie, wet prairie, perennial wildflower, and native plant communities. 
Native grasses and forbs mean grasses, including prairie grasses, and forbs (flowering broad-leaf plants) that are indigenous to this state. 
Native plant communities mean groupings of native grasses, forbs and other plants that generally occur together in an area due to soil and light conditions, such as: wet prairie, dry prairie, oak savannah, or maple-basswood forest. 
Noxious weed means plants designated as such according to Minn. Stat. § 18.77, subd. 8. 
Nuisance weed means a herbaceous plant generally not valued, growing wild and rank, and regarded as cumbering the ground or hindering the growth of desired vegetation that is allowed to grow in excess of 8 inches in height, but is not a noxious weed as defined herein. 
Ornamental plants means grasses, flowering perennial and annual plants, shrubs and groundcovers that may not be indigenous to Minnesota, but are adaptable. Ornamental grasses do not include turf grasses. 
Public right-of-way means the surface, air space above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, trail, avenue, boulevard, drive, court, concourse, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, skyway, waterway, or property within the city owned by or under control of the city, or dedicated or otherwise conveyed to the public. 
Rain garden means a shallow excavated depression with loosened sub-soils in which ornamental plants or native grasses and forbs that are adapted to moist conditions and have deep roots are planted for the purpose of infiltrating and filtering rain water and reducing storm water runoff. 
Residential property means a lot of record on which the only residential permitted use is single-family detached dwelling under the land use regulations of this Code. 
Restoration or restored means the process of re-establishing or returning an area to be covered by and comprised of vegetation that is of a native plant community original to the locale of the property to be restored. 
Turf grasses means commercially available cultured grass plant varieties, including bluegrass, fescue and ryegrass blends, that are commonly used in regularly cut lawn areas and low maintenance turf grasses as defined herein. 
Unmanaged vegetation means diseased, dead, or poisonous vegetation, invasive species plants, overgrown shrubs, or any area(s) on a property that is overgrown by turf grass or nuisance weeds or noxious weeds. 
Vegetation means any non-woody plants. 
Woodland means an area of coniferous or deciduous trees interspersed with shrubs, grasses, broadleaf plants, and other vegetation, excluding nuisance and noxious weeds and unmanaged vegetation or invasive species plant(s), or prohibited species trees, that are native or adaptive to this state. 
Subd. 3. Establishment and maintenance of turf grass and other permitted vegetation. 
A.  Any property that has been approved by the city for development or has been improved with a building, as defined in the building code, including vacant property combined with an improved property for property tax purposes, shall have established and maintained turf grass or permitted vegetation subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Permitted vegetation establishment required. All areas of a property that constitutes the yard of the property, as the term is defined in the land use regulations of this Code, and that is not otherwise occupied by the driveway or other parking surface, sidewalk, structures, landscape beds, or recreational improvements (such as: swimming pool, tennis or sport court, play equipment) shall be covered by turf grasses, permitted vegetation or woodland that are compatible with the property's existing conditions, including soil, slope and shade conditions. 
2.  Turf grass establishment required. All areas of a property, which is not a residential property as defined in this section, constituting the yard of the property, as the term is defined in the land use regulations of this Code, and that is not otherwise occupied by the driveway or other parking surface, sidewalk, structures, landscape beds, recreational improvements (such as: swimming pool, tennis or sport court, play equipment) or established woodland shall be covered by turf grasses that are compatible with the property's existing conditions, including soil, slope and shade conditions. Notwithstanding the foregoing, up to 50 percent of all disturbed or maintained areas requiring turf grass may be restored to a meadow or woodland condition, provided the requirements herein are met. 
3.  The establishment of turf grass, permitted vegetation or woodland, as required herein for the property, shall be completed within eight months of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or within 12 months of issuance of a building permit, whichever is earlier. Turf grass establishment shall be completed through sodding or seed and mulch. Any turf grass establishment on and within three feet of all impervious surfaces shall be accomplished through sodding. 
4.  The property owner shall be responsible for supplemental watering of all areas established with turf grass, permitted vegetation or woodland to ensure sufficient establishment and root development. 
5.  All areas of the property shall comply with the requirements of the provisions of the land disturbance and erosion control regulations and any other provisions of the City Code as applicable. 
6.  If any property, or portion thereof, is established as or restored to meadow or woodland, then all vegetation existing in the proposed establishment or restoration area shall be eliminated in its entirety and the meadow or woodland vegetation shall be established through transplanting, seeding or other means of propagation. Any meadow or woodland restoration area should be consistent with the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources' native planting and restoration best practices methods and standards. 
7.  No area established as or restored to a woodland or meadow condition shall have any unmanaged vegetation or any prohibited tree species as provided in this section. 
8.  A minimum three-foot-wide buffer of turf grass shall be established and maintained along the property boundary line of the property where permitted vegetation other than turf grass, meadow or woodlands abuts established turf grass on the adjoining property in order to provide a transition zone between the two types of plant communities. The minimum three-foot setback need not be maintained as required in this paragraph if: (a) a fence is installed along the property line pursuant to a zoning permit; (b) the permitted non-turf grass vegetation, meadow or woodland abuts a public park, open space, a vacant lot, or a wetland, pond, lake, stream or natural area; or (c) the planting area is located on slopes equal to or greater than three feet horizontal to one foot vertical (3:1). 
9.  Soil erosion prevention measures shall be completed during the transition or establishment period of any meadow, woodland or other permitted vegetation area and shall comply with the provisions of the land disturbance and erosion control plan in effect for the property. 
10.  No shrub, tree, vegetation except turf grass, or any landscape material(s) may be planted or maintained within the public right-of-way, unless approved by the city pursuant to a right-of-way permit as regulated elsewhere in this Code. 
11.  Rain gardens shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the best practice methods and standards of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency or other similar industry practices and standards for rain gardens. 
12.  Unmanaged vegetation is prohibited and shall not be permitted or maintained on any property. 
B.  Turf grass and other permitted vegetation maintenance standards. 
1.  Vegetation on a property shall not exceed a height of eight inches, measured from the base at ground level to the tip of each stalk, stem, blade or leaf, except permitted vegetation other than turf grass that naturally exceeds eight inches in height due to the plant's cultivar. 
2.  Paragraph 1 above shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  A wetland designated on the official city wetland inventory or zoning map or along the shoreline of a lake, pond or stream; 
(b)  A drainage pond or ditch that stores or conveys stormwater; 
(c)  An area currently being used as pasture land for domestic hoofed animals when permitted by the city's land use regulations in this Code; 
(d)  An area of land that has not been graded, landscaped, mowed or otherwise previously disturbed by human or mechanical means; 
(e)  A steeply sloped area that makes mowing or cutting vegetation not reasonably practical for equipment operation or safety; and 
(f)  A meadow or woodland area established and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this subdivision. 
Subd. 4 . Public nuisance. The following shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be immediately abated by the property owner: 
(a)  Noxious weeds; 
(b)  Vegetation in violation of this section; 
(c)  Vegetation in violation of the public rights-of-way plant and vegetation placement provisions in the City Code; and 
(d)  Unmanaged vegetation. 
Subd. 5. City to control tree planting. It is unlawful to plant on any lot or land parcel any tree or seed therefrom that is a prohibited species where such trees are not naturally occurring. Prohibited species are defined as the following trees: 
Ginkgo (female only) 
Box elder 
Non-disease-resistant elm species 
Nonhybrid cottonwood species 
Subd. 6. Shade tree diseases. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or permit, any nuisance as defined in section 10.20 of the City Code. 
B.  Inspection, diagnosis and abatement of a nuisance shall be in accordance with the procedures and methods specified in section 10.20 of the City Code. 
Subd. 7. Abatement. If any such owner fails to assume the primary responsibility described in subdivisions 2, 3, or 4 of this section or to abate any public nuisance under this section, then the city's performance of the work necessary for compliance of this section or the abatement of the public nuisance shall be in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 10.21, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 107, 2nd series, eff. 7-27-90; Ord. No. 185, 2nd series, eff. 9-1-94; Ord. No. 296, 2nd series, § 3, 7-27-00; Ord. No. 340, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 4-25-02; Ord. No. 505, 2nd series, § 3, eff. 5-15-2012; Ord. No. 527, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 4-1-2014)  
Sec. 10.22. - Reserved. 
(Code 1983, § 10.22, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 119, 2nd series, eff. 6-4-91)  
Sec. 10.23. - Rules and regulations governing public parks and recreation areas. 
Subd. 1.  Unlawful acts (general rules). It is unlawful for any person, in any park or recreation area, to: 
A.  Deface, destroy, tamper with, injure, or remove any city property, including, but not limited to, furniture, structures, vegetation, signs or soils. 
B.  Scatter or litter the grounds or any lake, pond, or watercourse within or draining into a park with any form of trash, but shall place such material in the proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not provided, all such trash shall be carried away from the area by the person responsible for its presence. 
C.  Start a fire, except a small fire for cooking purposes in a designated area, and then only in a fire ring, grill or portable stove, or fail to fully extinguish such a fire. 
D.  Use any land or body of water for a launching or landing operation for flying apparatus except by permit from the council or park director. Powered model aircraft may only be flown in areas which will not interfere with sport games or any other park activities. 
E.  Solicit or conduct any commercial enterprise or sell or attempt to sell any goods or merchandise, unless the person (1) is a registered vendor with the city or an organization that was granted a park facility permit or special event permit from the city as regulated elsewhere in this Code; and (2) is granted a vendor permit from the city's director of parks and recreation. 
F.  Play games which interfere with appropriate use of the rinks, sledding or tobogganing areas or use hockey sticks or pucks in areas not designated for hockey play or loiter on the ice or in park buildings. 
G.  Paste, affix or inscribe any handbill, poster or sign or distribute handbills, circulars or announcements of any kind for a commercial purpose. 
Subd. 2.  Unlawful acts (hours and conduct). It is unlawful for any person, in any park or recreation area, to: 
A.  Remain between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. without a written permit from the council or park director. No privately owned vehicle shall remain during these same hours without a written permit. Any vehicle remaining after 11:00 p.m. without authorization shall be towed at the owner's expense. 
B.  Be under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance. 
C.  Bring wine or liquor, as those terms are defined in chapter 5 of the City Code, or bring beer, as that term is defined in said chapter, in kegs, barrels or case lot quantities except where authorized by written permit from the council or park director. 
D.  Use, possess or sell any controlled substance. 
E.  Appear nude, seminude, commit any nuisance or use threatening, abusing, insulting, obscene or indecent language or act in an indecent, lascivious, or improper manner or do any act which constitutes a breach of the public peace. 
F.  Harass any visitor or behave in a reckless manner which would endanger any visitor or visitor's property. 
G.  Swim or wade except in designated areas. 
H.  Park a bike, except at a bicycle rack if provided, and, if not provided, in such a manner as to create a hazard or interfere with other visitors or activities. 
I.  Engage in any form of gambling. 
J.  Strike or otherwise propel a regulation golf ball. 
K.  Disobey any reasonable order or direction of any city employee, law enforcement officer, or other person designated by the council or park director to give such orders or directions. 
Subd. 3.  Unlawful acts (animals in the park). It is unlawful for any person, in any park or recreation area, to: 
A.  Kill, trap, hunt, pursue or in any manner disturb or cause to be disturbed any wildlife, except that fishing is permitted. 
B.  Bring any dog, cat or other creature unless caged or kept on a leash not more than six feet in length. This clause shall not apply to any dog within an off-leash dog area, provided the following requirements are met: 
1.  The owner of the dog is present within the confines of the off-leash dog area; 
2.  The owner of the dog is within close enough proximity to the dog to be able to physically restrain the dog when necessary; 
3.  An off-leash dog area permit for the dog has been issued by the city and is valid and in effect for the current term of the permit; 
4.  The dog is wearing the city-issued permit tag for its off-leash dog area permit; 
5.  The owner of the dog and the dog are in compliance with all city park regulations for the off-leash dog area; 
6.  No person shall bring a dog declared by the city or any other jurisdiction as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, defined elsewhere in this chapter, into an off-leash dog area; 
7.  The dog has not been ordered by a police officer or animal control officer to be removed from the off-leash dog area. 
If any of the above requirements is not met, such noncompliance shall be deemed as a separate violation of this section and accordingly, unlawful. 
The term "owner" shall have the meaning as provided in the general animal regulations set forth elsewhere in this chapter. The term "off-leash dog area" shall mean a city-designated area within a city park wherein dogs may be permitted to be unrestrained in compliance with this chapter and city park regulations. 
C.  Permit a creature to disturb, harass, or interfere with or endanger any visitor or visitor's property, or tether any creature to a tree, plant, building or park equipment. 
D.  Ride, lead or permit a horse, except in designated riding areas. 
E.  Permit a creature to enter unauthorized areas. Unauthorized areas are active play areas, picnic areas and park buildings. 
F.  Release any insect, fish, animal or other wildlife or introduce any plant, chemical or other agent potentially harmful to the vegetation, water supply or wildlife of the area. 
Subd. 4.  Unlawful acts (weapons and fireworks). It is unlawful for any person, in any park or recreation area, to: 
A.  Possess, carry, fire or discharge any firearm within or into any park or recreation area from beyond its boundaries, except that authorized bows and arrows may be permitted in designated archery areas. 
B.  Discharge any fireworks without a permit from the council or park director. 
Subd. 5.  Unlawful acts (equipment). It is unlawful for any person, in any park or recreation area, to: 
A.  Operate a motor boat or other self-propelled watercraft. Nonmotorized watercraft are permitted. 
B.  Drive or park any vehicle, except an authorized or emergency vehicle on any turf or other area not designated for parking or travel; wash, grease, dismantle, repair, change or deposit the oil of a vehicle anywhere in a park or recreation area. 
C.  Operate a motorized recreational vehicle, except on marked trails and at times designated by the council and/or park director. 
Subd. 6.  Rules and regulations. The council, park and recreation board or park director shall have the right to issue additional administrative rules and regulations relative to but not conflicting with this section. No person shall violate such rules or regulations, and any such violation may be subject to penalties of this section. 
Subd. 7.  City employees. Nothing in this section shall prevent city employees including law enforcement officers from performing their assigned duties. 
Subd. 8.  Discrimination in parks. No person involved in any event or in any use of the parks or recreation areas, including, but not limited to, sponsors of teams, shall deny another person access to, admission to, utilization of, or benefit from any such event or use because of race, age, sex, color, creed, religion or national origin. 
(Code 1983, § 10.23, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 476, 2nd series, § 1, 4-5-2011; Ord. No. 494, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-8-2012; Ord. No. 507, 2nd series, § 3, eff. 6-5-2012; Ord. No. 548, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 9-15-2015) 
State Law reference— Recreational facilities, Minn. Stat. § 471.15.  
Sec. 10.24. - Rules and regulations governing boating and related water activities within the city. 
Subd. 1.  General. In order to promote the safety and the public welfare, the city hereby prohibits all usage of motor-driven watercraft, as defined in Minn. Stat. § 86B.005, subd. 18, on all lakes, ponds, impoundments, lying entirely within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
Subd. 2.  Exceptions. 
A.  Emergency purposes by U.S. Coast Guard, county sheriff's department, city police and fire departments, and other pertinent officials. 
B.  Officials of the state department of natural resources, the state pollution control agency, city parks and recreation personnel, and personnel authorized by the director of parks and recreation. 
C.  County personnel and their agents upon lakes within the county parks system. 
D.  Electric trolling motor-driven watercraft shall be permitted. 
Subd. 3.  Disturbance. No person shall navigate, direct, or handle any boat in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or endanger the occupants of other boats or watercraft, persons, wildlife or domesticated animals, in or upon the water. 
Subd. 4.  Ice fishing houses. No ice fishing house or dark house shall be placed on the ice of any public body of water, with the exception of Holland Lake. Portable structures that are removed at the completion of the fishing day are excepted from this provision. 
Subd. 5.  Seasonal docks. All private seasonal docks shall be removed on or before October 30 of each year. No more than one seasonal dock shall be permitted for each separately owned abutting lakeshore parcel. No seasonal dock shall exceed the following standards: (1) extend 20 feet from the shoreline, and (2) cover more than 60 square feet of water surface. 
Subd. 6.  Pontoons and floating rafts. All private pontoons and floating rafts shall be removed, completely, from all surface waters by October 30 of each year. Only one pontoon or floating raft per property owner shall be allowed, and no pontoon or floating raft shall cover more than 81 square feet of surface water. Each structure shall have a minimum of four red or blue colored reflectors affixed on its sides and shall have the owner's name and address clearly affixed. 
Subd. 7.  Adoption of state laws. Minn. Stat. ch. 86B (Water Safety, Watercraft, and Watercraft Titling) and 6 MCAR 1.0200—1.0212 (Boat and Water Safety Rules), as amended, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as part of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 10.24, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 18, 2nd series, eff. 11-30-84; Ord. No. 119, 2nd series, eff. 6-14-91)  
Sec. 10.25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 414, 2nd series, § 2, effective July 28, 2007, repealed § 10.25 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to compliance with wetland conservation statutes and regulations as enacted by Ord. No. 144, 2nd series, effective May 27, 1992; as amended by Ord. No. 391, 2nd series, § 1, effective July 16, 2005.  
Secs. 10.26—10.29. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10.30. - Curfew. 
Subd. 1.  Curfew—Minors under the age of 12. It is unlawful for any minor person under the age of 12 years to be upon the streets or in any public place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday and 5:00 a.m. of the day next following and any time between 10:00 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday and 5:00 a.m. on the day next following. 
Subd. 2.  Curfew-Minors who are 12 to 14 years of age. It is unlawful for any minor person 12 to 14 years of age to be upon the street or in any public place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday, and 5:00 a.m. of the day next following and any time between 11:00 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday and 5:00 a.m. of the day next following. 
Subd 3.  Curfew—Minors who are 15, 16, or 17 years of age. It is unlawful for any minor person 15, 16, or 17 years of age to be upon the streets or in any public place between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday, and 5:00 a.m. of the day next following and any time between 12:01 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday. 
Subd. 4.  Curfew—Parents and guardians. It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person having the legal care or custody of any minor person to allow or permit such minor person to be or loiter upon the streets or public places in violation of this section unless such minor is accompanied by a person of lawful age having such minor person in charge. 
Subd. 5.  Curfew—Places of amusements, entertainment or refreshment. It is unlawful for any person operating or in charge of any place of amusement, entertainment or refreshment or other place of business to allow or permit any minor person under the age of 18 years to be or loiter in such place in violation of this section unless such minor is accompanied by a person of lawful age having such minor person in charge. This subdivision shall not be construed to permit the presence, at any time, of any person under age in any place where his presence is otherwise prohibited by law. 
Subd. 6.  Exceptions. Such curfew shall not apply to any students under the age of 18 years who are lawfully attending, going to or returning from school, church, or community-sponsored athletic, musical or social activities or events, or employment. 
(Code 1983, § 10.30, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 16, 2nd series, eff. 4-27-84; Ord. No. 364, 2nd series, eff. 9-25-03)  
Sec. 10.31. - Noisy parties or gatherings and electronic sound system/audio equipment. 
Subd. 1.  Noisy parties and gatherings. It is unlawful for any person to permit or to be present at or participate in a noisy party or gathering of people from which noise emanates of sufficient volume or nature so as to disturb the peace, quiet or comfort of another or interferes with the right of another to use peacefully his/her property, whether on public or private property. It shall be presumed that a violation of this section has occurred when any noise from a gathering is plainly audible, at a distance of 50 feet or more, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
It is unlawful for any person, owning or possessing property upon which a party or gathering prohibited herein is in progress, to fail to abate such noise upon an order of a police officer. When a police officer has probable cause that a violation of this section is occurring, the officer may order all persons present, other than the owner or person in possession of the property, to disburse and leave the property immediately and failure of any person, other than the owner or person in possession of the property, to refuse to leave after being so ordered by the police officer shall be unlawful. 
Subd. 2.  Electronic sound system/audio equipment. 
A.  No person shall use or operate any electronic sound system or audio equipment including, but not limited to, any compact disc player, cassette tape player, AM-FM radio, citizen band radio, paging system, or any other device designed to produce or reproduce audio sound; in such an unreasonably loud manner that it disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of others or interferes with the right of another to use peacefully his/her property or public property without disturbance. 
B.  It shall be presumed that a violation of this section has occurred when any electronic sound system or audio equipment is operated in a manner in which it is plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet or more. 
C.  When sound violating this section is produced by an electronic sound system or audio equipment that is located in or on a vehicle, the vehicle's owner is guilty of the violation, provided that if the vehicle's owner is not present, the person in charge of the vehicle at the time of the violation is guilty of the violation. 
D.  This section shall not apply to sound produced by the following: 
1.  Amplifying equipment used in connection with activities for which a permit has been granted or in connection with activities of any organized school, church, civic, or other event or activity open to the public and occurring between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; 
2.  Anti-theft devices; 
3.  Church bells, chimes or carillons, school bells, or emergency civil defense warning signals; and 
4.  Authorized emergency vehicles or other vehicles required by law to be equipped with sound devices. 
Subd. 3.  Permit required for outdoor electronic sound system/audio equipment use after 10:00 p.m. 
A.  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., no person shall use or operate any electronic sound system or audio equipment to produce or reproduce audio sound outdoors, unless such person first obtains a permit from the city prescribed herein, complies with all provisions of this subdivision, and the terms and conditions set forth in the permit. No electronic sound system or audio equipment under the permit shall be operated after 12:00 midnight. For purposes of this subdivision, the term "electronic sound system or audio equipment" shall include any device designed or commonly used to intentionally produce, amplify or reproduce sound. A permit under this subdivision may be approved and issued by the city clerk as set forth in this section. 
B.  Permit application. No permit shall be issued to an applicant unless a written application meeting the requirements set forth below and accompanied by payment of the permit fee established in the city's fee schedule, is filed with the city clerk. The permit application shall contain the following: 
1.  The location for which the permit is sought ("permitted location"); 
2.  The dates and times for which the permit is sought; 
3.  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and the on-site contact person named by the applicant to implement the permit and act as the on-site contact for city officials during the event for which the permit is sought. The applicant and the contact person shall be responsible for compliance with the terms and conditions imposed by the permit and by this Code; 
4.  A description of the facilities, and the electronic sound system or audio equipment to be used for which the permit is sought; 
5.  A statement from the applicant as to whether the applicant or contact person has been issued a similar permit for the outdoor use of electronic sound system or audio equipment within the last five years by this city, any other municipality, or any other government entity with authority to issue such similar permit. The statement shall contain contact information for the permitting entity or entities and a statement as to whether the applicant or contact person was or was not in violation of any term or condition of said permit; and 
6.  Such other and further information as the application form may require in order to carry out the purposes of this subdivision. 
C.  Procedure. The city clerk shall consider all of the following criteria when determining whether to issue a permit upon application: 
1.  The volume, frequency and type of sound to be generated; 
2.  The day of the week and duration of the sound to be generated; 
3.  The character and nature of land uses underlying and adjacent to the land upon which the electronic sound system or audio equipment will be used; and 
4.  Whether the applicant or contact person has complied with the terms of a previous permit or similar permit issued by another municipality or government agency. 
D.  The city clerk shall not issue a permit to any person who has, during the last five years, failed to comply with the terms and conditions of any previously issued electronic sound system or audio equipment permit of this city or any similar permit issued by any other municipality or government entity. The city clerk may deny the permit if the proposed use of electronic sound system or audio equipment will adversely affect surrounding properties. 
E.  The city clerk may impose conditions upon the issuance of any permit that are reasonably related to ensure that the sound generated by the permitted electronic sound system or audio equipment does not unreasonably disturb the persons and property surrounding the permitted location. 
F.  The applicant, or contact person, shall maintain the permit on the permitted premises at all times during which the permitted electronic sound system or audio equipment is in use. The permit shall be presented to any city official or law enforcement officer upon demand. 
G.  Sound measurement and restriction. No sound produced under the permit shall exceed the maximum allowable sound pressure level as measured at locations ¼ mile and ½ mile from the property line of the permitted location. The maximum allowable sound pressure level at a location ¼ radius mile from the property lines of the permitted premises is 55 decibels. The maximum allowable sound pressure level at a location ½ radius mile from the property lines of the permitted premises is 50 decibels. The measurement of sound pressure levels shall be made with a Type I or Type II decibel meter, as defined by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Specifications, Section 1.4-1971, using the A-weighted fast response scale. The decibel meter microphone shall be placed three to five feet above ground level and positioned so as to not create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured sound pressure level. 
H.  Exclusions. This subdivision shall not apply to sound produced by the following: 
1.  Anti-theft devices; 
2.  Church bells, chimes or carillons, school bells, or emergency civil defense warning signals; 
3.  Authorized emergency vehicles or other vehicles required by law to be equipped with sound devices; and 
4.  This subdivision shall not apply to residential properties, provided subd. 2 herein shall apply. 
I.  Permit enforcement. A city law enforcement officer or city official, upon measurement of sound pressure levels exceeding the maximum allowed sound pressure level, may direct the on-site contact person to reduce the sound level emitting from the electronic sound system or audio equipment to a sound level that is at, or below, the maximum allowed sound level. It is unlawful for the applicant or the contact person to fail to comply with such an order. Failure to comply with such an order may result in immediate cessation of noise amplification and revocation of the permit. 
J.  Any violation of this subdivision or a violation of any condition of the permit issued under this subdivision shall be deemed unlawful. 
(Code 1983, § 10.31, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 282, 2nd series, eff. 9-21-99; Ord. No. 318, 2nd series, eff. 9-27-01; Ord. No. 442, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 7-7-09; Ord. No. 570, 2nd series, §§ 1—4, eff. 11-17-2017)  
Sec. 10.32. - Obstructions and dumping on public property. 
Subd. 1. Obstructions . It is unlawful for any person to excavate, obstruct, or place, deposit, display, install, or maintain, or offer for sale any object or materials, including but not limited to: any fence, goods, building or landscaping materials, any structure, any landscaping, any garbage or refuse of any kind, or other objects, on or within any public property, unless granted written permission from the city. This paragraph shall not apply to operable and registered motor vehicles lawfully parked within any designated public parking area, provided the motor vehicle is not blocking any portion of a sidewalk or trail and is not used in connection with the sale of any goods. This subdivision shall not apply to any person participating in an event for which a special event permit or public facility permit has been issued and in accordance with the terms of the permit. 
Subd. 2. Fires. Except where authorized in this Code, it is unlawful for any person to build or maintain a fire upon public property. 
Subd. 3. Dumping on public property. It is unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, place or cause to be placed on public property any household furnishings, appliances or parts or components thereof, vehicle parts or components, construction debris, dirt, earth, yard waste, garbage, refuse, kitchen waste, recyclables or other similar substances, sewage, petroleum products, antifreeze; including fluids leaking from vehicles, or to any water or other fluids thereon. It is unlawful for any person to release or discharge, directly or indirectly, any illicit discharge, as defined in chapter 7 of this Code, into any lake, stream, creek, pond (natural or man-made), or wetland. 
Refuse and recyclables generated during the proper use of a public property facility and properly disposed of in designated refuse or recyclable receptacles at the same location is not a violation of this subdivision. 
Subd. 4. Signs and other structures. It is unlawful for any person to place or maintain a sign, advertisement, or other structure on public property without first having obtained a written permit from the council. 
Subd. 5. Snow or ice on public property. It is unlawful for any person not acting under a contract with the city to dump snow or ice on public property. 
Subd. 6. Continuing violation. Each day that any person continues in violation of this section shall be a separate offense and punishable as such. A violation of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance. Any person who is in violation of this section shall immediately remove the obstruction, fill the excavation, recover or abate any illicit discharge in the city's municipal storm sewer system, or otherwise comply with the section upon demand by the city; upon failure to do so, the violator shall pay the costs incurred by the city in connection with its removal or abatement. 
Subd. 7. Condition. Before granting any permit under any of the provisions of this section, the council may impose such insurance or bonding conditions thereon as it, considering the projected danger to public or private property or to persons, deems proper for safeguarding such persons and property. Such insurance or bond shall also protect the city from any suit, action or cause of action arising by reason of such obstruction. 
Subd. 8. City employees and authorized agents exempt. This section does not apply to any employee or authorized agent of a unit of government having jurisdiction within the city while performing the required duties of his/her job to protect public safety or maintain public streets, property or infrastructure. 
(Code 1983, § 10.32, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 468, 2nd series, § 1, 12-21-2010; Ord. No. 476, 2nd series, § 2, 4-5-2011; Ord. No. 494, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 2-8-2012; Ord. No. 537, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 2-17-2015)  
Sec. 10.33. - Reserved. 
(Code 1983, § 10.33, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 33, 2nd series, eff. 5-6-86)  
Sec. 10.34. - Drug paraphernalia—Possession, manufacture, delivery and advertisement prohibited.[2] 
Subd. 1.  Definitions. 
A.  Drug paraphernalia. "Drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of Minn. Stat. ch. 152. It includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
2.  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances; 
3.  Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance; 
4.  Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances; 
5.  Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
6.  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances; 
7.  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining marihuana; 
8.  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances; 
9.  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
10.  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; 
11.  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body; 
12.  Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marihuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
(a)  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
(b)  Water pipes; 
(c)  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
(d)  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
(e)  Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold burning material such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
(f)  Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials; 
(g)  Chamber pipes; 
(h)  Carburetor pipes; 
(i)  Electric pipes; 
(j)  Air-driven pipes; 
(k)  Chillums; 
(l)  Bongs; 
(m)  Ice pipes or chillers. 
B.  Other terms. Other terms are as defined in Minn. Stat. § 152.01. 
C.  Evidence. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority shall consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
1.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
2.  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance; 
3.  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this act; 
4.  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
5.  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object; 
6.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom he knows or should reasonably know intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of Minn. Stat. ch. 152; the innocence of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of Minn. Stat. ch. 152, shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia; 
7.  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
8.  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use; 
9.  National and local advertising concerning its use; 
10.  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
11.  Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
12.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
13.  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; 
14.  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
Subd. 2.  Prohibitions. 
A.  Possession of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to use or to possess with intent to use drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of Minn. Stat. ch. 152. 
B.  Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver drug paraphernalia, knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of Minn. Stat. ch. 152. 
C.  Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor. Any person 18 years of age or over who violates subparagraph B, above, by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of age who is at least three years his junior is guilty of a special offense. 
D.  Advertisement of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably should know that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
Subd. 3.  Civil forfeiture. All drug paraphernalia as defined by subdivision 1 is subject to forfeiture, subject to the provisions set forth in Minn. Stat. § 609.5311 et seq., in the same manner as if said forfeiture were pursuant to Minn. Stat. ch. 609. 
(Ord. No. 74, eff. 11-06-80; Code 1983, § 10.34, eff. 1-1-83) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Drug paraphernalia, Minn. Stat. § 152.092 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10.35. - Stalking and harassing behavior. 
Subd. 1.  Stalking prohibited. A person who commits any of the following shall be guilty of stalking: 
A.  Willfully and repeatedly follows another person and makes a credible threat to that person; or 
B.  Repeatedly makes any form of communication to a person, whether or not a conversation ensues, and makes a credible threat to that person; or 
C.  Willfully and repeatedly harasses another person and makes a credible threat to that person. 
Subd. 2.  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
A.  Credible threat means a threat, through words or actions, that would cause a reasonable person to be in fear for that person's life or safety. 
B.  Repeatedly means on more than one occasion within a six-month period or three or more occasions within a 12-month period. 
C.  Harasses means a knowing and willful course of conduct directed at a specific person which seriously alarms or harasses the person and which serves no legitimate purpose. The course of conduct must be such as would cause a reasonable person to suffer substantial emotional distress and must actually cause substantial emotional distress. 
Subd. 3.  Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this section. 
(Ord. No. 157, 2nd series, eff. 1-29-93)  
Sec. 10.36. - Trespass on private property. 
A.  No person shall enter upon the land of another and, without claim of right, intentionally refuse to depart therefrom on demand of the lawful possessor thereof or his/her agent. A demand to depart may be made as follows: 
1.  Orally, by the lawful possessor or the possessor's agent; 
2.  By conspicuously posting signs which prohibit entry on the affected land; or 
3.  By conspicuously posting signs which prohibit entry onto the affected land during certain hours. 
B.  No person, after receiving a written demand not to re-enter the lawful possessor's land, shall re-enter the lawful possessor's land without the written permission of the lawful possessor, or his/her agent, for a period of up to 365 days from the date of the written demand as provided therein. 
(Ord. No. 283, 2nd series, eff. 9-21-99)  
Sec. 10.37. - Equipment and construction activity noise regulations. 
Subd 1.  The following activity shall be unlawful on public or private property between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.: 
A.  Construction activity, including but not limited to: operation, repair, servicing and engine start-up/warm-up of heavy construction equipment; loading and unloading of heavy equipment; and delivery of supplies; 
B.  The use of any power tools for construction activity including, but not limited to: saws; jackhammers; nail drivers; impact wrenches; and air compressors; 
C.  The use of power lawn or landscape maintenance equipment, including but not limited to: lawn mowers; hedge clippers; grass/weed trimmers; garden tillers; chainsaws; leafblowers; wood chippers; and 
D.  Repair and servicing of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles or other vehicles or equipment. 
Subd 2.  Exemption. The following activities are specifically exempted from the prohibitions under this section. 
A.  Mining and excavation regulated by a mining and excavation permit; 
B.  All activities and land uses regulated by conditional use permits including but not limited to fuel facilities, fast food establishments, major auto repair, school activities and day care facilities; 
C.  Public work construction and maintenance by federal, state, county or city authorities or their contractors and sub-contractors as approved by the city engineer; 
D.  Snow removal activities; 
E.  Emergency public works repair/construction; and 
F.  Parking lot maintenance or sweeping. 
(Ord. No. 284, 2nd series, 9-21-99)  
Secs. 10.38, 10.39. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10.40. - Fire-related regulations. 
Subd. 1. Adoption . The current edition of the Minnesota State Fire Code, and any amendments thereto established and adopted from time to time by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety, is hereby adopted as though set forth verbatim herein. One copy of said code shall be marked "City of Eagan - Official Copy" and kept on file in the office of protective inspections and open to inspection and use by the public. 
Subd. 2.  Enforcement. 
A.  The fire chief or his authorized representative shall enforce the provisions of this section. 
B.  The fire chief may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The fire chief may recommend the employment of technical inspectors who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to members and nonmembers of the fire department, and appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite term with removal only for cause. 
Subd. 3.  Definitions. 
A.  Whenever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the city. 
B.  Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the city attorney. 
Subd. 4.  New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits. The chief building official, a representative appointed by the council and the fire chief or his representative shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in said code. The fire chief shall post such names in a conspicuous place in his office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
Codifier's note— Ord. No. 175, 2nd series, repealed prior subdivision 4 entitled "Amendments Made in the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code," and renamed subdivision 5 as subdivision 4. 
Subd. 5.  Fire lane signage requirements. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this subdivision is to create a uniformity in fire lane signage throughout the city, thereby furthering the prevention and control of fires and fire hazards. 
B.  Standards. All fire lanes on private and public property as designated and approved by the fire chief shall be marked by signage in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  The sign plate shall be 12 × 18 inches; 
2.  The sign plate shall be made of aluminum and shall have red lettering on a white 3M or equal engineer's grade reflective sheeting; 
3.  The sign shall only read: 
No Parking Fire Lane 
4.  A sign shall be posted at each end of the fire lane and at every 100-foot interval along the fire lane; 
5.  The sign shall face the direction of travel; 
6.  The post on which the sign is attached shall be set back at least two feet but not more than three feet from the curb or driving surface; and 
7.  The bottom of the sign plate shall be at least seven feet above the ground. 
8.  The signpost and its foundation and sign mountings shall be so constructed as to hold signs in a proper and permanent position, to resist swaying in the wind or displacement by vandalism. 
Subd. 6. Recreational fires . 
A.  Purpose . The purpose of this subdivision is to establish regulations for recreational fires within the city, thereby furthering the prevention and control of fires and fire hazards. 
B.  Requirements for recreational fires. No recreational fire shall be burned without first obtaining a recreational fire permit from the city. The permit shall be on the form and pursuant to the application process prescribed by the Eagan Fire Chief. A recreational fire permit shall be valid for the calendar year of issuance, effective from the date of issuance to December 31st, and subject to annual renewal thereafter. All permits are subject to the regulations set forth herein and may be revoked for the failure to comply therewith. 
All recreational fires on private and public property shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Fires must be a minimum of 25 feet from all combustible materials (i.e., dwellings and structures, decks, fences, etc.), except an outdoor fireplace, as defined herein, shall be a minimum of 15 feet from all combustible materials. 
2.  All fires shall be contained within a fire pit, an outdoor fireplace, or fire bowl, chiminea, or any other free-standing container manufactured for the sole purpose of recreational fires. No outdoor fireplace, or fire bowl, chiminea, or any other free-standing container shall be used upon any deck or patio that is constructed of wood, composite materials or any other combustible materials. 
3.  Fire pits shall be constructed of and completely surrounded by non-combustible materials, and shall be located a minimum of ten feet from all property lines. 
4.  Outdoor fireplaces and fire bowls, chimineas, and all other free-standing fire containers must comply with all regulations herein. 
5.  The size of the fire shall not exceed three feet × three feet × three feet. 
6.  Only dry, clean, unpainted, and untreated wood or cooking charcoal may be burned. All wood to be burned shall be no longer than three feet in length. Tree branches and sticks, provided they are dry, clean wood, may be burned as starter kindling for the recreational fire, but shall not be burned for purposes of disposal in an open burning manner. Brush piles and bush/scrub debris may not be burned and shall be deemed as yard waste. 
7.  Chemically treated products, garbage and yard waste, including but not limited to: chemically treated fireplace logs; treated, painted, stained or glued woods, such as plywood or particle board; furniture or other household items; or leaves, grass clippings or garden vegetation, shall not be burned. 
8.  No fire shall be allowed if winds are greater than 15 miles per hour. 
9.  A garden hose attached to a water supply or other approved fire extinguishing device shall be readily available at the location of the recreational fire. 
10.  The fire must be attended at all times by a person over 18 years in age. 
11.  Prior to igniting any fire, a recreational fire permit shall be issued by the Eagan Fire Department. 
12.  No fire shall be allowed during the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. Notwithstanding, all fires are subject to extinguishment at the direction of the fire or police department. 
13.  All outdoor fireplaces shall require a building permit pursuant to chapter 4 herein. All outdoor fireplaces shall have a spark arrester. 
The fire chief shall have the authority to revoke a recreational fire permit when the permit holder has two or more violations of any regulation herein within a 12-month period. No permit will be issued for a property at which a permit has been revoked or two or more violations of any regulation herein occurred at the property within the preceding 12 months of permit application. 
C.  Standards for fires or barbecues on balconies or patios . For any structure containing three or more dwelling units that have a common hallway or shared means of egress: 
1.  No grills, whether electric, gas, charcoal or open flame, shall be used or stored upon any balcony above ground level or on any ground floor patio within 15 feet of the structure. 
2.  No person shall store or use any fuel, barbecue torch or other similar heating or lighting chemical or device on any balcony above ground level, or on any ground floor patio within 15 feet of a structure. 
3.  No person shall kindle, maintain, or cause any fire or open flame on any balcony above ground level or on any ground floor patio within 15 feet of a structure. 
D.  Definitions. 
1.  Recreational fire . The term "recreational fire" shall mean an outdoor wood burning fire conducted in compliance with the regulations set forth in this subdivision and done so for the sole purpose of recreational pleasure and not for the purpose of destroying or disposing of refuse, garbage, brush, yard waste or any other item. 
2.  Outdoor fireplace . The term "outdoor fireplace" shall mean a wood-burning structure that may be custom built or prefab manufactured for the purpose of outdoor cooking or recreational fires and includes outdoor wood-burning ovens. The outdoor fireplace is of such size and weight as to require reinforced concrete slab as to render it permanent in nature. An outdoor fireplace has a single front-loading firebox, a smoke chamber and chimney with a spark arrester. Any outdoor wood burning apparatus that does not meet this definition in any respect shall be deemed as a chiminea or other free standing wood burning container for purposes of this subdivision. 
Subd.  7. Open burning. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this subdivision is to establish regulations for open burning fires within the city, thereby furthering the prevention and control of fires and fire hazards. This subdivision establishes permitted categories of open burn events within the city and provides a permit process for open burning that does not constitute recreational fires. 
B.  Requirements for open burning. All open burning fires on private and public property shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  No person shall start or allow any fire on any property in the city that does not comply with the recreational fire requirements in this section unless the person first obtained an open burn permit. 
2.  Open burning permits shall be obtained by making application for approval to the city fire chief, fire marshal, fire inspector, or fire official on a form prescribed by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and adopted by the Eagan Fire Department. The location is subject to a preliminary site inspection to locate the proposed burn site, note any special conditions necessary for the permit, review fire safety considerations, and set dates and times of permitted burn. If established criteria for the issuance of an open burning permit are not met during review of the application or it is determined that a practical alternative method for disposal of the material exists or a pollution or nuisance condition would result, or if an open burn event safety plan cannot be drafted to the satisfaction of the fire chief, fire marshal, fire inspector or fire official, the application for the open burn permit may be denied. 
3.  A minimum of five acres is required to obtain an open burn permit, and the open burn must be a minimum of 300 feet from all combustible materials (i.e. dwellings and structures). 
4.  The permit holder shall be at and attending to the open burn at all times. The open fire shall be completely extinguished before the permit holder or his/her representative leaves the site. No fire may be allowed to smolder without the permit holder or his/her representative present on the site. 
5.  The open burn site shall have available appropriate communication and fire suppression equipment as set forth in the fire safety plan in case of an emergency. 
6.  The permit holder shall have the valid permit available for inspection by the police department, fire department, MPCA or DNR forest officer on the open burn site. 
7.  No permits will be issued when the DNR has officially declared a burning ban due to potential hazardous fire conditions or when the MPCA has declared an Air Quality Alert. 
8.  The permit holder shall comply with and implement all special conditions noted on the permit and conditions of the burn event safety plan as established. The permit holder shall be responsible for all costs incurred as a result of the burn, including but not limited to city fire suppression and administrative costs and fees incurred in connection with the open burn. 
9.  The open burning permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of the fire chief, fire marshal, fire inspector, fire official, police department, MPCA, or DNR forest officer. Reasons for revocation may include but are not limited to a fire hazard existing or developing during the course of the burn; any of the conditions of the permit are violated during the course of the burn; a pollution or nuisance condition developed during the course of the burn; or a fire smoldering with no flames present. 
C.  Open burn permits. Open burning permits will be allowed only for the elimination of health hazards, by fire, that cannot be abated by other practical means; ground thawing for utility repair and construction; disposal of vegetative material for managing forest, prairie or wildlife habitat; and in development and maintenance of land and right-of-way where chipping, composting, land spreading or other alternative methods are not possible or practical; disposal of diseased trees generated on site; disposal of diseased or infected nursery stock; and fire training that is permitted by the MPCA. 
Subd. 8. Declaration of burning ban. The city fire chief may declare a burning ban within the city subject to the terms herein. A burning ban may be declared when a public fire hazard exists within the city based upon the city's fire danger rating as established by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources. A burning ban may be in effect for a period up to 30 days, unless the city council authorizes a ban for a period longer than 30 days. All recreational fires and open fires are prohibited and no open burning permits will be issued during a declared burning ban. 
(Code 1983, § 10.40, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 166, 2nd series, eff. 5-14-93; Ord. No. 175, 2nd series, eff. 2-4-94; Ord. No. 183, 2nd series, eff. 6-24-94; Ord. No. 269, 2nd series, eff. 12-24-98; Ord. No. 424, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 4-15-08; Ord. No. 502, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 5-15-2012; Ord. No. 513, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 11-20-2012; Ord. No. 515, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 3-5-2013; Ord. No. 579, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 9-14-2018) 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 2.32.  
Sec. 10.41. - Air pollution control. 
The air pollution control rules, promulgated by the state pollution control agency, are hereby adopted by reference as though set forth verbatim herein. Three copies of said rules shall be marked "City of Eagan—Official Copy" and kept on file in the office of the city clerk-treasurer and open to inspection and use by the public. It is unlawful to violate a provision of this section or of the air pollution control rules hereby adopted by reference. 
(Code 1983, § 10.41, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 10.42. - Noise pollution regulations. 
Subd. 1.  Adoption of regulations. The noise pollution control section of the state regulations published by the state pollution control agency are hereby adopted by reference as though set forth verbatim herein. Two copies of said regulations shall be marked "City of Eagan—Official Copy" and kept on file in the office of the city clerk-treasurer and open to inspection and use by the public. 
Subd. 2.  Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person to create or maintain levels of sound in excess of those permitted by the noise pollution standards. 
Subd. 3.  Alternative remedy. The city may, at its option, seek civil injunctive relief to enforce the noise pollution regulations adopted in this section. 
(Code 1983, § 10.42, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 10.43. - Fire, burglary and safety alarm regulations and requirements. 
Subd. 1. Purpose. To preserve and protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Eagan, this section regulates the use of fire, burglary and safety alarms and establishes a service charge for the costs to the city as a result of the Eagan police department and fire department responses to excessive false alarm calls due to a faulty or negligently operated automatic alarm. 
Subd. 2. Definitions. For the purpose of this section: 
Alarm user means the person or entity using and responsible for an automatic alarm to protect premises, regardless of whether the person owns or leases the property. 
Automatic alarm means any device or system which is designed to be used for the detection of an unauthorized person in any structure, for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act, or for the detection of smoke, fire, heat, carbon monoxide, or other hazardous condition within a structure, and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated. Automobile alarm devices shall not be considered an automatic alarm for the purposes of this section. 
Audible alarm means a device designed for the detection of smoke, fire, heat, carbon monoxide, or other hazardous condition or of an unauthorized entry on the premises from which the alarm activates or generates an audible sound on or near the premises. 
Calendar year means the period January 1 through December 31 of each year. 
False alarm means the city's police department personnel or fire department personnel responding to an automatic alarm, whether it is as a result of direct contact with the alarm signal or contact by a third party reporting the activated alarm, when an emergency situation or hazardous condition did not exist. 
Subd. 3. Regulations and requirements. 
A.  Audible alarm. All audible alarms shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Every person maintaining an automatic alarm with an audible alarm shall post a notice containing the name and telephone number of a person to be notified to render a response or service to such alarm system during any hour of the day or night upon activation of such alarm system. Such notice shall be posted at the main entrance to such premises or near the alarm in such a position as to be legible from the ground level adjacent to the building. This provision shall not apply to audible alarms within a single or two family residential dwelling. 
2.  Alarm systems with audible alarm signals, except for fire, heat, or carbon monoxide alarms, shall have an automatic shutoff which will silence the audible alarm signal within a period not to exceed 20 minutes. 
B.  In-house annunciator panel. Any building having an alarm system with multiple sensors shall have an in-house annunciator panel, which provides specific enumeration of the sensors' locations, at a private monitoring location on the premises. When, in the judgment of the police department, no such private monitoring location is possible upon the premises, the requirements of this subparagraph B may be waived. 
C.  No person shall install or use, monitor, and possess an automatic alarm system which utilizes taped or prerecorded messages that are delivered or otherwise transmitted directly to the police or fire department or the city's dispatch center, including automatic transmission of the emergency number 911. 
Subd. 4. Public nuisance declared and service fee. 
A.  More than three false alarms within a calendar year are declared to be a public nuisance. 
B.  A service fee shall be imposed upon the alarm user of any automatic alarm and the property owner of the premises on which the automatic alarm is located for the fourth false alarm and each false alarm thereafter within a calendar year. The fee shall be in the amount duly adopted by council resolution. 
C.  The service fee shall be imposed regardless of whether the city's police department or fire department receives the alarm by direct connection or through any intermediary such as a central station. No fee is imposed under this section when notification to either department is made directly by a person not as a result of or in response to an activated automatic alarm. 
D.  The property owner and alarm user shall be personally liable for any service fee imposed under this section. Payment of fees under this section shall be made to the city within 30 days after mailing the invoice. Payments not made within 30 days are delinquent and subject to a late penalty of 10 percent of the amount due. All unpaid fees and penalties shall become a lien against the property on which the automatic alarm is located and shall be certified by the city clerk to the county treasurer-auditor each year as a special assessment in accordance with the statutes of the state. 
E.  A newly installed automatic alarm systems shall be exempt from the provisions of this section for a period of 30 days from the date of installation in order to allow for proper testing and troubleshooting of the system. 
(Code 1983, § 10.43, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 150, 2nd series, eff. 12-11-92; Ord. No. 505, 2nd series, § 4, eff. 5-15-2012; Ord. No. 532, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 6-17-2014) 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 2.32.  
Sec. 10.44. - Repeat nuisance call service fee. 
Subd. 1.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the public safety, health and welfare and to prevent and abate repeat service response calls by the city to the same property or location for nuisance service calls, as defined herein, which prevent police or public safety services to other residents of the city. It is the intent of the city by the adoption of this section to impose and collect service call fees from the owner or occupant, or both, of property to which city officials must repeatedly respond for any repeat nuisance event or activity that generates extraordinary costs to the city. The repeat nuisance service call fee is intended to cover that cost over and above the cost of providing normal law or code enforcement services and police protection city wide. 
Subd. 2.  Scope and application. This section shall apply to all owners and occupants of private property which is the subject or location of the repeat nuisance service call by the city. This section shall apply to any repeat nuisance service calls as set forth herein made by an Eagan peace officer, part time peace officer, community service officer, animal control officers and code enforcement technicians. 
Subd. 3.  Definition of nuisance call or similar conduct. 
A.  The term nuisance service call shall mean any activity, conduct, or condition occurring upon private property within the city which: (i) unreasonably annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any member of the public; (ii) or will, or will tend to, alarm, anger or disturb others or provoke breach of the peace, to which the city is required to respond, including, but not limited to the following: 
1.  Any activity, conduct, or condition deemed as a public nuisance under any provision of the City Code; 
2.  Any activity, conduct, or condition in violation of any provision of chapter 10 of the City Code; 
3.  Any conduct, activity or condition constituting a violation of Minnesota state laws prohibiting or regulating prostitution, gambling, controlled substances, use of firearms; and 
4.  Any conduct, activity, or condition constituting disorderly conduct under Minn. Stat. ch. 609. 
Subd. 4.  Repeat nuisance service call fee. The city may impose a repeat nuisance service call fee upon the owner or occupant of private property if the city has rendered services or responded to the property on three or more occasions within a period of 365 days in response to or for the abatement of nuisance conduct, activity, or condition of the same or similar kind. The repeat nuisance service call fee under this section shall be an amount as set forth and duly adopted by city council resolution. All repeat nuisance service call fees imposed and charged against the owner or occupant under this section shall be deemed delinquent 30 days after the city's mailing a billing statement therefore. Delinquent payments are subject to a ten percent late penalty of the amount due. 
Subd. 5.  Notice. No repeat nuisance service call fee may be imposed against an owner or occupant of property without first providing the owner or occupant with written notice of the prior nuisance service calls prior to the latest nuisance service call rendered by the city upon which the fee is imposed. The written notice shall: 
(1)  State the nuisance conduct, activity or condition that is or has occurred or is maintained or permitted on the property, the dates of the nuisance conduct, activity or condition; 
(2)  State that the owner or occupant may be subject to a repeat nuisance call service fee if a third nuisance service call is rendered to the property for the same nuisance, in addition to the city's right to seek other legal remedies or actions for abatement of the nuisance or compliance with the law, and 
(3)  Be served personally or by U.S. mail upon the owner or occupant at the last known address. 
Subd. 6.  Right to appeal repeat nuisance service call fee. Upon the imposition of a repeat nuisance service call fee, the city shall inform the owner or occupant of his/her right to a hearing on the alleged repeat nuisance service calls. The owner or occupant upon whom the fee is imposed may request a hearing by serving upon the city clerk within five business days of the mailing of the fee invoice, inclusive of the day the invoice is mailed, a written request for hearing. The hearing shall be heard by the hearing office within 14 days of the date of the owner's or occupant's request for hearing. 
The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner and the Minnesota Rules of Civil Procedure and Rules of Evidence shall not be strictly applied. The hearing need not be transcribed, but may be transcribed at the sole expense of the party who requests the transcription. After considering all evidence submitted, the hearing officer shall make written findings of fact and conclusions on the issue of whether the city responded to or rendered services for repeat nuisance service calls of the same or similar kind on three or more occasions within a 365 day period. The findings and conclusions shall be served upon the owner or occupant by U.S. mail within five days of the notice of hearing. 
An owner or occupant's right to a hearing shall be deemed waived if the owner or occupant fails to serve a written request for hearing as required herein or fails to appear at the scheduled hearing date. Upon waiver of the right to hearing, or upon the hearing officer's written findings of fact and conclusions that the repeat nuisance call service fee is warranted hereunder, the owner or occupant shall immediately pay the fee imposed. 
Subd. 7.  Legal Remedies Nonexclusive. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the city's other available legal remedies for any violation of the law which may constitute a nuisance service call hereunder, including criminal, civil, injunctive or others. 
(Ord. No. 311, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 5-24-01)  
Sec. 10.45. - Coal tar sealant product ban. 
Subd. 1. Adoption. The Minnesota coal tar sealant product law, currently set forth in Minn. Stat. § 116.202, and any amendments thereto established and adopted from time to time, is hereby adopted as though set forth verbatim herein. One copy of said statute shall be marked "City of Eagan - Official Copy" and kept on file in the office of the city clerk and open to inspection and use by the public. 
Subd. 2. Enforcement. It is unlawful for any person to violate any provisions of the Minnesota coal tar sealant product law within the city. The city's chief building official or the official's inspectors or any code enforcement technician may enforce the provisions of the Minnesota coal tar sealant product law within the city. 
(Ord. No. 526, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-4-2014)  
Secs. 10.46—10.49. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10.50. - Abandoning a motor vehicle. 
It is unlawful for any person to abandon a motor vehicle on any public or private property without the consent of the person in control of such property. For the purpose of this section, a "motor vehicle" is as defined in Minn. Stat. ch. 169, and an "abandoned motor vehicle" is as defined in City Code, section 2.70. 
(Code 1983, § 10.50, eff. 1-1-83) 
Cross reference— Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles, § 2.70; traffic regulations, ch. 8.  
Sec. 10.51. - Junk vehicles, furniture, household furnishings and appliances stored on public or private property. 
It is unlawful to park or store any motor vehicle, as defined by Minn. Stat. chs. 168 and 169, that is unlicensed, unregistered, inoperable or displaying expired registration tabs; household furnishings or appliances; or parts or components thereof on any property, public or private, unless housed within a lawfully erected building. Any violation of this section is declared to be a public nuisance. The abatement of the public nuisance shall be in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 10.51, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 285, 2nd series, eff. 9-21-99; Ord. No. 505, 2nd series, § 5, eff. 5-15-2012) 
Cross reference— Traffic regulations, ch. 8.  
Sec. 10.52. - Prohibited use and parking of mobile homes and recreational camping vehicles. 
Subd. 1.  Definitions. The terms "mobile home" and "recreational camping vehicle" shall mean and include the following definitions: 
A.  Travel trailer means a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses, permanently identified "travel trailer" by the manufacturer of the trailer. 
B.  Pickup coach means a structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation. 
C.  Motor home means a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 
D.  Camping trailer means a folding structure, mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation and vacation uses. 
Subd. 2.  Unlawful acts. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to park a mobile home or recreational camping vehicle upon public or private property for human habitation except in a licensed mobile home park. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to park or store a mobile home or recreational vehicle in the setback area of any property in a "residence district" for more than 72 hours, and in no event may such mobile home or recreational vehicle be parked within 15 feet of the improved portion of any roadway. For the purpose of this provision, the term "setback" means within 15 feet of the improved portion of any roadway. 
(Code 1983, § 10.52, eff. 1-1-83) 
Cross reference— Traffic regulations, ch. 8; parking regulations, ch. 9.  
Sec. 10.53. - Building and structure safety and appearance regulations. 
Subd. 1.  Building and structure appearance and maintenance requirements. 
A.  Any building or structure other than accessory buildings on farms is a public nuisance if its exterior does not comply with the following requirements: 
1.  An owner, lessee, or occupant of property or a dwelling may not allow the accumulation of dirt or filth on the exterior premises occupied or controlled in a manner that could create a health hazard to the dwelling occupants or the general public. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. 
2.  No part of any exterior surface shall have deterioration, holes, breaks, gaps, or loose or rotting siding. All exterior surfaces including, but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches and trim, shall be maintained in a good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. 
3.  Every exterior surface shall be maintained to avoid noticeable deterioration of the finish. No wall or other exterior surface shall have peeling, cracked, chipped, or otherwise deteriorated surface finish on more than 20 percent of: 
(a)  Any one wall or other surface; and 
(b)  All door and window moldings, eaves, gutters, and similar projections on any one side or surface. 
4.  Every window, exterior light fixture, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair, weather tight, and shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. 
5.  All cornices, moldings, decorative features, lintels, sills, bay or dormer windows, and similar projections shall be kept in good repair and free from cracks and defects which make them hazardous or unsightly. 
6.  All siding and masonry joints, including joints between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights, shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight. 
7.  Roof structures, including but not limited to: drains, gutters and downspouts, facia and trim, shall be maintained in good repair. All roof drainage systems shall be attached securely. 
8.  Chimney, antennae, air vents, and other similar projections shall be structurally sound and in good repair. Such projections shall be attached securely, where applicable, to an exterior wall or roof. 
9.  Retaining walls shall be structurally sound and in good repair. 
10.  All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in sound and good repair and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
11.  All foundation walls shall be maintained so as to prevent the entry of rodents. 
12.  Every exterior stairway, ramp, deck, porch, balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be kept in sound and good repair, maintained structurally sound and free of hazardous conditions, anchored and capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
13.  Every handrail and guardrail shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in sound and good repair and free from hazardous conditions. 
B.  Any fence is a public nuisance if it does not comply with the following requirements: 
1.  The fence shall be firmly fastened and anchored in order that it is not leaning or otherwise in the stage of collapse. 
2.  The fence shall be maintained in sound and good repair and free from deterioration, loose or rotting pieces, or holes, breaks, or gaps not otherwise intended in the original design of the fence. The fence shall be free from any defects or condition which makes the fence hazardous. 
3.  All exterior wood surfaces of any fence, other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements by paint or other protective surface covering or treatment, which shall be maintained in good repair to provide the intended protection from the elements. 
4.  No fence section shall have peeling, cracked, chipped or otherwise deteriorated surface finish, including but not limited to: paint or other protective covering or treatment, on more than 20 percent of any one linear ten-foot section of the fence. 
For purposes of this section, "fence" means any structure, wall, or gate erected as a permanent dividing marker, partition, visual or physical barrier, or enclosure, excluding any permitted temporary fence as regulated in the zoning regulations of this Code, within a parcel of land regardless if the parcel is platted or unplatted. 
Subd. 2.  Exterior property public health and safety requirements. 
A.  Any building or structure in the city which is found by an authorized employee or agent of the city to be dangerous to public safety, health or property by reason of the following is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a hazardous structure or condition: 
1.  Damage by fire; 
2.  Defective chimneys or stovepipes; 
3.  Dilapidated condition or decay; 
4.  Defective electrical wiring; 
5.  Defective gas installations; 
6.  Defective heating apparatus; 
7.  Defective sewage disposal system; 
8.  Defective plumbing; or 
9.  Any other defect endangering the public safety, health, or other property. 
B.  Any building or other structure which is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, vermin- or rodent-infested, or which lacks provisions for basic illumination, ventilation, or sanitary facilities to the extent that the defects create a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants or of the public, may be declared unfit for human habitation by an authorized employee or agent of the city. 
C.  Whenever any building has been declared unfit for human habitation, the city may proceed to declare the building a hazardous building or hazardous property and may seek to correct or remove the hazardous condition and assess the costs therefor as authorized by Minnesota Statutes. 
Subd. 3.  Firewood storage. 
A.  The term firewood shall mean split wood or unsplit wood logs cut into lengths not exceeding three feet for the purpose of burning for a fireplace or a recreational fire on the property. 
B.  Firewood shall be kept or stored outdoors in accordance with the following requirements. 
1.  Firewood shall be stored or kept in neat and secure stacks (maximum of four stacks), each of which shall be no higher than five feet, with the combined firewood stacks not exceeding a volume equal to five feet high by ten feet wide by 20 feet long. The firewood stacks shall be elevated at least three and one-half inches above grade. 
2.  Unless screened by a solid fence or wall, stacks shall not be closer than five feet to the property line. 
3.  The firewood stacks shall not be infested with rats, rodents, vermin, or insects. 
4.  The firewood shall not be stored in the front yard or yard that is commonly considered the front yard of any lot. 
5.  Fallen, uncut, trees may be stored for up to 30 days. 
6.  The firewood shall be located no closer than five feet to an inhabited building or structure. For purposes of this subdivision, an attached or detached garage shall not be considered an inhabited building or structure. 
Subd. 4. Workmanship requirements. All maintenance and repairs shall re-establish the structure and/or property to its original safety, appearance and maintenance standards. 
Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations shall be executed and installed in accordance with the Minnesota State Building, Plumbing, Mechanical, Fuel Gas, Electrical and Fire Codes, the City Code, and the manufacturer's installation instructions. All repairs, maintenance, and alterations to the exterior of the primary structure shall be constructed of or completed with compatible or like materials and finishes to blend into or match surrounding exterior surfaces. 
(Ord. No. 296, 2nd series, § 4, 7-27-00; Ord. No. 319, 2nd series, §§ 1—3, eff. 10-25-01; Ord. No. 470, 2nd series, § 1, 2-1-2011; Ord. No. 505, 2nd series, § 6, eff. 5-15-2012)  
Secs. 10.54—10.59. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10.60. - City services related to responsibilities of property owner and/or abatement of public nuisance. 
Subd. 1. Definition . For purposes of this section, the term "service" shall mean any of the following services performed by the city due to the property owner's failure to do so: snow, ice, or rubbish removal from sidewalks; weed elimination from public street boulevard areas or private property; removal or elimination of public health or safety hazards from private property, excluding any hazardous building under Minn. Stat. §§ 463.15 through 463.26; trimming and care of trees on private property, and treatment or removal of insect-infested or diseased trees on private property; public safety false alarm services; and abatement of other public nuisances. 
Subd. 2. Procedure prior to abatement by city . Upon the city's written notice by U.S. mail to the property owner, the property owner shall complete any work as required under this chapter or elsewhere in this Code or otherwise abate any declared public nuisance from the owner's property within the time period set forth in the notice. If the property owner fails to complete the work or otherwise abate the public nuisance, the city may perform the work which is the property owner's primary responsibility hereunder or otherwise abate the public nuisance on the owner's property. 
Subd. 3. Costs of abatement . The owner of property on which the work or service has been performed by the city as set forth herein shall be personally liable for the cost of the service. The city shall prepare and mail an invoice for the costs of the service to the owner, and the charges shall be due and payable to the city within 30 days of the date of invoice. Any charges remaining unpaid after 30 days shall be delinquent. Delinquent charges for a service shall be subject to a late penalty fee as determined by council resolution. 
Subd. 4. Special assessment for unpaid charges . Any delinquent charges for a service, including the late penalty fee, shall be specially assessed against the property in accordance with Minn. Stat. ch. 429 and shall become a lien upon the property. 
(Ord. No. 505, 2nd series, § 7, eff. 5-15-2012)  
Secs. 10.61—10.98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10.99. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful or performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure is prohibited or declared unlawful by a code adopted by reference by this chapter and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. 
(Code 1983, § 10.99, eff. 1-1-83)  
Chapter 11 - LAND USE REGULATIONS (ZONING)[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 366, 2nd series, effective Oct. 7, 2003, amended chapter 11 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 11 pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Code 1983, as amended. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. Amendments to the chapter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. For stylistic purposes, heading and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Material enclosed in brackets [ ] has been added for clarity. 
Cross reference— Planning and zoning department, § 2.36; construction licensing, permits and regulation, excavations and mobile home parks, ch. 4; subdivision regulations, ch. 13. 
State Law reference— Zoning, Minn. Stat, § 462.357. 
 
Sec. 11.10. - Intent and purpose. 
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of: 
(1)  Protecting the public health, safety and general welfare; 
(2)  Dividing the city into zones and districts restricting and regulating therein the location, height, number of stories, size of buildings and other structures, and percentage of lot which may be occupied, the size of yards and other open spaces, and the density and distribution of population; 
(3)  Promoting orderly development of the residential, business, industrial, recreational and public areas; 
(4)  Providing adequate light, air and convenience of access to property; 
(5)  Limiting congestion in the public rights-of-way; 
(6)  Preventing the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures by regulating the use of the land and buildings and the bulk of buildings in relation to the land and buildings surrounding them; 
(7)  Providing for the compatibility of different land uses and the most appropriate use of land throughout the city; 
(8)  Providing for the more orderly transition from a rural to an urban or suburban environment; 
(9)  Providing for the administration of this chapter and amendments thereto; 
(10)  Defining the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies, as provided hereinafter; and 
(11)  Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this chapter or any amendment thereto. 
(Ord. No. 366, 2nd series, eff. 10-7-03)  
Secs. 11.11—11.19. - Reserved.  
Sec. 11.20. - Rules of language construction. 
Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this chapter, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in such definition thereof. All measured distances expressed in feet shall be the nearest tenth of a foot. 
(Ord. No. 366, 2nd series, eff. 10-7-03)  
Secs. 11.21—11.29. - Reserved.  
Sec. 11.30. - Definitions. 
The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings stated: 
Abutting means making contact with or separated only by public thoroughfare, railroad or public right-of-way. 
Accessory building or structure (see Building, accessory). 
Accessory use means a subordinate use that is located upon the same lot on which the primary use is situated and which is reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary or main use. 
Addition means an extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure. 
Agricultural use means the commercial use of land for the production for sale of agricultural products as defined in Minn. Stat. ch. 273, as may be amended. 
Animal hospital or clinic means a place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the hospital use. 
Antenna means a device used for transmitting or receiving electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to: Television or video, AM/FM radio, analog or digital, microwave, cellular or personal communications service (PCS), telephone or data, or similar signals. 
Apartment (see Dwelling, apartment). 
Applicant means any person or entity who has made an application requesting an action as covered under this section. 
Architectural concrete means a building construction material consisting of concrete that has a surface design, pattern, and texture that enhances the architectural design of the building and is available in a variety of colors. 
Automobile reduction yard means a lot or yard where one or more unlicensed motor vehicles or the remains thereof are kept for the purpose of dismantling, wrecking, crushing, sale of parts, sale of scrap, storage or abandonment. 
Banquet or conference facilities means a building, room, or portions thereof, that are used to provide space, whether rented, leased or otherwise made available, to any person, group, or entity for an event or function, that may or may not have food and beverage service, such as a conference or meeting, party, wedding, reception, fundraiser, or other similar occasion. 
Basement means any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level. 
Bluff means a topographic feature, such as a hill, cliff, or embankment, having all of the following characteristics. An area with an average slope of less than 18 percent over a horizontal distance for 50 feet or more shall not be considered part of the bluff. 
A.  Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area; 
B.  The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water level of the water body; 
C.  The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25 feet or more above the ordinary high water level averages 30 percent or greater; and 
D.  The slope must drain toward the water body. 
Bluff impact zone means a bluff and the land located within 20 feet from the top of a bluff. 
Brewery shall have the meaning as the term is defined in the alcohol licensing regulations in chapter 5 of this Code. 
Brewpub shall have the meaning as the term is defined in the alcohol licensing regulations in chapter 5 of this Code. 
Brewer taproom shall have the meaning as the term is defined in the alcohol licensing regulations in chapter 5 of this Code. 
Builder means any person or entity to whom a building permit is issued for the construction of a single-family residence. 
Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
Building, accessory means an accessory structure detached from the principal structure, having a roof and walls to provide weather protection. This includes detached garages, storage sheds, gazebos and similar structures. A carport attached to an accessory building is considered part of that accessory building. 
Building coverage means the area of a lot covered by building(s). 
Building or structure height means the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the highest and lowest points within a five foot horizontal distance from the exterior building foundation to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, the deck line of a mansard roof, or the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. 
Building line means a line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high water level at the minimum required setback beyond which a structure may not extend. 
Building or structure, principal means the primary building or structure upon a lot. 
Caliper inch means the diameter of a tree measured at a height of one foot above the ground level. 
Carport means an automobile shelter having one or more sides. 
Carwash means any building or portions thereof used for the cleaning or washing of motor vehicles. 
Cast in place panel means a building wall section of concrete poured into place in a form at the building construction site. 
Church means a building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which buildings and uses are maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain regular public worship. 
Clearcutting means the removal of an entire stand of trees. 
Cocktail room shall have the meaning as the term is defined in the alcohol licensing regulations in chapter 5 of this Code. 
Commercial planned development means a planned development of various commercial uses. 
Commercial use means the principal use of land or buildings for the sale, lease, rental or trade of products, goods, or services. 
Community service operation means a not for profit function or program designed to provide a contribution to the welfare of others. 
Comprehensive Guide Plan means the Comprehensive Guide Plan as duly adopted and as amended from time to time by the Eagan City Council. 
Conditional use permit means a permit specially and individually granted by the council after review thereon by the advisory planning commission for any conditional use so permitted in any use district. 
Construction area means any area in which movement of earth, alteration in topography, soil compaction, disruption of vegetation, change in soil chemistry, or any other change in the natural character of the land occurs as a result of the site preparation, grading, building construction or any other construction activity. 
Convention/banquet facility means a building or portion thereof designed to accommodate large gatherings for professional, business, or personal events. Convention/banquet facilities may include accommodations for eating and recreation. 
Copy center means an establishment that provides photocopying and other basic print reproduction services to the general public and other businesses. These businesses offer both full and self-service options. 
Critical root zone (CRZ) means an area within a radius surrounding the tree trunk of one foot per one caliper inch of tree diameter, e.g., a 20-inch diameter tree has a CRZ with a radius of 20 feet. 
Cultural/entertainment event means an outdoor arts, music, or other social event that is open to the general public and its primary purpose is to entertain at which incidental sales of food, beverages, goods and merchandise may also occur. The event may be organized and hosted by a private or public entity and to occur on private property. 
Currency exchange business means that as defined in chapter 6 of this Code. 
Day care facility means a facility licensed by the state or county, public or private, which, for gain or otherwise, regularly provides care of one or more persons (child or adult) on a regular basis, for periods of less than 24 hours per day, in a place other than the person's own home. 
Deck means a horizontal, above grade, unenclosed platform with a structural framing support system, attached or functionally related to a principal use or dwelling. A deck may include attached railings, seats, trellises or other features. 
Decorative block means a masonry building block or cast concrete and aggregate rock that has a split-rock, brick-like, burnished, or ribbed texture on the side to be exposed, and is available in a variety of colors. 
Density means the number of dwelling units per acre of land. 
Developer means any person or entity other than a builder, as defined herein, who undertakes to improve a parcel of land, by platting, grading, installing utilities, or constructing or improving any building thereon. 
Development means individual lot single-family residence development, single phase development and two-phase development, as those terms are defined herein. 
Diameter means the length of a straight line measured through the trunk of a tree at 54 inches above the ground. In other contexts, diameter shall be construed to have its common meaning. 
Diameter inch means the diameter, in inches, of a tree measured at diameter breast height (54 inches from the uphill side of the existing ground level). 
Distilled spirits shall have the meaning as the term is defined in the alcohol licensing regulations in chapter 5 of this Code. 
Drip line means the farthest distance away from the trunk that rain or dew will fall directly to the ground from the leaves or branches of a tree. 
Drive-through facility means an establishment which permits customers to receive services or obtain goods while remaining in their motor vehicles, excluding gasoline service stations. 
Drive-through service—Restaurant means an accessory use of a restaurant whereby a customer pays for and picks up his/her food/beverage order from a vehicle at a window of the restaurant facility regardless if the food may be ordered in advance of arrival to the site or ordered while in a drive-through lane on the site via a menu board-ordering intercom system. 
Duplex means a dwelling structure having two dwelling units, attached by common walls or floors and each unit equipped with separate sleeping, cooking, eating, living, and sanitation facilities. 
Dwelling means a building or one or more portions thereof intended to be occupied for residential occupancy. Residential occupancy means inhabiting the building, or any portion thereof, as a household for a period of not less than 30 consecutive days. Dwelling does not mean rooms in motels, hotels, nursing homes, boarding houses, motor homes, tents, cabins or travel trailer coaches. 
Dwelling, apartment means a building designed with four or more dwelling units where access to the dwellings is through shared hallways and main entrances and exits. See also "dwelling, efficiency apartment." 
Dwelling, attached means a dwelling unit which is joined to another dwelling unit at one or more sides by a party wall or walls. 
Dwelling, detached means a single dwelling unit not attached to another dwelling unit or structure. 
Dwelling, efficiency apartment means a one room dwelling unit consisting of one principal room having cooking facilities and used for combined living, dining and sleeping purposes. 
Dwelling, multiple family means a building consisting of more than two dwelling units designed for and occupied by three or more families living independently of each other, consisting of townhomes or apartments. 
Dwelling, single-family means a building consisting of no more than one dwelling unit and designed for and occupied by one family. 
Dwelling, two-family means a building containing two dwelling units. 
Dwelling site means a designated location for residential use by one or more persons using temporary or movable shelter, including camping and recreational vehicle sites. 
Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
Essential services means underground and overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water distribution systems; collector, communication, supply or disposal systems including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police callboxes, traffic signals, hydrants or similar equipment and accessories in conjunction therewith, including city buildings. Essential services shall not include waste facilities or personal wireless service antennas or support structures. 
Essential service structures means structures and buildings necessary for the operation of essential services, including but not limited to: telephone buildings, telephone booths, gas regulator stations, substations, electrical stations, water tanks, and lift stations. Essential service structures shall not include transmission/reception antennas and towers. 
Erosion means the wearing away of land surface by the action of natural elements. 
Excavation means the removal, filling with, or storage of rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay or other like material. 
Excavation permit means a permit to remove, excavate, or store rock, sand, gravel, dirt, clay or other like material, issued by the city. 
Expansion means an increase in the floor or building coverage area or volume of an existing building. 
Extractive use means the use of land for the removal of surface or subsurface sand, gravel, rock, industrial minerals, a nonmetallic mineral, or peat not regulated by Minn. Stat. §§ 93.44—93.51 and amendments thereto. 
Face brick means a masonry building block or clay baked in a kiln until hard. 
Family means an individual or two or more persons all of whom are related to one another by blood, marriage, or adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group of not more than five persons all of whom are not so related to each other, but maintain a common household and common cooking and kitchen facilities. For the purposes of this definition, housekeeping unit means all persons residing within a dwelling unit whose relationship includes a substantial amount of social interaction, including the sharing of housekeeping responsibilities or expenses and the taking of meals together. 
Farm means a parcel of land having an area of ten acres or more (five acres for truck farms) which is under cultivation or is fenced and utilized as pasture. 
Farm winery shall have the meaning as the term is defined in the alcohol licensing regulations in chapter 5 of this Code. 
Farming means the process of operating a farm for the growing and harvesting of crops and/or the keeping of common domestic farm animals which shall include those necessary buildings related to operating the farm. 
Fence means any partition, structure, wall or gate erected as a dividing marker, visual or physical barrier, or enclosure and located along the boundary or within the required yard. 
Fence height means the distance measured from grade to the highest point of the fence. 
Fill means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means. 
Filling means the placement of sand, gravel, earth or other materials of any composition on a parcel of land. 
Financial institution means establishments such as, but not limited to, banks and trust companies, credit agencies, investment companies, brokers and dealers of securities and commodities, security and commodity exchanges, insurance agents, brokers, lessors, lessees, buyers, sellers, agents and developers of real estate. 
Flood means a temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in inundation of the areas adjacent to the channel. 
Flood frequency means the average frequency, statistically determined, for which it is expected that a specific flood stage or discharge may be equalled or exceeded. 
Flood fringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway and which has been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood. 
Floodplain means the channel or beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood. Floodplain areas within the city shall encompass all areas designated as zone A on the flood insurance rate maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Floodproofing means a combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages. 
Floodway means the channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the regional flood. 
Floor area, gross means the area included within the surrounding exterior wall of a building or portion thereof, exclusive of vent shafts and courts. The floor area of a building or portion thereof not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above. 
Floor area, net means the total of all floor areas of a building, excluding stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, and interior vehicular parking or loading, or 80 percent of the gross floor area of a building, whichever is greater. 
Forest land conversion means the clearcutting of forested lands to prepare for a new land use other than reestablishment of a subsequent forest stand. 
Forester means a person holding a bachelor's degree in forestry from an accredited four-year college of forestry. 
Frontage means that boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public street, watercourse or similar barrier. 
Garage, private means an accessory building or accessory portion of the principal building which is primarily intended for and used to store the private passenger vehicles and trucks of the family resident upon the premises and in which no business, service or industry is carried on. 
Garage sale means any display of goods and/or salesmen's samples and sale of said goods on a property customarily used as a residence. At least one person conducting the sale shall be a resident of the property. 
Garbage means "garbage" as defined in chapter 10 of this Code. 
Grade means, for the purposes of measuring building or structure height, the average elevation of the ground, paving or sidewalk around the building foundation. 
Grading means excavating, filling or otherwise changing the natural or existing topography of land including stockpiling of earth or land. 
Gross vehicle weight means the weight of the vehicle plus the weight of the load thereon or the registered gross vehicle weight of the vehicle, whichever is greater. 
Hardship means a situation where property in question cannot be put to a reasonable use under the conditions allowed by the official controls where the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to this property, not created by the landowner. Economic considerations alone shall not constitute a hardship if a reasonable use for the property exists under terms of the official controls. 
Health and fitness club means an indoor facility designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, exercise, leisure time activities or other customary and usual recreational activities, operated for profit or not-for-profit, and which can be open only to bona fide members and guests of the organization or open to the public for a fee. 
Health care facility means establishments primarily engaged in furnishing medical, surgical or other services to individuals, including the offices of physicians, dentists and other health practitioners, medical and dental laboratories, outpatient care facilities, blood banks, and oxygen and miscellaneous types of medical supplies and services. 
Home occupation means any occupation or profession engaged in by the occupant of a residential dwelling unit which is clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the premises, does not change the character of said premises and satisfies the requirements of this Code. 
Hospital means a licensed facility for the hospitalization or care of human beings within the meaning of Minn. Stat. chapter 144.50, as may be amended. 
Hotel means a building or group of buildings offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public, which may provide additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities, and where access to each lodging room is gained through a common hallway within the building. 
Impervious surface means a material providing a hard surface which prevents normal absorption of water into land. It shall include, but not be limited to gravel driveways, parking areas, buildings, and structures. 
Industrial use means the use of land or buildings for the production, manufacture, warehousing, storage, or transfer of goods, products, commodities, or other wholesale items. 
Individual lot single-family residence development means the process where the construction of a new single-family residence occurs on a single lot, or the expansion of any existing single-family residence by ten percent or greater square feet. 
Institutional use means a facility providing educational, governmental, religious, or community services to the general public such as libraries, churches, municipal buildings, museums, and historic buildings and sites. Institutional facilities may be owned and operated by either public or private entities. (See also School) 
Intensive vegetation clearing means the complete removal of trees, grasses or shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row, or block. 
Junkyard means an outdoor area where used, waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, abandoned, packed, disassembled, or handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, rags, paper, rubber products, bottles and lumber. 
Kennel means any place, building, tract of land, abode or vehicle, wherein or whereon a total of four or more dogs or cats or combination, over six months of age, are kept, kept for sale, or boarded. 
Landscaping means plantings such as trees, flowers, grass and shrubs and other improvements directly related thereto. 
Land reclamation means depositing 400 cubic yards or more of materials so as to elevate the grade. 
Landscape architect means a state-licensed landscape architect. 
Loading area means an unobstructed area provided and maintained for the temporary parking of trucks and other motor vehicles for the purpose of loading and unloading goods, wares, materials and merchandise as more fully described under the off street loading area regulations in this chapter. 
Lot means a parcel of land occupied or used or intended for a purpose or use permitted in this chapter, abutting on a public street, and of sufficient size to provide the yards and area required by this chapter. 
Lot area means the area of a lot in a horizontal plane bounded by the lot lines, but not including any area occupied by the waters of a duly recorded lake or river or area which has been dedicated as public thoroughfare or road. 
Lot area per unit means the number of square feet of lot area required per dwelling unit. 
Lot, corner means a lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two or more intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed 135 degrees. 
Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot. 
Lot frontage means the narrowest lot boundary abutting a public or private street that meets minimum lot width requirements. If none of the boundaries abutting a public or private street meet minimum lot width requirements, then the lot frontage is the widest boundary abutting a street. 
Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot, including through or double frontage lots. 
Lot line means the property line bounding a lot. 
Lot line, front means any boundary of a lot which abuts an existing public or private street. 
Lot line, rear means that boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. In the case of a corner lot, it shall be the boundary opposite the shortest front lot line on a public or private street. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten feet in length within the lot connecting the side lot lines and parallel to the front lot line. 
Lot line, side means any boundary of a lot which is not a front or rear lot line. 
Lot of record means part of a subdivision approved by the city, the plat of which has been duly recorded in the office of the county recorder or registrar of titles, or a parcel of land, the deed to which was recorded in the office of said county recorder, registrar of titles, prior to the adoption of this chapter, October 17, 2002, which meets the minimum requirements of state law and all Code provisions in effect upon the date of said recording. 
Lot, substandard means a lot or parcel of land which does not meet the minimum lot area or other dimensional standards of the Code. 
Lot, through means a lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. 
Lot width means the distance measured between lot lines, parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required front yard setback. 
Manufactured home (mobile home). For the purpose of this Code, manufactured homes shall be as defined in Minn. Stat. chapter 327, as may be amended. 
Manufactured home park (mobile home park) means any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which two or more occupied manufactured homes are located, either free of charge or for compensation, and includes any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of the manufactured home park. 
Medical clinic means a facility used for patient examination and treatment by physicians, dentists, optometrists, psychologists or other health care professionals and where patients are not lodged overnight. 
Microdistillery shall have the meaning as the term is defined in the alcohol licensing regulations in chapter 5 of this Code. The term proof gallon as used in the definition of microdistillery shall have the meaning as that term is also defined in the alcohol licensing regulations in chapter 5 of this Code. 
Mining means the extraction of sand, gravel or other material from the land in the amount of 3,000 cubic yards or more. 
Motel means a building or group of buildings offering transient lodging accommodations on a daily rate to the general public, which may provide additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities, and where access to each lodging room is gained from the outside. 
Motor fuel sales, class I means a place or business engaged in only the sale of motor fuels, and incidental automotive products and may include incidental services including a carwash and the sale of convenience retail goods. 
Motor fuel sales, class II means a place of business engaged in the sale of motor fuels and dispensing of services generally associated with the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles, including automobile or truck repair facilities. 
Motor vehicle repair, major means general repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of engines, transmissions, motor vehicles or trailers, including body work, framework, welding and major painting service. 
Motor vehicle repair, minor means the replacement of any part or repair of any part which does not require removal of the engine head or pan, engine transmission or differential; incidental body and fender work; minor painting and upholstering service. Above stated is applied to passenger automobiles and trucks not in excess of 9,000 pounds gross weight. 
Non-conforming structure, use, or lot, illegal means a lot, building, structure, premises, or use illegally established when it was initiated, created or constructed, which did not conform with the applicable conditions or provisions of the Code for the district in which the structure or use is located. 
Non-conforming structure, use, or lot, legal means a lot, building, structure, premises, or use lawfully established when it was initiated, created or constructed, which does not conform with the applicable conditions or provisions of the Code for the district in which the structure or use is located. 
Noxious matter or material means material capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction, or capable of causing detrimental effects to the physical well being of individuals. 
Nursery, day means a use where care is provided for pay for more children than those of one family in addition to the family residing on the premises. 
Nursery, landscape means an enterprise that conducts the retail and wholesale sale of plants grown on the site, as well as accessory items directly related to their care and maintenance. The accessory items normally sold include clay pots, potting soil, fertilizers, insecticides, hanging baskets, rakes, shovels, and the like, but do not include power equipment such as gas or electric lawnmowers and farm implements. Contractor yards that involve the storage of landscape materials shall not constitute a landscape nursery. 
Nursing home means a facility or that part of a facility that provides nursing care to five or more persons. A nursing home does not include a facility or part of a facility that is a hospital, clinic, doctor's office, diagnostic or treatment center or a residential program licensed by the State of Minnesota. 
Occupancy means the purpose for which a building or part thereof is used or intended to be used. 
Office means a building or portion of a building wherein services are performed involving predominantly administrative, professional, or clerical operations. 
Office/showroom means a building with gross floor area consisting of at least 30 percent finished office space, in addition to showroom, warehousing and distribution uses including product display, storage, wholesale, and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment, but excluding bulk storage of materials that are inflammable or explosive or that create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. 
Office/warehouse means a building with gross floor area consisting of at least 15 percent finished office space, in addition to warehousing and distribution uses including storage, wholesale, and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment, but excluding bulk storage of materials that are inflammable or explosive or that create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. 
Outdoor display means to store or exhibit outside a commercial building a representative sample of merchandise, goods or inventory intended for sale, rent or lease in the normal course of the principal occupant's business. For purposes of this chapter, any outdoor display exceeding the restrictions thereof as regulated in this chapter shall constitute outdoor storage. 
Outdoor event—Seasonal or temporary means an outdoor exhibition or sale which is accessory to the principle use of the subject property, including, but is not limited to: promotional and fundraiser event; product sales; nursery plants or stock sales, fresh fruit and vegetable sales; craft, clothing or other goods sidewalk sales or displays; fireworks or Christmas tree sales stand/tent; and recognition events. An outdoor event shall be deemed as a seasonal outdoor event if its duration is more than ten, but less than 90 consecutive days per year. An outdoor event shall be deemed as a temporary outdoor event if: (1) its duration is ten days or less; (2) it does not occur more than once per 30 days period; and (3) no more than three temporary events occur per year or a combination of 20 days total in a calendar year. 
Outdoor food sales means the sale or service of prepared food or beverage from a temporary structure or stand or a mobile food unit as defined by Minnesota state law to the general public. 
Outdoor storage means to stock, keep, sell or trade outside a commercial or industrial building any items of merchandise, supplies, materials, finished goods, inventory or other movable property or motor vehicles. For purposes of this definition and the regulation of outdoor storage, an outdoor event—seasonal and temporary shall not constitute outdoor storage. 
Owner means an individual, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, or any other legal entity holding an equitable or legal ownership interest in land, buildings, structures, dwelling unit(s) or other property. 
Ordinary high water level (OHWL) means an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high water level is the operating elevations of the summer pool. 
Parcel means an individual lot or tract of land. 
Park means a tract of land publicly owned and used by the public for active and/or passive recreational purposes. 
Parking lot, surface means an off-street, at-grade, uncovered area, utilized for the temporary storage of motor vehicles. 
Parking ramp means a structure used for the temporary storage of motor vehicles. 
Parking space means an area of such shape and dimensions as provided by this Code, sufficient in size to store one motor vehicle, which has adequate access to a public street or alley and permitting satisfactory ingress and egress of an automobile. 
Patio means an at-grade recreation area that is often paved and is typically designed especially for outdoor dining. 
Performance standard means criteria established for, but not limited to, setbacks, fencing, landscaping, screening, drainage, building materials, outside storage, off-street parking, and to control noise, odor, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat or other nuisance elements generated by or inherent in use of land or buildings. 
Permitted use (see Use, Permitted) 
Plain concrete block means a masonry building block of cast concrete that has no additional surface texturing. 
Planned development means an urban development characterized by a unified site design and developed according to an approved overall plan having: 
(1)  Two or more principal uses or buildings within a single parcel without the necessary zoning to allow the uses in compliance with the existing zoning districts; or 
(2)  A single use which does not comply with all of the restrictions of any one zoning district. Planned development zoning shall be allowed only where the council determines that, because of topography, location, design, public need, amenities, or for other similar reasons, the development represents good planning in relation to existing and proposed development in the area. 
Play and recreational facilities means facilities customary and incidental to the principal use of the site intended for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their occasional guests. Such facilities include swing sets, play sculptures, sand boxes, picnic tables, basketball standards, tennis courts, swimming pools, barbeque grills, patios, accessory furniture, and the like. 
Porch means a portion of a principal structure with a roof to provide weather protection, but not intended for year round use or habitation. 
Precast panel means a building wall section of concrete poured into a form at the manufacturer's facility and shipped to the construction site for installation. 
Preferred co-location site means an existing or approved tower, structure or building which may accommodate planned equipment for a proposed new tower within a one-half mile search radius of the proposed tower location. 
Printing or reproduction shop means an establishment that provides a full range of printing and reproduction services primarily to other businesses. 
Protected use means a designated use from which another use is required to be set back pursuant to a special use setback in this Code. 
Public building or structure means buildings and structures owned or operated by municipal, school district, county, state, or other governmental units. 
Public hearing, unless otherwise specifically redefined, means a public hearing pursuant to a notice published once in the official newspaper of the city at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing, which notice shall specify the general purpose, time and place of such hearing. Any such hearing after such publication may be continued, recessed or adjourned, from time to time, without any further publication or notice thereof. 
Public right-of-way means the entire area dedicated to public use or contained in an easement or other conveyance or grant to the state, county or city and shall include but not be limited to roadways, boulevards, sidewalks, trails, alleys and other public property between lateral property lines in which the street or roadway lies. 
Public utility services mean the providing of electric power, gas, telephone, sanitary sewer and water. 
Public waters has the meaning given it in Minnesota Water Law (Minn. Stat. § 103G.005, subd. 15). 
Public use means uses owned or operated by municipal, school district, county, state, or other governmental units. 
Publication means notice placed in the official city newspaper stating time, location, and date of meeting and description of topic. 
Recreation, commercial means a business directed toward the general public that offers recreational entertainment such as amusement centers, bowling alleys, billiard halls, golf courses, movie theatres, ballrooms, roller rinks and similar uses. 
Recreational camping vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle and any vehicle propelled, drawn, towed or carried by a self-propelled vehicle, which is designed to be used for temporary living quarters while engaged in recreation or vacation activities. 
Recreational equipment means non-vehicular materials used primarily for recreation and leisure time activities and purposes, such as ice-fishing houses, sport courts, and sports equipment. 
Recreational vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle and any vehicle propelled, drawn, towed or carried by a self-propelled vehicle, which is designed to be used for leisure time activities and purposes including but not limited to: 
1.  Recreational camping vehicles; 
2.  Non-motorized trailers generally used for transporting recreational vehicles such as watercraft and snowmobiles; 
3.  A van or truck with a slide-in camper which is not used primarily for day to day transportation needs; 
4.  Snowmobiles, all terrain vehicles, any type of watercraft and similar vehicles. Such vehicles that are placed on a utility trailer shall, together with the trailer, constitute a single recreational vehicle; 
5.  Passenger vehicles with antique or collector license plates, specialized off-road racing vehicles that are not primarily used for day to day transportation needs. Such vehicles that are placed on a utility trailer shall, together with the trailer, constitute a single recreational vehicle. 
Recreational vehicle, class I means a recreational vehicle with a length of less than 20 feet and a height of less than six feet when measured from the parking surface to the highest point of the vehicle. 
Recreational vehicle, class II means a recreational vehicle with a length of 20 feet or more and/or a height of six feet or more when measured from the parking surface to the highest point of the vehicle. 
Recyclables means "recyclables" as defined in chapter 10 of this Code. 
Refuse means "other refuse" as defined in chapter 10 of this Code. 
Regional flood means a flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in the state and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with 100-year floodplain and with the term "base flood" used in the flood insurance rate map. 
Regulatory flood protection elevation means a point not less than one foot above the water surface profile associated with the regional flood plus any increases in the flood heights attributable to encroachments on the floodplain. It is the elevation to which uses regulated by this section are required to be elevated or floodproofed. 
Rental shop means a business operated within a principal structure and engaged exclusively in providing movable property to another for temporary use in exchange for consideration paid, except for the incidental sale of accessories related to those items rented. 
Repair, small engine or appliance means general repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of small engines or appliances, including replacement or repair of parts. 
Research laboratory means a building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, development, investigation, testing, or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory. 
Residential program means a program that provides 24-hour-a-day care, supervision, food, lodging, rehabilitation, training, education, habilitation, or treatment outside a person's own home, including a nursing home or hospital that receives public funds, administered by the commissioner of human services, to provide services for five or more persons whose primary diagnosis is mental retardation or a related condition or mental illness and who do not have a significant physical or medical problem that necessitates nursing home care; a program in an intermediate care facility for four or more persons with mental retardation or a related condition; a nursing home or hospital that was licensed by the commissioner of human services on July 1, 1987, to provide a program for persons with a physical handicap that is not the result of the normal aging process and considered to be a chronic condition; and chemical dependency or chemical abuse programs that are located in a hospital or nursing home and receive public funds for providing chemical abuse or chemical dependency treatment services under Minn. Stat. 1998, chapter 245B. Residential programs include home and community-based services for persons with mental retardation or a related condition that are provided in or outside of a person's own home. 
Residential planned development means a use where the nature of residency is nontransient and the major or primary focus of the development is not service oriented. 
Restaurant—Casual means an eating facility where customers place their order at a counter and either the customer takes the food/beverage to a table or wait staff serves the food/beverage at the customer's table for on-premise consumption. Accessory use may include take-out food service. No drive-through service is provided. 
Restaurant—Delivery or take-out means a facility where food is prepared, ready-to-eat or partially ready-to-eat and either picked up by or delivered to the customer for off-premise consumption. This type of restaurant may have a limited amount of seating, but not for more than 24 guests at one time. 
Restaurant—Fast food means an eating facility where drive-through service is provided and customers may place their food order either at a counter inside the facility or from the customer's motor vehicle outside the facility by use of a drive-through service. This type of restaurant also includes a "drive-in" establishment where food and beverages are ordered from and consumed in the motor vehicle upon the premises outside of the building. 
Restaurant—Full service means an eating facility that provides full wait staff service where food/beverages are ordered, served and consumed by the customer while seated at a table, booth or counter. Accessory use may include take-out food service. No drive-through service is provided. 
Retail sales means a use engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land intended to be used for roadways, sidewalks, railroads, or utility purposes on which an irrevocable right-of-passage has been recorded. 
Riparian lot means a lot which borders on a lake, river or stream. 
School (public or private) means a building used for the purpose of elementary or secondary education, which meets all the requirements of compulsory education laws of the State of Minnesota, and not providing residential accommodations. 
School, vocational or technical means a secondary or higher education facility primarily teaching usable skills that prepare students for jobs in a trade and meeting the state requirements for vocational facility. 
Screening means a device or materials used to visually shield or obscure one element of a development from other elements or from adjacent or contiguous development. Screening materials may include fences, walls, berms, plantings, or other materials providing the required opacity. 
Semi-public use means the use of land by a private, nonprofit organization to provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some persons outside the regular constituency of the organization. 
Sensitive resource management means the preservation and management of areas unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints such as shallow soils over groundwater or bedrock, highly erosive or expansive soils, steep slopes, susceptibility to flooding or occurrence of flora and fauna in need of special protection. 
Setback means the minimum horizontal distance required between any lot line or right-of-way and the nearest point of a building, structure or improvement located or to be located on the lot. The setback is measured at a right-angle from the lot line to the closest point of the building or improvement. 
Within the shoreland overlay district, setback means the minimum horizontal distance between a structure, sewage treatment system, or other feature and an ordinary high water level, sewage treatment system, top of a bluff, road, highway, property line, or other facility. 
For purposes of measuring the setback between a building, structure or use, including a parking area, and a street right-of-way, as defined in this Code and to include any easement, conveyance or other grant to the county or state, the setback is the horizontal distance from the edge of said street right-of-way which abuts the lot to the nearest point of the building, structure or use, including any parking area, located or to be located on the lot. 
Setback line means a line located at the specified setback distance from and parallel to any lot line. 
Sewage treatment system means an on-site system for disposing and treating human and domestic waste such as a septic tank and soil absorption system or other individual or cluster-type sewage system as described and regulated in this chapter and chapter 4 of this Code. 
Sewer system, sanitary means the pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force main and all other constructions, devices, appliances, facilities or appurtenances used for conducting sewage, industrial waste, or other wastes to the regional facility for treatment and disposal. 
Shopping center means a group of commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on-site. 
Shore impact zone means land located between the ordinary high water level of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50 percent of the structure setback. 
Shoreland, shoreland area, shoreland district and shoreland overlay district mean land located within the following distances from public waters: 1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level of any lake, pond, or flowage; and 300 feet from rivers and streams, or the landward extent of a floodplain designated by ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is greater. The limits of shorelands may be reduced whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for lesser distances and when approved by the DNR. 
Sign means any surface, facing or object upon which there is printed, painted or artistic matter, design or lighting. 
Significant historic site means any archaeological site, standing structure, or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the National Register of Historic Places or is listed in the State register of historic sites, or is an unplatted cemetery within the provisions of Minn. Stat. § 307.08. A historic site meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after review by the state archaeologist or the director of the Minnesota Historical Society. All unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to be significant historic sites. 
Single-phase development means the process where improvement of the entire site occurs in one continuing process. Activities which can occur during single-phase development include initial site grading; installation of utilities; construction of public streets; construction and grading of drainageways; filling of any areas; grading of the pad area; utility hookups; construction of buildings, parking lots, driveways, storage areas, recreation areas, private streets; and any other activity within the construction area. 
Slope means the degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent of degrees. 
Slope, steep means land where agricultural activity or development is either not recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and the site's soil characteristics, as mapped and described in available county soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and construction techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. Where specific information is not available, steep slopes are lands having average slopes over 12 percent, as measured over horizontal distances of 50 feet or more, that are not bluffs. 
Special residential facility means a structure or several structures developed as a single facility in which residential housing is provided for persons with special living or care needs, based on age or disabilities, including but not limited to facilities that provide for or are independent living units; assisted living housing; memory and dementia care; youth supportive housing; or nursing home, convalescent home, sanitarium or other full care facility. 
Special use setback means the following: 
1.  If the use is entirely contained within a building, the distance of 200 linear feet from any point of the exterior wall of the building, or the exterior wall of the delineated space within the building in which the use is located exclusively, to the nearest point on the property line of the lot on which the protected use is located. 
2.  If the use has any outdoor operations, the distance of 200 linear feet from any point along the outer edge of any paved parking or drive lane area, excluding driveway access point, on which the use is operated to the nearest point on the property line of the lot on which the protected use is located. 
Story means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement, cellar or unused under-floor space is more than six feet above grade, as defined herein, for more than 50 percent of the total perimeter or is more than 12 feet above grade, as defined herein, at any point, such basement, cellar or unused under-floor space shall be considered a story. 
Street, arterial minor means a street that serves or is designed to serve heavy flows of traffic and is primarily used as a route for traffic between communities and/or heavy traffic generating areas as identified within the city's duly adopted Comprehensive Guide Plan. 
Street, arterial major means a street that serves or is designed to serve heavy flows of traffic and is primarily used as a route for traffic between communities and/or heavy traffic generating areas as identified within the city's duly adopted Comprehensive Guide Plan. 
Street, collector means a street that serves or is designed to serve as a trafficway for a neighborhood or as a feeder to an arterial street as identified within the city's duly adopted Comprehensive Guide Plan. 
Street, cul-de-sac or dead-end means a street with only one vehicular outlet. 
Street, local means a street designed to serve primarily as an access to abutting properties. 
Street, private means a street that is not dedicated for public use. 
Street, public means a public right-of-way for vehicular traffic which has been dedicated or deeded for public use. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having a location on the ground. Among other things, structures include but are not limited to buildings, gazebos, decks, retaining walls, walls, fences over six feet in height, and swimming pools, but excluding patios and similar at-grade improvements. 
Structure, principal means see "Building, principal". 
Structure, accessory means see "Building, accessory". 
Subdivision means the division of any parcel of land into two or more lots, blocks or parcels. 
Surface-water-oriented commercial use means the use of land for commercial purposes, where access to and use of a surface water feature is an integral part of the normal conductance of business. Marinas, resorts, and restaurants with transient docking facilities are examples of such use. 
Swimming pool, outdoor means any structure, basin, chamber or tank containing an artificial body of water for swimming, diving or recreational bathing use having a depth of more than 24 inches at any point and a surface area exceeding 150 square feet. 
Synthetic stucco means a nonbearing exterior wall cladding system providing both insulation value and finished exterior surface (e.g., EIFS panels). 
Temporary outdoor event means an exhibition or sale with a duration of ten continuous days or less which does not occur more than once per 30 days and more than three times per year or a combination of 20 days total in a calendar year. A temporary outdoor event includes, but is not limited to: promotional and fund raiser event; car wash; nursery stock, fresh fruit and vegetable sales; and prepared food clothing and crafts display or sale. 
Toe of the bluff means the lower point of a 50 foot segment with an average slope exceeding 18 percent. 
Top of the bluff means the higher point of a 50 foot segment with an average slope exceeding 18 percent. 
Townhouse means a single-family dwelling having one or more walls in common with another single-family dwelling oriented so all exits open directly to the outside. 
Tower means any freestanding structure designed specifically to elevate an antenna, satellite dish or similar apparatus. 
Transit station means the premise and associated facilities to accommodate loading and unloading of transit passengers and associated parking area for transit passenger vehicles. 
Tree means any of the following type of trees, as each is defined herein: 
Coniferous evergreen tree means a woody plant, which at maturity is at least 12 feet or more in height, having foliage on the outermost portion of the branches year-round. 
Deciduous tree means a woody plant, which at maturity is at least 15 feet or more in height, having a defined crown, and which sheds leaves annually. 
Hardwood deciduous tree includes: ironwood, catalpa, oak, maple (hard), walnut, ash, hickory, birch, black cherry, hackberry, locust and basswood. 
Significant tree means a healthy tree measuring a minimum of six inches in diameter for hardwood deciduous trees, defined herein, or a minimum of 12 inches in diameter for softwood deciduous trees, as defined herein, or a minimum of 12 feet in height for coniferous/evergreen trees. 
Softwood deciduous tree includes: cottonwood, poplars/aspen, box elder, willow, silver maple and elm. 
Specimen tree means a healthy hardwood deciduous tree measuring equal to or greater than 30 inches diameter and/or a coniferous tree measuring 50 feet or greater in height. 
Truck stop means a business, service or industry involving the dispensing of motor fuel or other petroleum products directly into motor vehicles, and the sale of accessories or equipment for trucks and similar commercial vehicles. A truck stop may also include the maintenance, washing, servicing, storage or repair of commercial vehicles, overnight accommodations and restaurant facilities intended for use primarily by truck drivers and the traveling public. 
Truck terminal means a building or area in which freight brought by truck is assembled and/or temporarily stored for rerouting or reshipment. The terminal facility may also include storage and/or parking areas for truck tractor and/or trailer units. 
Two-phase development means the process where improvement of the entire site occurs in at least two distinct phases. Generally, the first phase includes initial site grading; installation of utilities; construction of public streets; construction, grading of drainage ways; and filling of any areas. The second phase generally includes grading of specific pad areas; utility hookups; construction of buildings, parking lots, driveways, storage areas, recreation areas, private streets; and any other activity within the specific construction zone. 
Use means the purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designated, arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. Uses are classified as principal or accessory and as permitted or conditional. 
Use, accessory means a subordinate use that is located upon the same lot on which the primary use is situated and which is reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary or main use. 
Use, conditional means those uses specifically designated in each zoning district, which because of unique characteristics, are not classified as permitted uses in a particular zoning district but may be deemed acceptable subject to certain conditions and guarantees to protect the public interest. 
Use, interim means a temporary use of property until a particular date or until the occurrence of a particular event. 
Use, permitted means a use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and performance standards, if any, of such districts. 
Use, principal means the main use of land or buildings as distinguished from subordinate or accessory uses. A principal use may be either permitted or conditional. 
Use, similar means a use that has defining qualities, characteristics, or functions of a use specifically listed in the use chart. 
Variance means a modification or waiving of the provisions of this chapter consistent with the state enabling statute for municipalities, as applied to a specific property and granted pursuant to the standards and procedures of this chapter, except that a variance shall not be used for modification of the allowable uses within a district and shall not allow uses that are prohibited. 
Warehouse means a building used primarily for the extended storage of goods and materials. 
Waste facility means all property, real or personal, including negative and positive easements and water and air rights, which is or may be needed or useful for the processing, disposal, transfer, and/or storage of hazardous/or solid wastes, except property used primarily for the manufacture of scrap metal or paper. Waste facility includes but is not limited to transfer and storage stations, processing facilities, and disposal sites and facilities. Waste facility does not include drop off centers which are accessory to allowable uses and which are operated by a governmental unit, civic organization or similar non-profit group expressly for the collection of recyclable waste including paper, clean glass and metal containers, yard waste for composting, and other eligible household wastes from individuals 
Water-oriented accessory structure or facility means a small, aboveground building or other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks, and retaining walls, which, because of the relationship of its use to surface water, reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters than minimum required structural setbacks. 
Wetland is defined as set forth in the wetlands protection and management regulations in this Code. 
Wholesaling means the selling of goods, equipment and materials by bulk to another business that in turn sells to the final customer. 
Woodland, significant means a grouping or cluster of coniferous and/or deciduous trees with contiguous crown cover, occupying 500 or more square feet of property, which are comprised of deciduous trees between four inches and 12 inches in diameter or coniferous trees between four feet and 12 feet in height. 
Yard means open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed by a building or structure from the ground to the sky, except as expressly permitted by this chapter. A required yard shall extend along a lot line and at right angles to such a lot line to a depth or width specified in the setback regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
Yard, front means the area between the front lot line and the front building or setback line. 
Yard, rear means the area between the rear lot line and the rear building or setback line. 
Yard, required means the open area between a lot line and the setback line as specified in the setback regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
Yard, side means the area from the side lot line to the side building or setback line extending between the front yard to the rear yard along a side lot line. 
Yard waste means "yard waste" as defined in chapter 10 of this Code. 
Zoning district means an area or areas of the city (as delineated on the Zoning Map) set aside for specific uses with specific regulations and provisions for use and development as defined by this chapter. 
Zoning district overlay means a zoning district containing regulations superimposed upon other zoning district regulations and superseding the underlying zoning district use regulations. 
Zoning map means the map or maps incorporated into this chapter as part thereof, designating the zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 366, 2nd series, eff. 10-7-03; Ord. No. 411, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 4-28-07; Ord. No. 414, 2nd series, § 5, eff. 7-28-07; Ord. No. 419, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 12-8-07; Ord. No. 471, 2nd series, § 1, 2-15-2011; Ord. No. 478, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 4-20-2011; Ord. No. 499, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 500, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 5-1-2012; Ord. No. 531, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 6-3-2014; Ord. No. 547, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 8-3-2015; Ord. No. 549, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 11-2-2015; Ord. No. 571, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 11-17-2017)  
Secs. 11.31—11.39. - Reserved.  
Sec. 11.40. - General provisions. 
Subd. 1.  Application. 
A.  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. 
B.  Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other law, Code provision, statute, resolution or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail. 
C.  Except as in this chapter specifically provided, no structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or altered and no structure or land shall be used for any purpose nor in any manner which is not in conformity with this chapter. 
D.  Whenever in any district a use is neither specifically permitted nor denied, a property owner may request a study by the city to determine whether the particular use is compatible with the zoning district in which it is proposed to be located. 
Subd. 2.  Separability. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the several provisions of this chapter are separable in accordance with the following: 
A.  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provisions of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this chapter not specifically included in said judgment. 
B.  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property, building or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, building or structure not specifically included in said judgment. 
Subd. 3.  Lot provisions. A duly created lot of record shall be deemed a buildable lot, provided all of the following are met: 
A.  The lot shall have a minimum of 50 feet of frontage on a public street or the lot shall have been approved in platting a condominium project or an attached dwelling project wherein a contiguous lot, owned in common, provides said frontage. 
B.  There shall be no more than one principal building on one lot except when approved as a part of a planned development. 
C.  The lot shall be capable of supporting a building(s). 
D.  The lot shall be of sufficient size to accommodate a building(s) within the minimum required building setbacks for the particular zoning district in which it is located. 
E.  If two or more contiguous lots are in single ownership and if all or part of the lots do not meet the width and area requirements of this chapter for lots in the district, the contiguous lots shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this chapter. If part of the parcel is sold, the sale shall constitute a self-created hardship under the variance provisions of this chapter. 
Subd. 4.  Required yards and open space. 
A.  Whenever a park or play area is so located that it abuts on a public right-of-way or railroad right-of-way, either a landscaped yard area of at least 30 feet shall maintained from such right-of-way and the nearest developed play space, or a fence in conformity with subdivision 20 of this section, or similar barrier may be used. This section shall apply to all public and private parks, schools, churches and areas where play areas are provided. 
B.  No yard or open space existing upon the effective date of this section shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such yard or other open space less than the minimum required by this section. 
C.  The council may waive the required side yard setback requirement in all districts, if two legal lots of record are held in one ownership and are combined by the county assessor as one tax parcel. 
D.  The following shall not be considered as encroachments on required yard setbacks: 
1.  Air conditioning or heating equipment, chimneys, flues, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves, gutters, and similar features, provided they do not project more than 30 inches into the required yard. 
2.  Decks, patios, balconies, stoops, or other similar features provided they do not extend more than 30 inches above the finished grade and a distance greater than eight feet into a required front yard, five feet into a required side yard and five feet into a required rear yard and provided they do not encroach upon a public easement. 
3.  In rear yards, recreational equipment and clothes lines, arbors and trellises, gazebos, breezeways, detached accessory buildings, air conditioning and heating equipment may encroach to a point not less than five feet from the rear lot line. 
Subd. 5.  Accessory buildings, structures and uses. 
A.  General standards. 
1.  No accessory building or structure other than a fence or a temporary construction office shall be permitted on any lot in a residential zoning district prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory, except a residential garage, which prior to the construction of a residence can be used only for storage purposes pertaining to and until the completion of the main structure. 
2.  Accessory buildings exceeding 120 square feet in size shall exhibit finish materials similar and compatible to those utilized on the principal building and match the principal building in color. 
3.  Accessory buildings shall be maintained in a manner that is compatible with adjacent uses and does not present a hazard to public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  Other uses. 
1.  Buildings and structures accessory to uses other than farms and single-family detached dwellings shall conform to the principal building setback requirements specified for the respective zoning district in which they are located. 
2.  Buildings and structures accessory to uses other than farms and single-family detached dwellings shall not exceed the district height limit or the height of the principal building, whichever is less, except as otherwise allowed by this chapter. 
C.  Residential uses, R-1, R-2, and E zoning districts. 
1.  No accessory use or building shall be allowed within a required front yard setback. With the exception of an attached garage, no accessory building or structure may be placed within the front yard. 
2.  No more than two detached accessory buildings may be permitted for each dwelling. 
3.  All accessory buildings shall comply with the following setbacks: 
	R-1 	R-2 	E 
Side yard 	5 feet 	5 feet 	10 feet 
Front yard or public right-of-way 	30 feet 	30 feet 	30 feet 
Rear yard 	5 feet 	5 feet 	10 feet 
 
4.  When an attached garage is present on the site, the total floor area of all detached accessory structures (including garages) shall not exceed 576 square feet. 
5.  When an attached garage is not present on the site, the total floor area of all detached accessory structures shall not exceed 800 square feet. 
6.  The roof of all detached accessory structures exceeding 120 square feet in size shall match the pitch and style of the principal structure. 
7.  In no event shall the height of any attached garage exceed the height of the dwelling. 
8.  In no event shall the inside wall height of any detached accessory structure, including a detached garage, exceed 11 feet as measured from the floor to the roof decking (maximum eight-foot wall height for accessory structures 120 s.f. or smaller). 
9.  In no event shall the height of a door opening of any detached accessory structure or attached garage exceed eight feet, as measured from the floor to the trim covering the door header. 
D.  Agricultural uses. Buildings and structures accessory to farming operations are exempt from the requirements of this subdivision except that a building containing more than two animal units shall not be less than 50 feet from a lot line. 
E.  Swimming pools. 
1.  The interior vertical wall of swimming pools shall not be closer than five feet to any side or rear lot line. 
2.  Swimming pools shall be located in the side or rear yard and shall not be located within any required front yard setback. 
3.  No swimming pool shall be located beneath or within ten feet of any overhead utility lines or over any underground utility lines. 
4.  All outdoor swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a security fence or wall at least four but not more than six feet high and located at least four feet from the edge of the pool. The bottom of the fence or wall shall be no higher than four inches above the surface of the ground. Fence openings or points of entry to the pool area shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching lockable gates. 
5.  No swimming pool shall be used, kept, maintained or operated in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance or as to be hazardous to health, life or property. All swimming pools shall have and operate adequate equipment to filter and otherwise keep the water clean and free from contamination. 
Subd. 6.  Traffic visibility. On all corner lots in all districts, no structure or planting in excess of 30 inches above the abutting curbline shall be permitted within a triangular area defined as follows: beginning at the intersection of the project curblines of two intersecting streets, thence 30 feet along one curb diagonally to a point 30 feet from the point of beginning of the other curbline, thence to the point of beginning. 
Subd. 7.  Public utility service. It is unlawful for any person to install, construct, erect, alter, revise, reconstruct or move any pipeline, underground telephone line, underground electric transmission line, and overhead electric transmission line including structures related thereto or any other public utility device or related structure, without first obtaining a written permit from the city. All persons obtaining a written permit pursuant to this subdivision shall be subject to those standards and regulations set forth in and as a condition of the permit issued pursuant to this subdivision. In issuing said permit, the city shall find that: 
A.  The proposed location of the essential service shall not unreasonably interfere with future land use of the city. 
B.  The depth of any buried essential services shall be at a depth that will not cause future problems with roads, streets, utilities or buildings. 
C.  The width of any linear easements or rights-of-way shall not be such that it will unreasonably interfere with future land use. 
Subd. 8.  Structures in public rights-of-way. No buildings, structures or uses may be located in or on any public lands or rights-of-way without approval by the council. 
Subd. 9.  Nonconforming structures and uses. 
A.  Policy. It is the policy of the city that nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses in time be eliminated due to obsolescence, exhaustion or destruction so as to insure a uniform use of and within the districts established within this chapter. 
B.  Expansion of use. The expansion of any existing nonconforming use shall not be permitted, and no land shall be used by any person or in any manner which is not in conformity with this chapter. 
C.  Alteration or enlargement of structure. Except as provided herein, no nonconforming structures shall be erected, converted, enlarged, altered, or changed in any manner which is not in conformity with this subdivision. No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, altered, or changed in any manner upon any land upon which a nonconforming use is conducted. 
D.  Maintenance and repair. Routine maintenance and repair may be made to a nonconforming structure or any structure upon land upon which a nonconforming use is conducted, provided the repairs are nonstructural in nature. 
E.  Reconstruction. Whenever a lawful non-conforming structure shall have been damaged by fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, tornado, war, riot, or act of God, it may be reconstructed and used as before if a building permit for reconstruction is applied for within 180 days of the property damage occurring. If a building permit is not applied for within 180 days of property damage and the damage to the building or structure is 50 percent or more of its fair market value as shown on the assessor's records at the time of damage, the use thereof shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
F.  Abandonment. Any nonconforming structure or nonconforming use shall be deemed abandoned and thereafter shall be discontinued, when any nonconforming structure is not used or any nonconforming use is discontinued for a period greater than one year for any reason. In this case, the city may impose reasonable conditions upon any building permit to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent property. 
G.  Variance. No provision hereunder shall preclude a request for a variance, as governed by this chapter, for the erection or reconstruction of a nonconforming structure. This provision does not apply to any nonconforming uses. 
Subd. 10.  Outdoor wood boiler systems. 
A.  Purpose. This section is intended to ensure that outdoor wood boilers are utilized in a manner that does not create a public nuisance and is not detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city. 
B.  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
1.  Clean fuel. Natural dry wood (which has not been painted, varnished or coated with a similar material, has not been pressure-treated with preservatives and does not contain artificial resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood products), corn, wood pellets, other fuel pellets and other solid fuels approved by the Environmental Protection Agency. 
2.  Outdoor wood boiler. An appliance installed out-of-doors and designed to transfer or provide heat, via liquid or other means, through the burning of clean fuel for heating purposes. Also known as outdoor hydronic heaters. Outdoor wood boiler does not include a fire pit or wood-fired barbeque. 
3.  Public nuisance. An outdoor wood boiler operated or maintained in a manner which creates any dense smoke, noxious fumes or noxious gas, or releases soot or cinders in unreasonable quantities. 
C.  Regulations and requirements. An outdoor wood boiler shall be allowed as a use in all zoning districts, subject to the following provisions: 
1.  A building permit must be obtained to assure that all outdoor wood boilers meet all Minnesota State Building and Fire Codes, and manufacturer's specifications for installation, and the permit application must include: 
(a)  A site plan or survey, illustrating the dimensions of the property, including location of buildings and the wood boiler relative to the lot lines. 
(b)  Manufacturer's specifications for installation. 
(c)  Applicable building permit fee. 
2.  An outdoor wood boiler shall be located at least 300 feet from all property lines. 
3.  An outdoor wood boiler shall not be operated or maintained in a manner which creates a public nuisance. 
4.  An outdoor wood boiler shall burn clean fuel only. 
5.  Outdoor storage of clean fuel shall be in compliance with City Code requirements. 
6.  All requirements for installation and maintenance of the outdoor wood boilers shall be met, including but not limited to local, state and federal regulations and manufacturer's specifications. 
D.  Existing outdoor wood boiler systems. Outdoor wood boilers installed prior to the adoption of this subdivision shall be operated in compliance with the requirements of this subdivision, except that the distance requirement set forth in subsection (C) above shall not apply. 
Subd. 11.  Opt-out of temporary family health care dwelling zoning laws. 
A.  Purpose. On May 12, 2016, Governor Mark Dayton signed into law the creation and zoning regulations of temporary family health care dwellings, as defined in and codified as Minn. Stat. § 462.3593 (laws 2016, chapter 111, section 3). This new law provides that a municipality may, by ordinance, "opt out" of the application of the requirements of this new law. Pursuant to authority granted by Minn. Stat. § 462.3593, subdivision 9, it is in the best interest of the city and its residents that the City of Eagan not be subject to the mandates of Minn. Stat. § 462.3593 requiring temporary dwellings be allowed in residential districts. 
B.  Exercise of opt-out. The city opts out of the application of the requirements of laws 2016, chapter 111, section 3, codified at Minn. Stat. § 462.3593, and accordingly the provisions therein shall not apply within the city. 
(Ord. No. 366, 2nd series, eff. 10-7-03; Ord. No. 428, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 9-16-08; Ord. No. 437, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 4-21-09; Ord. No. 450, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-16-10; Ord. No. 459, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 8-2-10; Ord. No. 555, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 8-1-2016)  
Secs. 11.41—11.49. - Reserved.  
Sec. 11.50. - Administration and enforcement. 
Subd. 1.  Enforcing officer. 
A.  The council shall designate a city employee who shall be primarily responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. 
B.  The enforcing officer shall enforce this chapter and in furtherance of said authority, may: 
1.  Enter upon the land or within a building during reasonable working hours as found necessary to fulfill his duties as administrator of this chapter. 
2.  Conduct inspections of buildings and use of land to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter. 
3.  Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including, but not limited to, maps, amendments and conditional uses, variances, appeals, certificates of occupancy and applications thereto. 
4.  Institute, in the name of the city, appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator as provided by law. 
5.  Establish and enforce necessary or desirable regulations in writing, clarifying or explaining any provision of this chapter. 
Subd. 2.  Board of adjustments and appeals. 
A.  The council shall act as the board of adjustments and appeals. 
B.  The board of adjustments and appeals shall meet within 21 days from the date of receipt of an application for an appeal to consider all appeals from decisions of the chief building official under the building code, determinations made by the city staff in the enforcement of this chapter, council decisions, and such other matters as may be directly referred to it by the council. 
C.  The board of adjustments and appeals shall make a finding of fact and make a decision on appeal where it is alleged by the applicant that error has occurred in any order, requirement, decision or determination in accordance with the procedures described in subdivision 3 hereof, except that the appeal request may go directly to the council serving as the board of adjustments and appeals. All appeals shall be filed no later than 90 days after the alleged error. 
D.  The board of adjustments and appeals shall decide whether to approve or deny the appeal within 60 days after the appeal request is submitted to it. 
E.  The grant of an appeal shall be by two-thirds vote of the full council serving as the board of adjustments and appeals. 
Subd. 3.  Variances. 
A.  Purpose and scope of application. The council may grant variances from the strict application of the provisions of the applicable Code provisions and impose conditions and safeguards in the variances so granted where practical difficulties result from carrying out the strict letter of the regulations of such Code provisions. "Practical difficulties," as used in connection with the granting of a variance, means that the applicant proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner not permitted by the zoning provisions of this Code; the plight of the applicant is due to circumstances unique to the property not created by the applicant; and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality. Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical difficulties. 
B.  Procedures. 
1.  Request for a variance shall be filed with the city on the city's application form. The application shall include a statement of the exceptional conditions and the peculiar and practical difficulties claimed as a basis for the need for a variance and shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as established by council resolution. The application shall also be accompanied by sufficient copies of detailed, written and graphic materials necessary for the explanation of the request, together with a list of property owners affected or within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of the subject property. The request shall be considered as being officially submitted when all the information requirements are complied with. 
2.  The city council shall hold a public hearing to review each request for a variance and shall approve or deny the request within 60 days of the filing of a completed application, unless extended in a manner consistent with Minn. Stat. § 15.99. All owners of property located within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of the subject property shall be mailed a notice of the request for variance and the date and time of the city council's public hearing. In cases when a variance to a regulation is requested with other applications for public hearing before the advisory planning commission, the advisory planning commission shall make a recommendation to grant or deny the variance application to the city council. 
3.  The city council may approve, approve with conditions or deny a request for a variance. A variance will be denied when it is not in harmony with the general purposes and intent of the zoning provisions of this Code or when the variance is inconsistent with the comprehensive plan. Any condition imposed upon the approved variance must be directly related to and must bear a rough proportionality to the impact created by the variance. In considering all requests for a variance and whether the applicant established that there are practical difficulties in complying with the provision(s) of this chapter, the city council shall consider the following factors: 
a.  Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances apply to the property which do not apply generally to other properties in the same zone or vicinity, and result from lot size or shape, topography, or other circumstances over which the owner of property has no control. 
b.  The literal interpretation of the provisions of this Code would deprive the applicant property use commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the provisions of this Code. 
c.  The exceptional or extraordinary circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant. 
d.  The granting of the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to owners of other lands, structures or buildings in the same district. 
e.  The variance requested is the minimum variance which would alleviate the practical difficulties. 
f.  The variance would not be materially detrimental to the purposes of this Code, or to other properties in the same zone. 
g.  The property for which the variance is requested is otherwise in compliance with the City Code. 
C.  Lapse of variance or appeal. Whenever within one year after granting a variance or appeal the use as permitted by the variance or appeal shall not have been completed or utilized, then such variance or appeal shall become null and void unless a petition for extension of time in which to complete or to utilize the use has been granted by the council. Such extension shall be requested in writing and filed with the city clerk at least 30 days before the expiration of the original variance or appeal. There shall be no charge for the filing of such petition. The request for extension shall state facts showing a good faith attempt to complete or utilize the use permitted in the variance or appeal. 
D.  Reapplication. No application of a property owner for a variance shall be considered within a period of one year following a denial of such request, except that a new application may be permitted if new evidence or a change of circumstances warrant it. 
Subd. 4.  Conditional use permits. 
A.  Purpose. Conditional uses include those uses which are not generally suitable within the zoning district, but which may under some circumstances be suitable. The applicant shall have the burden of proof that the use is suitable and that the standards set forth in this subdivision 4 have been met. 
B.  Application, public hearing, notice and procedure. The application, public hearing, public notice and procedure requirements for conditional use permits shall be the same as those for zoning amendments as provided herein, except that the permit shall be issued on the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire council. Although specific submissions required to complete an application for a conditional use permit may vary with the specific use and the district in which it is located, all applications for such permits shall be filed with the city on a form prescribed by the city. 
C.  Evaluation criteria. The advisory planning commission shall recommend a conditional use permit and the council shall issue such conditional use permit only if it finds that such use at the proposed location: 
1.  Will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, or general welfare of the neighborhood or the city. 
2.  Will be harmonious with the general and applicable specific objectives of the comprehensive plan and Code provisions. 
3.  Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be compatible in appearance and use with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential character of that area, nor substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood. 
4.  Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, including streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer systems and schools. 
5.  Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and conditions of operation that will be hazardous or detrimental to any persons, property or the general welfare because of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors. 
6.  Will have vehicular ingress and egress to the property which does not create traffic congestion or interfere with traffic on surrounding public streets. 
7.  Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural, scenic or historic feature of major importance. 
8.  Is appropriate after considering whether the property is in compliance with the City Code. 
D.  Conditions. In reviewing applications of conditional use permits, the advisory planning commission and the council may attach whatever reasonable conditions they deem necessary to mitigate anticipated adverse impacts associated with these uses, to protect the value of other property within the district, and to achieve the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan. In all cases in which conditional uses are granted, the council shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with. 
E.  Denial for noncompliance. If the advisory planning commission recommends denial of a conditional use permit or the council orders such denial, it shall include in its recommendation or determination findings as to the manner in which the proposed use does not comply with the standards required by this section. 
F.  Permittee. A conditional use permit shall be issued for a particular use and not for a particular person. 
G.  Periodic review, term of permit. A periodic review of the use may be attached as a condition of approval of a conditional use permit. Unless otherwise stipulated, the term shall be the life of the use. 
H.  Revocation. Failure to comply with any condition set forth in a conditional use permit or any other violation of Code provisions shall also constitute sufficient cause for the termination of the conditional use permit by the council following a public hearing. 
I.  Expiration/extension. In any case where a conditional use has not been established within one year of the date on which the conditional use permit was granted, the permit shall be null and void or if the conditional use is discontinued for six months, the conditional use permit shall be null and void, unless a petition for extension of time in which to record the permit or to implement, effect or operate the use has been granted by the council. Such extension shall be requested in writing and filed with the city clerk at least 30 days before the expiration of the conditional use permit. There shall be no charge for the filing of such petition. The request for extension shall state facts showing a good cause to extend the conditional use permit. No conditional use permit may be extended for more than one year from the date of expiration of the originally approved conditional use permit. If an extension is granted, the council may impose any additional conditions as allowed under this subdivision. 
J.  Reapplication. No application of a property owner for a conditional use permit shall be considered within a period of one year following a denial of such request, except that a new application may be permitted if new evidence or a change of circumstances warrant it. 
Subd. 5.  Amendments to zoning map (rezoning) and ordinance text. 
A.  Provisions. The provisions of this chapter may be amended by the majority vote of the council, except that amendments changing the boundaries of any district or changing the regulations of any existing district may only be made by an affirmative vote of two-thirds of all members of the council. 
B.  Initiation. Proceedings for amendment of this chapter shall be initiated by: (1) a petition proposing a text amendment; (2) a petition of the owner or owners of the property which is proposed to be rezoned; (3) a recommendation of the advisory planning commission; or (4) by action of the council. 
C.  Petitions. All petitions for amendments shall be filed with the city. If the application is initiated by the owner or owners of the property and involves the changing of zoning districts and boundary thereof, the application shall be accompanied by an abstractor's certified property certificate showing the property owners within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of the property in question. The petition shall be forwarded to the advisory planning commission by the city. 
Petitions for amendments shall fill out and submit a rezoning/text amendment application form to the city. If a rezoning of property is proposed, a scaled site plan must be attached indicating the following: 
1.  A detailed map showing the number of acres in each separate zoning district. 
2.  Any additional information that may be required under this Code. 
D.  Public hearing—Notice and procedure. The advisory planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing affording the parties interested the opportunity to be heard and shall give not less than ten days' nor more than 30 days' notice of the time and place of such hearing, published in the designated legal newspaper of the city. Such notice shall also include the description of the land and the proposed changes in zoning. At least ten days before the hearing, the city shall mail an identical notice to the owners of the property and to each of the property owners within 350 feet of the outside boundaries of the land proposed to be rezoned. Failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceeding, provided a bona fide attempt to comply with this subdivision has been made. The council may waive the above mailed notice requirement in connection with a city-wide zoning or amendment to the text of this chapter, initiated by the advisory planning commission or the council. An amendment to the text of this chapter, however, shall also require a public hearing as described above. 
E.  Referral to advisory planning commission. The council shall not rezone any land or area in any zoning district or make any other proposed amendment to this chapter without first having referred it to the advisory planning commission for its consideration and recommendation. 
F.  If the advisory planning commission fails to make a report within 60 days after receipt of the application, the council may act without the recommendation. The council may table the petition for further investigation and hearing. The council may also request further information and report from the advisory planning commission. 
G.  City council action. The city council shall after receiving recommendation from the advisory planning commission and within 60 days of receipt of a completed application unless extended in a manner consistent with Minn. Stat. § 15.99, act on the application, providing appropriate findings of fact to support the action. The city council shall consider whether the property is in compliance with the City Code when rezoning is sought. 
H.  Reapplication. No application of a property owner for a zoning amendment shall be considered within a period of one year following a denial of such request, except that a new application may be permitted if new evidence or a change of circumstances warrant it. 
Subd. 6.  Interim use permits. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of an interim use permit is to allow a reasonable use of property for uses not specifically permitted in a zoning district on a temporary basis as deemed appropriate by the city council upon recommendation of the advisory planning commission and benefit the public good. 
B.  Definition. "Interim use" is a temporary use of property until a particular date, or until the occurrence of a particular event. 
C.  Evaluation criteria. The council may issue interim use permits for an interim use of property if: 
1.  The use is deemed to be temporary in light of the Comprehensive Guide Plan designation for the property site on which the use is located and the use conforms to the bulk and performance standards of the zoning regulations herein; 
2.  The date or event that will terminate the use can be identified with certainty; 
3.  Permission of the use will not impose additional costs on the public if it is necessary for the public to take the property in the future; 
4.  The user agrees to any conditions that the council deems appropriate for permission of the use; 
5.  The use meets the standards set forth in the zoning regulations herein governing conditional use permits; and 
6.  The city determines that the property is in compliance with the City Code. 
D.  [Reserved.] 
E.  Termination. Any interim use permitted hereunder shall terminate upon the earlier of a specified date, or upon the occurrence of a particular event, which is specified in the permit. 
F.  Revocation. All interim use permits shall be subject to an annual administrative review. The purpose of such review shall be to determine that the conditions of a permit issued hereunder are within compliance. Any interim use permit may be revoked for failure to comply with any condition of the permit following notice of the noncompliance and a hearing by the city council with all interested parties being given an opportunity to be heard. 
G.  Public hearings. Public hearings on the granting of interim use permits shall be held in the manner provided in Minn. Stat. § 462.357, subd. 3. 
H.  Reapplication. No application of a property owner for an interim use permit shall be considered within a period of one year following a denial of such request, except that a new application may be permitted if new evidence or a change of circumstances warrant it. 
(Ord. No. 366, 2nd series, eff. 10-7-03; Ord. No. 422, 2nd series, §§ 1—4, eff. 2-4-08; Ord. No. 454, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-16-10; Ord. No. 482, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 7-19-2011)  
Secs. 11.51—11.59. - Reserved.  
Sec. 11.60. - Use districts and overlays. 
Subd. 1.  Classification. The following land use districts are hereby established under which all lands in the city shall be classified: 
A 	Agricultural District 
E 	Estate District 
R-1 	Residential Single District 
R-1S 	Residential Single District - Small Lot 
R-2 	Residential Double District 
R-3 	Residential Townhouse District 
R-4 	Residential Multiple District 
R-5 	Manufactured Home Park District 
LB 	Limited Business District 
NB 	Neighborhood Business District 
GB 	General Business District 
CSC 	Community Shopping Center District 
I-1 	Limited Industrial District 
I-2 	General Industrial District 
RD 	Research and Development Park District 
BP 	Business Park District 
PD 	Planned Development District 
P 	Park District 
PF 	Public Facilities/Institutional District 
CGD 	Cedar Grove District 
T 	Transitional District 
S 	Shoreland Overlay District 
FP 	Floodplain Overlay District 
 
Subd. 2.  Zoning map. The boundaries of the above districts are hereby established as shown on that certain map entitled "Zoning Map of the City of Eagan, Minnesota," which map is properly approved and filed in the office of the city clerk, hereinafter referred to as the "zoning map." Said map and all of the notations, references and other information shown thereon shall have the same force and effect as if fully set down therein and are hereby made a part of this chapter by reference and incorporated herein as fully as if set forth herein at length. It shall be the responsibility of the city clerk to maintain the zoning map and make same available to the public. Where a dispute arises over the city clerk's determination of the exact location of a district boundary, said dispute shall be heard by the board of appeals and adjustments for recommendation, with final determination to be made by the council. 
Subd. 3.  "A" Agricultural District. 
A.  Purpose. The intent of the agricultural district is for agricultural uses and related activities, and a holding area for future development. 
B.  Permitted uses. Within any agricultural district no structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council: 
1.  Agriculture. 
2.  Freestanding satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
3.  Public parks, playgrounds and public utility service facilities. 
4.  Public utility tower mounted antennae, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
5.  Stands for the sale of agricultural products provided said products are raised on the premises. 
6.  Single-family detached dwellings. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within any agricultural district no structure or land shall be used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council except by a conditional use permit: 
1.  Any conditional use in the R-1 district as regulated therein. 
2.  Auction facilities. 
3.  Boarding stables. 
4.  Commercial feedlots as regulated by state statute. 
5.  Kennels, subject to the regulations thereof in chapter 6 of the Code. 
6.  Gun clubs. 
7.  Riding stables. 
8.  Sales barns. 
9.  Wind energy conversion systems subject to regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
10.  Farm winery, provided it holds a farm winery license issued by the commissioner of public safety and meets all requirements thereof. 
D.  Permitted accessory uses. 
1.  Building mounted antennae and satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises for a period of time not to exceed time necessary for such construction. 
3.  Decorative landscape features. 
4.  Gardening and other horticultural uses where no sale of products is conducted on the premises. 
5.  Freestanding towers, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
6.  Home occupations subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
7.  In-home daycare subject to state day care licensing. 
8.  Private garages and parking spaces. 
9.  Private swimming pools and tennis courts. 
10.  The keeping of domestic animals (household) for noncommercial purposes, for the use of the occupants of the premises. 
E.  Bulk standards (minimum unless noted). 
Lot Area 	5 acres 
Lot Width 	300 feet 
Setback From Public Right-of-way 	30 feet 
Side Yard Setback (principal structure) 	30 feet 
Side Yard Setback (garage or accessory structure) 	30 feet 
Rear Yard Setback 	30 feet 
Principal Structure Height (max.) 	35 feet 
 
F.  Additional setbacks for heights. In all residential districts, all minimum required building setbacks as stated in subparagraph E of this subdivision 3 shall be increased by three feet for each one foot of height over 35 feet. 
G.  Additional setbacks. The following shall be the minimum required building setback along any interstate or state highway, major thoroughfare or minor thoroughfare, either existing or proposed as shown on the current Functional Classification Plan: 
THOROUGHFARE 	RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH 	MINIMUM SETBACK 
Major Thoroughfare 
(Principal and A Minor Arterials) 	150 feet 	50 feet or 125 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Major Thoroughfare 
(B Minor Arterials) 	100 feet 	50 feet or 100 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Minor Thoroughfare 
(Major and Minor Collectors) 	80 feet 	40 feet or 80 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
 
G[1].  Density. In determining the minimum required lot area, no more than ten percent of ponding areas or similar unbuildable areas shall be used for calculating maximum allowable density. 
H.  Minnesota State Building Code. All homes built shall meet Minnesota State Building Code requirements. 
Subd. 4.  "E" Estate District. 
A.  Purpose. The intent of the "E" Estate District is for large lot single family residential development. 
B.  Permitted uses. Within any estate district, no structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council: 
1.  Freestanding satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Single-family detached dwellings. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within any estate district, no structure or land shall be used for the following use or uses deemed similar by the council except by conditional use permit: 
1.  Golf courses, country clubs and tennis clubs. 
D.  Permitted accessory uses. Within any estate district, no structure or land or use of land shall be permitted except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council: 
1.  Building mounted antennae and satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises for a period of time not to exceed time necessary for such construction. 
3.  Decorative landscape features. 
4.  Freestanding towers, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
5.  Gardening and other horticultural uses where no sale of products is conducted on the premises. 
6.  Home occupations, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
7.  In-home daycare subject to State day care licensing. 
8.  Public utility tower mounted antennae, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
9.  Private garages and parking spaces. 
10.  Private swimming pools and tennis courts. 
11.  The keeping of domestic animals (household) for noncommercial purposes, for the use of the occupants of the premises. 
12.  Accessory dwelling unit, subject to the regulations thereof as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
E.  Bulk standard (minimum unless noted). 
Lot Area 	16,000 sq. ft. 
Lot Width 	100 feet 
Setback From Public Right-of-way 	30 feet 
Side Yard Setback (principal structure) 	20 feet 
Side Yard Setback (garage or accessory structure) 	10 feet 
Rear Yard Setback (principal structure) 	30 feet 
Rear Yard Setback (accessory structure) 	10 feet 
Structure Height (max.) 	35 feet 
Building Coverage (max.) 	20 percent 
 
F.  Additional setbacks for heights. In all residential districts, all minimum required building setbacks as stated in subparagraph E of this subdivision 4 shall be increased by three feet for each one foot of height over 35 feet. 
G.  Additional setbacks. The following shall be the minimum required building setback along any interstate or state highway, major thoroughfare or minor thoroughfare, either existing or proposed as shown on the current Functional Classification Plan: 
THOROUGHFARE 	RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH 	MINIMUM SETBACK 
Major Thoroughfare 
(Principal and A Minor Arterials) 	150 feet 	50 feet or 125 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Major Thoroughfare 
(B Minor Arterials) 	100 feet 	50 feet or 100 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Minor Thoroughfare 
(Major and Minor Collectors) 	80 feet 	40 feet or 80 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
 
G[1].  Density. In determining the minimum required lot area, no more than ten percent of ponding areas or similar unbuildable areas shall be used for calculating maximum allowable density. 
H.  Minnesota State Building Code. All homes built shall meet Minnesota State Building Code requirements. 
Subd. 5.  "R-1" Residential Single District. 
A.  Purpose. The intent of the "R-1" Single District is for single family residential development. 
B.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Freestanding satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Single-family detached dwelling. One dwelling unit per lot. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within the R-1 district, no structure or land shall be used for the following use or uses deemed by the council except by conditional use permit: 
1.  Golf courses, country clubs and tennis clubs. 
D.  Permitted accessory uses. Within the R-1 district, no structure or land or use of land shall be permitted except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council: 
1.  Building mounted antennae and satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises for a period of time not to exceed time necessary for such construction. 
3.  Decorative landscape features. 
4.  Freestanding towers, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
5.  Gardening and other horticultural uses where no sale of products is conducted on the premises. 
6.  Home occupations, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
7.  In-home daycare subject to state day care licensing. 
8.  Public utility tower mounted antennae, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
9.  Private garages and parking spaces. 
10.  Private swimming pools and tennis courts. 
11.  The keeping of domestic animals (household) for noncommercial purposes, for the use of the occupants of the premises. 
12.  Accessory dwelling unit, subject to the regulations thereof as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
E.  Bulk standards (minimum unless noted). 
Lot Area 	12,000 sq. ft. 
Lot Width 	85 feet 
Setback From Public Right-of-way 	30 feet 
Side Yard Setback (principal structure) 	10 feet 
Side Yard Setback (garage or accessory structure) 	5 feet 
Rear Yard Setback (principal structure) 	15 feet 
Rear Yard Setback (accessory structure) 	5 feet 
Structure Height (max.) 	35 feet 
Building Coverage (max.) 	20 percent 
 
F.  Additional setbacks for heights. In all residential districts, all minimum required building setbacks as stated in subparagraph E of this subdivision 5 shall be increased by three feet for each one foot of height over 35 feet. 
G.  Additional setbacks. The following shall be the minimum required building setback along any interstate or state highway, major thoroughfare or minor thoroughfare, either existing or proposed as shown on the current Functional Classification Plan: 
THOROUGHFARE 	RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH 	MINIMUM SETBACK 
Major Thoroughfare 
(Principal and A Minor Arterials) 	150 feet 	50 feet or 125 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Major Thoroughfare 
(B Minor Arterials) 	100 feet 	50 feet or 120 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Minor Thoroughfare 
(Major and Minor Collectors) 	80 feet 	40 feet or 80 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
 
G[1].  Density. In determining the minimum required lot area, no more than ten percent of ponding areas or similar unbuildable areas shall be used for calculating maximum allowable density. 
H.  Minnesota State Building Code. All homes built shall meet Minnesota State Building Code requirements. 
Subd. 6.  "R-1S" Residential Single - Small Lot District. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the "R-1S" Residential Single - Small Lot District is for new single family residential developments on smaller lots to allow for varied housing styles and values within the city. Such district is intended to satisfy issues with existing single-family developments that do not meet standard R-1 requirements, and to allow for cluster-type development for infill developments when appropriate (due to topography, tree and wetland preservation, etc.). 
B.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Freestanding satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Single-family detached dwelling. One dwelling unit per lot. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within the "R-1S" district, no structure or land shall be used for the following use or uses deemed by the council except by conditional use permit: 
Golf courses, country clubs and tennis clubs. 
Manufactured home parks as defined by Minn. Stat. chapter 327 and regulated elsewhere in this chapter. 
D.  Permitted accessory uses. Within the "R-1S" district, no structure or land or use of land shall be permitted except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council: 
1.  Building mounted antennae and satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises for a period of not to exceed time necessary for such construction. 
3.  Decorative landscape features. 
4.  Freestanding towers, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
5.  Gardening and other horticultural uses where no sale of products is conducted on the premises. 
6.  Home occupations, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
7.  In-home daycare subject to state day care licensing. 
8.  Public utility tower mounted antennae, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
9.  Private garages and parking spaces. 
10.  Private swimming pools and tennis courts. 
11.  The keeping of domestic animals (household) for noncommercial purposes, for the use of the occupants of the premises. 
E.  Bulk standards (minimum unless noted). 
Lot Area 	8,000 sq. ft. 
Lot Width 	65 feet 
Setback From Public Right-of-way 	30 feet 
Side Yard Setback (principal structure) 	10 feet 
Side Yard Setback (garage or accessory structure) 	5 feet 
Rear Yard Setback (principal structure) 	15 feet 
Rear Yard Setback (accessory structure) 	5 feet 
Structure Height (max.) 	35 feet 
Building Coverage (max.) 	20 percent or 2000 sq. ft., whichever is less 
 
F.  Additional setbacks for heights. In all residential districts, all minimum required building setbacks as stated in subparagraph E of this subdivision 6 shall be increased by three feet for each one foot of height over 35 feet. 
G.  Additional setbacks. The following shall be the minimum required building setback along any interstate or state highway, major thoroughfare or minor thoroughfare, either existing or proposed as shown on the current Functional Classification Plan: 
THOROUGHFARE 	RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH 	MINIMUM SETBACK 
Major Thoroughfare 
(Principal and A Minor Arterials) 	150 feet 	50 feet or 125 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Major Thoroughfare 
(B Minor Arterials) 	100 feet 	50 feet or 100 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Minor Thoroughfare 
(Major and Minor Collectors) 	80 feet 	40 feet or 80 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
 
G[1].  Density. In determining the minimum required lot area, no more than ten percent of ponding areas or similar unbuildable areas shall be used for calculating maximum allowable density. 
H.  Minnesota State Building Code. All homes built shall meet Minnesota State Building Code requirements. 
Subd. 7.  "R-2" Residential Double District. 
A.  Purpose. The intent of the R-2 Residential Double District is for two-family residential development. 
B.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Freestanding satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Two-family dwelling. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within the R-2 district, no structure or land shall be used for the following use or uses deemed similar by the council except by conditional use permit: 
1.  Golf courses, country clubs and tennis clubs. 
D.  Permitted accessory uses. Within the R-2 district, no structure or land or use of land shall be permitted except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council: 
1.  Building mounted antennae and satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises for a period of not to exceed time necessary for such construction. 
3.  Decorative landscape features. 
4.  Freestanding towers, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
5.  Gardening and other horticultural uses where no sale of products is conducted on the premises. 
6.  Home occupations, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
7.  In-home daycare subject to state day care licensing. 
8.  Public utility tower mounted antennae, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
9.  Private garages and parking spaces. 
10.  Private swimming pools, tennis courts, recreational buildings, or tot lots. 
11.  The keeping of domestic animals (household) for noncommercial purposes, for the use of the occupants of the premises. 
E.  Bulk standards (minimum unless noted). 
Lot Area 	
 Double 	15,000 sq. ft. 
 Twinhome 	7,500 sq. ft. per unit 
Lot Width 	
 Double 	100 feet 
 Twinhome 	50 feet per unit 
Setback From Public Right-of-way 	30 feet 
Side Yard Setback (principal building) 	
 Double 	10 feet 
 Twinhome 	0 feet and 10 feet 
Side Yard Setback (garage or accessory structure) 	5 feet 
Rear Yard Setback (principal building) 	15 feet 
Rear Yard Setback (accessory structure) 	5 feet 
Structure Height (max.) 	35 feet 
Building Cover (max.) 	20 percent 
 
F.  Additional setbacks for heights. In all residential districts, all minimum required building setbacks as stated in subparagraph E of this subdivision 7 shall be increased by three feet for each one foot of height over 35 feet. 
G.  Additional setbacks. The following shall be the minimum required building setback along any interstate or state highway, major thoroughfare or minor thoroughfare, either existing or proposed as shown on the current Functional Classification Plan: 
THOROUGHFARE 	RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH 	MINIMUM SETBACK 
Major Thoroughfare 
(Principal and A Minor Arterials) 	150 feet 	50 feet or 125 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Major Thoroughfare 
(B Minor Arterials) 	100 feet 	50 feet or 100 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Minor Thoroughfare 
(Major and Minor Collectors) 	80 feet 	40 feet or 80 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
 
G[1].  Density. In determining the minimum required lot area, no more than ten percent of ponding areas or similar unbuildable areas shall be used for calculating maximum allowable density. 
H.  Minnesota State Building Code. All homes built shall meet Minnesota State Building Code requirements. 
Subd. 8.  "R-3" Residential Townhouse District. 
A.  Purpose. The intent of the "R-3" Residential Townhouse District is for multi-family residential townhouse developments. 
B.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Freestanding satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Townhouse dwelling. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within the R-3 district, no structure or land shall be used for the following use or uses deemed by the council except by conditional use permit: 
1.  Golf courses, country clubs and tennis clubs. 
D.  Permitted accessory uses. Within the R-3 district, no structure or land or use of land shall be permitted except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council: 
1.  Building mounted antennae and satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises for a period of time not to exceed time necessary for such construction. 
3.  Decorative landscape features. 
4.  Freestanding towers, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
5.  Gardening and other horticultural uses where no sale of products is conducted on the premises. 
6.  Home occupations, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
7.  In-home daycare subject to state day care licensing. 
8.  Public utility tower mounted antennae, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
9.  Private garages and parking spaces. 
10.  Private swimming pools, tennis courts, recreation buildings or tot lots. 
11.  The keeping of domestic animals (household) for noncommercial purposes, for the use of the occupants of the premises. 
E.  Bulk standards (minimum unless noted). 
Lot Area (per unit) 	6,000 sq. ft. 
Lot Width 	None 
Setback From Public Right-of-way 	30 feet 
Setback (from perimeter of site) 	30 feet 
Setback (between buildings within the development) 	20 feet 
Structure Height (max.) 	35 feet 
Building Coverage (max.) 	20 percent 
 
F.  Additional setbacks for heights. In all residential districts, all minimum required building setbacks as stated in subparagraph E of this subdivision 8 shall be increased by three feet for each one foot of height over 35 feet. 
G.  Additional setbacks. The following shall be the minimum required building setback along any interstate or state highway, major thoroughfare or minor thoroughfare, either existing or proposed as shown on the current Functional Classification Plan: 
THOROUGHFARE 	RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH 	MINIMUM SETBACK 
Major Thoroughfare 
Principal and A Minor Arterials) 	150 feet 	50 feet or 125 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Major Thoroughfare 
(B Minor Arterials) 	100 feet 	50 feet or 100 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Minor Thoroughfare 
(Major and Minor Collectors) 	80 feet 	40 feet or 80 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
 
G[1].  Density. In determining the minimum required lot area, no more than ten percent of ponding areas or similar unbuildable areas shall be used for calculating maximum allowable density. 
H.  Minnesota State Building Code. All homes built shall meet Minnesota State Building Code requirements. 
Subd. 9.  "R-4" Residential Multiple District. 
A.  Purpose. The intent of the "R-4" Residential Multiple District is for residential apartment buildings with four or more dwelling units. 
B.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Freestanding satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Apartment buildings with four or more units. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within the R-4 district, no structure or land shall be used for the following use or uses deemed by the council except by conditional use permit: 
1.  Golf courses, country clubs and tennis clubs. 
2.  Off-site, off-street parking, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter, except those portions thereof regarding outdoor storage. 
D.  Permitted accessory uses. Within the R-4 district, no structure or land or use of land shall be permitted except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council: 
1.  Building mounted antennae and satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises for a period not to exceeding the time necessary for such construction. 
3.  Decorative landscape features. 
4.  Freestanding towers, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
5.  Gardening and other horticultural uses where no sale of products is conducted on the premises. 
6.  Home occupations, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
7.  In-home daycare subject to state day care licensing. 
8.  Public utility tower mounted antennae, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
9.  Private garages and parking spaces. 
10.  Private swimming pools, tennis courts, recreational buildings, or tot lots. 
11.  The keeping of domestic animals (household) for noncommercial purposes, for the use of the occupants of the premises. 
 
F.  Additional setbacks for heights. In all residential districts, all minimum required building setbacks as stated in subparagraph E of this subdivision 9 shall be increased by three feet for each one foot of height over 35 feet. 
G.  Additional setbacks. The following shall be the minimum required building setback along any interstate or state highway, major thoroughfare or minor thoroughfare, either existing or proposed as shown on the current Functional Classification Plan: 
THOROUGHFARE 	RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH 	MINIMUM SETBACK 
Major Thoroughfare 
(Principal and A Minor Arterials) 	150 feet 	50 feet or 125 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Major Thoroughfare 
(B Minor Arterials) 	100 feet 	50 feet or 100 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Minor Thoroughfare 
(Major and Minor Collectors) 	80 feet 	40 feet or 80 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 

E.  Bulk standards (minimum unless noted). 
Lot Width 	None 
Front Yard Setback 	50 feet 
Side Yard Setback 	30 feet 
Rear Yard Setback 	30 feet 
Structure Height (max.) 	60 feet 
Building Cover (max.) 	20 percent 
Lot Area 	
 4—6 unit buildings 	5,000 sq. ft. per unit 
 6 + unit buildings 	2,750 sq. ft. per unit 
 
G[1].  Density. In determining the minimum required lot area, no more than ten percent of ponding areas or similar unbuildable areas shall be used for calculating maximum allowable density. 
H.  Minnesota State Building Code. All homes built shall meet Minnesota State Building Code requirements. 
I.  Special density credits. The minimum lot area requirements as stated in this subsection E shall be decreased where garages are below grade to the extent that the site area normally covered by garages can be occupied by other uses. The minimum required lot area be reduced by 300 square feet for each dwelling unit served by an underground garage. 
Subd. 10.  LB Limited Business District. 
A.  Purpose. Limited Business Districts are areas that are particularly exposed to residential neighborhoods and are thus suitable to those businesses compatible with nearby residential use (offices, clinics and the like). 
B.  Permitted uses. Within any LB district no structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council: 
1.  Clinics for human care. 
2.  Freestanding satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
3.  Funeral homes and mortuaries. 
4.  Institutional uses: library, swimming pools, churches, public schools, religious centers, health centers, and community buildings. 
5.  [Reserved]. 
6.  Municipal buildings where the use conducted is customarily considered to be an office use. 
7.  Offices of a general nature where the operations do not include retail sales or warehousing from the site. 
8.  Professional offices, banks and savings and loan. 
9.  Public utility tower mounted antennae, subject to the regulations of in this Code. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within any LB district no structure or land shall be used except for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council and only by a conditional use permit: 
1.  Nursing homes, rest homes, retirement homes or hospitals for human care, day care centers, private schools. 
2.  Art, interior decorating, photographic or music studio, provided no retail sales are made of products not manufactured on the site. 
3.  Radio and television studios. 
4.  Private clubs and lodges. 
5.  Museums, art institutions, galleries and playhouses. 
6.  Off-site off-street parking when the principal site of the off-site off-street parking is within an R-4 zoning district subject to the regulations thereof in this Code. 
7.  Off-site off-street parking, subject to the regulations thereof in this Code, except those portions regarding outdoor storage. 
8.  On-sale liquor in conjunction with a restaurant facility. 
9.  Restaurants—Full service and casual only those granted a permit according to applicable City Code provisions to serve 3.2 beer or wine and an outdoor dining area in conjunction therewith, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
10.  Reserved. 
11.  Outdoor event—seasonal, subject to regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
12.  Coffee kiosks subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  The activity shall be conducted within a free-standing building, no larger than 100 square feet in size. 
(b)  The use shall not result in the elimination of the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for all uses on the parcel. 
(c)  Vehicular stacking lanes shall comply with the following: 
(1)  A minimum length of 150 feet shall be provided for a single stacking lane or 80 feet per lane when multiple lanes are provided. 
(2)  Stacking lanes shall be designed such that they do not interfere with existing parking and vehicular circulation. 
(3)  Stacking lanes shall be clearly identified through striping, landscaping, and/or signage. 
(d)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold. 
(e)  Evidence of issuance of a permit from the Minnesota Department of Health shall be provided to the city. 
(f)  If the use of the building ceases for a period of six months, the conditional use permit shall lapse and the property owner shall remove the building and clean up the site. 
(g)  No on-site preparation of food shall be allowed. 
D.  Permitted accessory uses. 
1.  Private garages, off-street parking and loading spaces, as regulated by this chapter. 
2.  Building temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises for a period of not to exceed time necessary to complete said construction. 
3.  Public telephone booths provided all yard requirements are met. 
4.  Temporary outdoor event, cultural/entertainment event, and outdoor food sales, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
5.  Building mounted antenna or satellite dish, subject to the regulations thereof in this Code. 
E.  Bulk standards (minimum unless noted). 
Lot Area 	
Lot Width 	
Setback From Public Right-of-way 	30 feet 
Side Yard Setback 	10 feet 
Rear Yard Setback 	20 feet 
Adjacent to property guided* for residential use 	30 feet 
Structure Height (max.) 	30 feet 
Green Space 	30 percent 
Building Cover (max.) 	20 percent 
 
* Land use guide designation per city's Comprehensive Guide Plan. 
F.  Additional setbacks. The following shall be the minimum required building setback along any interstate or state highway, major thoroughfare or minor thoroughfare, either existing or proposed as shown on the current Functional Classification Plan: 
THOROUGHFARE 	RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH 	MINIMUM SETBACK 
Major Thoroughfare 
(Principal and A Minor Arterials) 	150 feet 	50 feet or 125 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Major Thoroughfare 
(B Minor Arterials) 	100 feet 	50 feet or 100 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Minor Thoroughfare 
(Major and Minor Collectors) 	80 feet 	40 feet or 80 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
 
Subd. 11.  NB Neighborhood Business District. 
A.  Purpose. Neighborhood Business Districts are small business areas generally located adjacent to or in close proximity to residential neighborhoods that are intended to provide daily retail goods and services. 
B.  Permitted uses. Within any NB district no structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council: 
1.  Bakeries. 
2.  Barbershops. 
3.  Beauty salons. 
4.  Clinics. 
5.  Clubs and lodges. 
6.  Copy centers. 
7.  Drug stores. 
8.  Financial institutions without drive-through facilities. 
9.  Florists. 
10.  Freestanding satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
11.  Funeral homes and mortuaries. 
12.  Gift shops. 
13.  Hardware stores. 
14.  Hobby shops. 
15.  Laundry and dry cleaners. 
16.  Laundromats. 
17.  Off-sale liquor stores. 
18.  Photography studios. 
19.  Offices. 
20.  Restaurants—Full service and casual (on-sale liquor subject to conditional use permit). 
21.  Shoe stores. 
22.  Specialty food stores. 
23.  Sporting goods stores. 
24.  Variety stores. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within any NB district no structure or land shall be used except for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council and only by a conditional use permit: 
1.  Animal clinics when contained within a building. 
2.  Carwashes. 
3.  Coffee kiosks, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
4.  Convenience stores. 
5.  Daycare facilities subject to State daycare licensing. 
6.  Drive-through facilities. 
7.  Motor fuel sales, Class I. 
8.  Motor vehicle repair, minor. 
9.  Nursing homes, retirement homes or hospitals for human care, and day care centers. 
10.  Off-site off-street parking when the principal site of the off-street parking is within an R-4 zoning district subject to the regulations thereof in this Code. 
11.  Off-site off-street parking, subject to the regulations thereof in this Code, except those portions regarding outdoor storage. 
12.  On-sale liquor, wine or 3.2 beer. 
13.  Radio and television studios. 
14.  Outdoor event—seasonal, subject to regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
15.  Restaurants—Fast food and delivery or take-out and any outdoor dining area in conjunction therewith, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
16.  A building or structure greater than 25,000 square feet, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this subdivision. 
D.  Permitted accessory uses. 
1.  Building mounted antennae and satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises for a period of not to exceed time necessary to complete said construction. 
3.  Outdoor display, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
4.  Private garages, off-street parking and loading spaces, as regulated by this chapter. 
5.  Public telephone booths provided all yard requirements are met. 
6.  Temporary outdoor event, cultural/entertainment event, and outdoor food sales, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
7.  An outdoor dining area in conjunction with a full service or casual restaurant, except an outdoor dining area that does not meet the special use setback from a residential property or that provides seating for more than 24 persons is subject to a conditional use permit or planned development approval as applicable, and any outdoor dining area shall be subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
E.  Bulk standards (minimum unless noted). 
Lot Area 	
Lot Width 	
Setback From Public Right-of-Way 	30 feet 
Side Yard Setback 	10 feet 
Rear Yard Setback 	20 feet 
Adjacent to property guided* for residential use 	30 feet 
Structure Height (max.) 	30 feet 
Green Space 	30 percent 
Building Cover (max.) 	20 percent 
 

* Land use guide designation per city's Comprehensive Guide Plan 
For any building or structure greater than 25,000 square feet, which was approved by a conditional use permit, shall comply with the following requirements: 
Structure Height (max.) 	25 feet 
Building Coverage (max.) 	15 percent 
Green Space 	35 percent 
 
F.  Additional setbacks. The following shall be the minimum required building setback along any interstate or state highway, major thoroughfare or minor thoroughfare, either existing or proposed as shown on the current Functional Classification Plan: 
THOROUGHFARE 	RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH 	MINIMUM SETBACK 
Major Thoroughfare 
(Principal and A Minor Arterials) 	150 feet 	50 feet or 125 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Major Thoroughfare 
(B Minor Arterials) 	100 feet 	50 feet or 100 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Minor Thoroughfare 
(Major and Minor Collectors) 	80 feet 	40 feet or 80 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
 
  Subd. 12.  GB General Business District. 
A.  Purpose. General business districts areas are intended to accommodate a wide range of retail commercial and office uses that serve the community and are generally located along arterial roadways. 
B.  Permitted uses. Within any GB district no structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council: 
1.  Animal hospitals or clinics when contained within a building. 
2.  Armories or conventional halls. 
3.  Auto accessories sales. 
4.  Bicycle, boat, motorcycle, snowmobile sales and service (outdoor display or storage subject to conditional use permit). 
5.  Carwashes. 
6.  Commercial recreation facilities contained within a building (includes amusement centers). 
7.  Copy centers. 
8.  Freestanding satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
9.  Garden stores when conducted within a building (outdoor sales subject to conditional use permit). 
10.  Health and fitness clubs. 
11.  Home improvement centers with no outdoor storage. 
12.  Motor vehicle sales when conducted entirely within a building. 
13.  Offices. 
14.  Public utility tower mounted antennae, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
15.  Private clubs and lodges. 
16.  Radio and television studios (towers subject to conditional use permit). 
17.  Rental centers. 
18.  Restaurants—Full service and casual (without on-sale liquor). 
19.  Research testing laboratories conducted within a building. 
20.  Small engine or appliance repair conducted entirely within a building. 
21.  Stone or monument sales (outdoor display or storage subject to conditional use permit). 
22.  Storage facilities contained within a building. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within any GB district no structure or land shall be used except for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council and only by a conditional use permit: 
1.  Coffee kiosks, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Kennels. 
3.  Motor fuel sales—Class I and Class II. 
4.  Motor vehicle repair—Minor. 
5.  Motor vehicle sales with outdoor sales and/or storage. 
6.  Off-site off-street parking and off-site outdoor storage, subject to the regulations thereof in this Code. 
7.  Outdoor event—Seasonal, subject to regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
8.  Outdoor storage when conducted by an occupant of the principal building, subject to regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
9.  Restaurants—Fast food and delivery or take-out and any outdoor dining area in conjunction therewith, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
10.  Retail sales of liquor, 3.2 beer or wine as part of any facility. 
11.  Truckstops. 
D.  Permitted accessory uses. 
1.  Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises for a period of not to exceed time necessary to complete said construction. 
2.  Private garages, off-street parking and loading spaces, as regulated by this chapter. 
3.  Public telephone booths provided all yard requirements are met. 
4.  Outdoor display, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
5.  Temporary outdoor event, cultural/entertainment event, and outdoor food sales, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
6.  An outdoor dining area in conjunction with a full service or casual restaurant, except an outdoor dining area that does not meet the special use setback from a residential property or that provides seating for more than 24 persons is subject to a conditional use permit or planned development approval as applicable, and any outdoor dining area shall be subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
E.  Bulk standards (minimum unless noted). 
Lot Area 	2 acres 
Lot Width 	100 feet 
Setback From Public Right-of-Way 	30 feet 
Side Yard Setback 	10 feet 
Rear Yard Setback 	20 feet 
Adjacent to property guided* for residential use 	50 feet 
Structure Height (max.) 	35 feet 
Green Space 	30 percent 
Building Cover (max.) 	35 percent 
 
* Land use guide designation per city's Comprehensive Guide Plan. 
F.  Additional setbacks. The following shall be the minimum required building setback along any interstate or state highway, major thoroughfare or minor thoroughfare, either existing or proposed as shown on the current Functional Classification Plan: 
THOROUGHFARE 	RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH 	MINIMUM SETBACK 
Major Thoroughfare 
(Principal and A Minor Arterials) 	150 feet 	50 feet or 125 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Major Thoroughfare 
(B Minor Arterials) 	100 feet 	50 feet or 100 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Minor Thoroughfare 
(Major and Minor Collectors) 	80 feet 	40 feet or 80 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
 
Subd. 13.  CSC Community Shopping Center District. 
A.  Purpose. Community shopping center districts are intended for large scale retail commercial sales and services. 
B.  Permitted uses. Within any CSC district no structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council: 
1.  Barbershops. 
2.  Beauty shops. 
3.  Financial institutions without drive-through facilities. 
4.  Freestanding satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
5.  Offices. 
6.  Public utility tower mounted antennae, subject to the regulations thereof in this chapter. 
7.  Restaurants—Full service and casual. 
8.  Retail sales. 
9.  Pawnshops. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within any CSC district no structure or land shall be used except for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council and only by a conditional use permit: 
1.  Carwashes. 
2.  Coffee kiosks, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
3.  Commercial recreation—Indoor. 
4.  Convenience stores. 
5.  Currency exchange operations, subject to the regulations thereof as set forth in chapter 6 of this Code. 
6.  Drive-through facilities. 
7.  Health and fitness clubs. 
8.  Motels and hotels. 
9.  Motor fuel sales—Class I 
10.  Motor vehicle repair—Minor. 
11.  Off-site off-street parking and off-site outdoor storage, subject to the regulations hereof in this Code. 
12.  On-sale liquor, 3.2 beer or wine. 
13.  Outdoor event—Seasonal, subject to regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
14.  Outside storage and sales of garden supplies. 
15.  Outdoor storage when conducted by an occupant of the principal building, subject to regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
16.  Restaurants—Fast food and delivery or take-out and any outdoor dining area in conjunction therewith, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
17.  Transit stations. 
D.  Permitted accessory uses. 
1.  Building mounted antenna or satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises for a period of not to exceed time necessary to complete said construction. 
3.  Outdoor display, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
4.  Private garages, off-street parking and loading spaces, as regulated by this chapter. 
5.  Public telephone booths provided all yard requirements are met. 
6.  Temporary outdoor event, cultural/entertainment event, and outdoor food sales, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
7.  An outdoor dining area in conjunction with a full service or casual restaurant, except an outdoor dining area that does not meet the special use setback from a residential property or that provides seating for more than 24 persons is subject to a conditional use permit or planned development approval as applicable, and any outdoor dining area shall be subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
E.  Bulk standards (minimum unless noted). 
Zoning District Area 	5 acres 
Lot Width 	100 feet 
Setback From Public Right-of-way 	30 feet 
Side Yard Setback 	10 feet 
Rear Yard Setback 	20 feet 
Adjacent to property guided* for residential use 	50 feet 
Structure Height (max.) 	35 feet 
Green Space 	30 percent 
Building Cover (max.) 	30 percent 
 
* Land use guide designation per city's Comprehensive Guide Plan. 
F.  Additional setbacks. The following shall be the minimum required building setback along any interstate or state highway, major thoroughfare or minor thoroughfare, either existing or proposed as shown on the current Functional Classification Plan: 
THOROUGHFARE 	RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH 	MINIMUM SETBACK 
Major Thoroughfare 
(Principal and A Minor Arterials) 	150 feet 	50 feet or 125 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Major Thoroughfare 
(B Minor Arterials) 	100 feet 	50 feet or 100 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Minor Thoroughfare 
(Major and Minor Collectors) 	80 feet 	40 feet or 80 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
 
Subd. 14.  I-1 Limited Industrial District. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the I-1 Limited Industrial District is to provide for the establishment of a variety of warehousing, manufacturing and light industrial uses, including large volume truck-oriented uses. 
B.  Permitted uses. Within any I-1 district no structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council: 
1.  Adult establishments. 
2.  Commercial recreation—Indoor; an indoor firearms shooting range shall be subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this Code. 
3.  Freestanding satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
4.  Ice, cold storage plants, bottling works. 
5.  Machine and welding shops. 
6.  Motor vehicle repair—Major. 
7.  Offices. 
8.  Processing, fabrication, storage or manufacturing light materials; brewery or microdistillery; or wholesaling operation or service. 
9.  Public utility tower mounted antennae, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
10.  Radio and television facilities. 
11.  Research laboratories. 
12.  Restaurants—Full service and casual. 
13.  Technical and vocational schools. 
14.  Warehousing and wholesaling and related sales or showrooms. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within any I-1 district no structure or land shall be used except for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council and only by a conditional use permit: 
1.  Amusement centers. 
2.  Car or truck washes. 
3.  Coffee kiosks, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
4.  Contractors' yards. 
5.  Freestanding tower or wind energy conversion systems, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
6.  Fuel storage tanks, located above ground, subject to the outdoor storage regulations in this chapter. 
7.  Kennels with outside runs and subject to the regulations in chapter 6. 
8.  Motor fuel sales—Class II. 
9.  Off-site off-street parking and off-site outdoor storage, subject to the regulations thereof in this Code. 
10.  On-sale liquor, 3.2 beer or wine; on-sale malt liquor in conjunction with a brewer taproom; on-sale distilled spirits in conjunction with a microdistillery cocktail room; off-sale malt liquor from the premises of and in conjunction with a brewery; or off-sale distilled spirits in conjunction with a microdistillery. 
11.  Outdoor storage when conducted by an occupant of the principal building, subject to regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
12.  Rental lots. 
13.  Sales yards for building materials when conducted by an occupant of the principal building, subject to regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
14.  Sales and service for trucks. 
15.  Outdoor event—Seasonal, subject to regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
16.  Truckstops. 
17.  Truck terminals. 
18.  Waste facilities, subject to the regulations in chapter 6. 
19.  Retail sales of any product, goods or material produced at or directly related to the principle use permitted under this subdivision, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  The retail sales are subordinate to the principle use. 
b.  The gross floor area used for the retail sales is more than 20 percent but not more than 30 percent of the total gross floor area of the principle building if a single user/occupant or of the principle user's occupied space if within a multiple-user structure. 
c.  The retail sales are owned and operated solely by the principle user/occupant of the subject site. 
d.  The site can accommodate the minimum parking requirement for both the retail and principle use components as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
20.  Commercial yard waste recycling and composting facility, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  The parcel shall not be less than ten acres or no more than 12.5 acres in size. 
b.  Access into the parcel shall be solely from a state or county public right-of-way. 
c.  The yard waste recycling and composting operations shall be conducted by a retail/wholesale garden or greenhouse operator as a component of its retail/wholesale operations. 
d.  The facility shall be open to the public for disposal of yard waste for recycling and composting and any fee charge for the disposal shall be reasonable. 
e.  The facility may recycle and compost only the following materials: grass, leaves, soft plant material, sod, soil, used wood mulch, brush, logs, used concrete, gravel stone and rock; no other waste materials shall be accepted or stored on the parcel. 
f.  The operator of the yard waste recycling and composting facility may sell at retail or wholesale bulk landscape materials and live trees, bushes and plants as a subordinate, not primary or exclusive, use on the parcel, subject to the storage conditions set forth by the permit. 
g.  A plan shall be submitted addressing yard waste de-bagging, feed material stockpiling, dry/wet material ratios in windrow construction, windrow turning schedules, and process controls and performance standards. Reasonable environmental performance standards stated as conditions may be imposed that address environmental or land use impacts from the items in the plan. The owner shall incorporate all such conditions into its operations plan for the facility. 
h.  The de-bagging area shall be fenced to prevent the spread of litter and other debris. 
i.  The operator of the yard waste recycling and composting facility may grind and process received trees and brush waste into wood mulch and may conduct soil blending and processing, subject to the scheduled hours of operation set forth in the permit so as not to cause noise impacts that would constitute a public nuisance. 
j.  The site shall be landscaped in order to screen the activities and any storage as permitted under the permit from any public right-of-way. 
k.  The site shall be kept free of litter and debris and maintained in a neat and orderly manner. Fencing may be required to prevent the spread of litter. 
l.  Storm water management plans shall be submitted and approved by the city's public works director. 
m.  Sanitary sewer shall conform to the city's requirements for any sanitary waste facilities on the property. 
n.  Noise abatement techniques shall be utilized to meet MPCA noise standards. Said abatement techniques may include, but not be limited to, requiring enclosures of equipment, use of noise absorbing materials, increased setbacks and/or landscaping, and limiting operational hours. 
o.  Supplemental watering of outdoor composting shall occur as necessary to prevent particulate emission. Turning of windrows shall be restricted during periods of high winds to prevent particulate emissions. 
p.  Odors shall be controlled, as necessary, to prevent objectionable odors at the property line consistent with MPCA standards and regulations. 
D.  Permitted accessory uses. 
1.  Building mounted antenna or satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Car or truck wash consisting of a single wash bay, when serving only the principal use and not serving the general public. 
3.  Temporary outdoor event, cultural/entertainment event, and outdoor food sales, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
4.  An outdoor dining area in conjunction with a full service or casual restaurant or an outdoor patio in conjunction with a brewer taproom or microdistillery cocktail room, except an outdoor dining area or patio that does not meet the special use setback from a residential property or that provides seating for more than 24 persons is subject to a conditional use permit or planned development approval as applicable, and any outdoor dining area or outdoor patio shall be subject to the regulations thereof of outdoor dining area set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
5.  Retail sales of product, goods or material produced at or directly related to the principle use on site, subject to the following: 
a.  The retail sales are subordinate to the principle use. 
b.  The gross floor area used for the retail sales is not more than 20 percent of the total gross floor area of the principle building if a single user/occupant or of the principle user's occupied space if within a multiple-user structure. 
c.  The retail sales are owned and operated solely by the principle user/occupant of the subject site. 
E.  Bulk standards (minimum unless noted). 
Lot Area 	0.5 acre 
Lot Width 	100 feet 
Setback From Public Right-of-way 	40 feet 
Side Yard Setback 	20 feet 
Rear Yard Setback 	20 feet 
Structure Height (max.) 	40 feet 
Building and outdoor storage setback adjacent to properties guided* for residential use when properties directly abut each other 	100 feet 
Building and outdoor storage setback adjacent to properties guided* for residential or public use when properties are separated by a street, or when directly abutting property guided P, Park and PF, Public Facilities 	50 feet 
Building Coverage (max.) 	35 percent 
Green Space 	25 percent 
 
* Land use guide designation per city's Comprehensive Guide Plan. 
F.  Additional setbacks. The following shall be the minimum required building setback along any interstate or state highway, major thoroughfare or minor thoroughfare, either existing or proposed as shown on the current Functional Classification Plan: 
THOROUGHFARE 	RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH 	MINIMUM SETBACK 
Major Thoroughfare 
(Principal and A Minor Arterials) 	150 feet 	50 feet or 125 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Major Thoroughfare 
(B Minor Arterials) 	100 feet 	50 feet or 100 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Minor Thoroughfare 
(Major and Minor Collectors) 	80 feet 	40 feet or 80 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
 
Subd. 15.  I-2 General Industrial District. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the I-2 General Industrial District is to provide for the establishment of heavier industrial uses that, because of the nature of the product or character of operation, require separation from or special protections for non-industrial uses. 
B.  Permitted uses. 
1.  The manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment or storage of the following products or materials: cement; concrete; stone cutting; brick; glass; batteries (wet cell); ceramic products; mill working; metal polishing and plating; paint (pigment manufacturing); vinegar works; rubber products; plastics; meat packing; flour, feed or grain milling; coal or tar asphalt distillation; rendering works; distillation of bones; sawmill; lime; gypsum; plaster of Paris; glue; size; cloth; and similar products; a brewery or a microdistillery. 
2.  Crude oil, gasoline or other liquid storage tanks. 
3.  Freestanding satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
4.  Public utility tower mounted antennae, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
C.  Conditional uses. 
1.  Acid manufacturing facilities. 
2.  Coffee kiosks, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
3.  Commercial stockyards, auction sales or slaughtering of animals. 
4.  Creosote plants. 
5.  Freestanding towers and wind energy conversion systems, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
6.  Off-site off-street parking and off-site outdoor storage, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
7.  Outdoor storage when conducted by an occupant of the principal building, subject to regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
8.  Refining of crude oil. 
9.  Storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products which could decompose by detonation. 
10.  On-sale malt liquor in conjunction with a brewer taproom, or off-sale malt liquor from the premises of and in conjunction with a brewery. 
11.  On-sale distilled spirits in conjunction with a microdistillery cocktail room, or off-sale distilled spirits from the premises of and in conjunction with a microdistillery. 
D.  Permitted accessory uses. 
1.  Building mounted antenna or satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Car or truck wash consisting of a single wash bay, when serving only the principal use. 
3.  An outdoor patio in conjunction with a brewer taproom or microdistillery cocktail room, except an outdoor patio that does not meet the special use setback from a residential property or that provides seating for more than 24 persons is subject to a conditional use permit or planned development approval as applicable, and any outdoor patio shall be subject to the regulations of outdoor dining area as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
D[1].  Bulk standards (minimum unless noted). 
Lot Area 	1 acre 
Lot Width 	200 feet 
Setback From Public Right-of-way 	40 feet 
Side Yard Setback 	20 feet 
Rear Yard Setback 	20 feet 
Structure Height (max.) 	40 feet 
Building and outdoor storage setback adjacent to properties guided* for residential use when properties directly abut each other 	100 feet 
Building and outdoor storage setback adjacent to properties guided* for residential or public use when properties are separated by a street, or when directly abutting property guided P, Park and PF, Public Facilities 	50 feet 
Building Coverage (max.) 	35 percent 
Green Space 	25 percent 
 
* Land use guide designation per city's Comprehensive Guide Plan. 
E.  Additional setbacks. The following shall be the minimum required building setback along any interstate or state highway, major thoroughfare or minor thoroughfare, either existing or proposed as shown on the current Functional Classification Plan: 
THOROUGHFARE 	RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH 	MINIMUM SETBACK 
Major Thoroughfare 
(Principal and A Minor Arterials) 	150 feet 	50 feet or 125 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Major Thoroughfare 
(B Minor Arterials) 	100 feet 	50 feet or 100 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Minor Thoroughfare 
(Major and Minor Collectors) 	80 feet 	40 feet or 80 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
 
Subd. 16.  RD Research and Development District. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this subdivision is to create a use district which will permit, subject to the following regulations, restrictions and controls, professional research and development and limited industrial structures and operations which will be compatible with the predominantly residential character of surrounding areas so as to preserve for the residents of the city the full use, benefit, and enjoyment of their homes and property. It is not the purpose of this subdivision to permit ordinary and usual types of industrial structures and operations which more appropriately qualify only under the foregoing industrial classifications. 
B.  Permitted uses. Within any RD district no structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council: 
1.  Adult establishments. 
2.  Agricultural activities associated with research and development. 
3.  Freestanding satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
4.  Light manufacturing and processing of a type producing negligible smoke, dust, odor, fumes or noise when conducted in conjunction with items 2. or 7. herein and compatible with subparagraph A. above. 
5.  Offices, general. 
6.  Public utility tower mounted antennae, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
7.  Research and development laboratories. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within any RD district no structure or land shall be used except for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council and only by a conditional use permit: 
1.  Coffee kiosks, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Off-site off-street parking and off-site storage, subject to the regulations thereof in this Code. 
D.  Permitted accessory uses. 
1.  Building mounted antennae or satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Guest houses owned and maintained in conjunction with permitted uses listed herein. 
3.  Recreational areas and similar uses for the primary benefit of employees. 
4.  Temporary outdoor event, cultural/entertainment event, and outdoor food sales, subject to regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
E.  Bulk standards. 
Lot Area 1 	40 acres 
Lot Width 	300 feet 
Setback From Public Right-of-way 	40 feet 
Side Yard Setback 	20 feet 
Rear Yard Setback 	20 feet 
Structure Height (max.) 	45 feet 
Setback adjacent to properties guided 2 for residential use when properties directly abut each other 	50 feet 
Setback adjacent to properties guided 2 for residential or public use when properties are separated by a street, or when directly abutting property guided P, Park and PF, Public Facilities 	50 feet 
Building Coverage (max.) 	20 percent 
Green Space 	25 percent 
 
1  The minimum required 40-acre lot shall only pertain to the initial planning and rezoning and shall not preclude the subsequent subdivision of an area in to small lots for development in accordance with plans for the overall area initially rezoned. 
2  Land use guide designation per city's Comprehensive Guide Plan. 
F.  Additional setbacks. The following shall be the minimum required building setback along any interstate or state highway, major thoroughfare or minor thoroughfare, either existing or proposed as shown on the current Functional Classification Plan: 
THOROUGHFARE 	RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH 	MINIMUM SETBACK 
Major Thoroughfare 
(Principal and A Minor Arterials) 	150 feet 	50 feet or 125 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Major Thoroughfare 
(B Minor Arterials) 	100 feet 	50 feet or 100 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Minor Thoroughfare 
(Major and Minor Collectors) 	80 feet 	40 feet or 80 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
 
Subd. 17.  BP Business Park District. 
A.  Purpose. The Business Park BP District is intended to accommodate development of low intensity office, light industrial and supporting commercial service uses that may be suitable in relative close proximity to non-industrial development. More intensive industrial uses which require either outdoor storage or high truck traffic or both are excluded. The performance standards for this district are intended to establish and maintain high quality site planning, architecture, signage and landscape design to create an attractive and unified development character. 
B.  Permitted uses. Within any BP district no structure or land shall be used except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council: 
1.  Adult establishments. 
2.  Financial institutions and banks (without drive-through facilities). 
3.  Freestanding satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
4.  Office and office buildings. 
5.  Office/warehouses and office/showrooms. 
6.  Processing, packaging, cleaning, storage, assembling, servicing, repair or testing of materials, goods or products, when wholly contained within a building and which meet and maintain all applicable standards established by the state. 
7.  Public utility tower mounted antennae, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
8.  Public utility uses. 
9.  Research laboratories, when wholly contained within a building and which meet and maintain all applicable standards established by the state. 
10.  Technical, vocational and business schools. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within any BP district no structure or land shall be used except for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the council and only by a conditional use permit: 
1.  Coffee kiosks, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Daycare facilities. 
3.  Elementary and middle schools. 
4.  Financial institutions and banks with drive-through facilities. 
5.  Health care facilities. 
6.  Health and fitness clubs. 
7.  Hotels and motels. 
8.  Restaurants—Full service and casual and any outdoor dining area in conjunction therewith, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
9.  On-sale liquor. 
10.  Retail sales of any product, goods or material produced at or directly related to the principle use on site, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  The retail sales are subordinate to the principle use. 
b.  The gross floor area used for the retail sales is more than 15 percent but not more than 30 percent of the total gross floor area of the principle building if a single user/occupant or of the principle user's occupied space if within a multiple-user structure. 
c.  The retail sales are owned and operated solely by the principle user/occupant of the subject site. 
d.  The site can accommodate the minimum parking requirement for both the retail and principle use components as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
D.  Permitted accessory uses. 
1.  Coffee shops and cafeterias located within the principal structure. 
2.  Garages or similar structures used to store vehicles and equipment. 
3.  Parking and loading as regulated herein. 
4.  Retail sales of any service or any product, goods or material produced at or directly related to the principle use on site, subject to the following: 
a.  The retail sales are subordinate to the principle use. 
b.  The gross floor area used for the retail sales is not more than 15 percent of the total gross floor area or 3,000 square feet, whichever is less, of the principle building if a single user/occupant or of the principle user's occupied space if within a multiple-user structure. 
c.  The retail sales are owned and operated solely by the principle user/occupant of the subject site. 
5.  Temporary outdoor event, cultural/entertainment event, and outdoor food sales, subject to regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
E.  Bulk standards. 
Lot Area 	1.5 acres 
Lot Width 	100 feet 
Setback From Public Right-of-Way 	40 feet 
Side Yard Setback 	20 feet 
Rear Yard Setback 	20 feet 
Setback adjacent to properties guided 1 for residential use when properties directly abut each other 	50 feet 
Setback adjacent to properties guided 1 for residential or public use when properties are separated by a street, or when directly abutting property guided P, Park and PF, Public Facilities 	50 feet 
Structure Height 2 (max.) 	45 feet 
Building Coverage (max.) 	40 percent 
Green Space 	25 percent 
 
1  Land use guide designation per city's Comprehensive Guide Plan. 
2  Building heights up to 80 feet may be permitted subject to air traffic corridor regulations and a one-foot increase in setback for each additional foot of building height over the maximum allowed up to a maximum setback of 60 feet on the front and 40 feet on the side and rear yards. 
F.  Additional setbacks. The following shall be the minimum required building setback along any interstate or state highway, major thoroughfare or minor thoroughfare, either existing or proposed as shown on the current Functional Classification Plan: 
THOROUGHFARE 	RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH 	MINIMUM SETBACK 
Major Thoroughfare 
(Principal and A Minor Arterials) 	150 feet 	50 feet or 125 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Major Thoroughfare 
(B Minor Arterials) 	100 feet 	50 feet or 100 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
Minor Thoroughfare 
(Major and Minor Collectors) 	80 feet 	40 feet or 80 feet from right-of-way centerline, whichever is greater 
 
Subd. 18.  PD Planned Development District. 
A.  Intent. 
1.  Providing greater flexibility in environmental design and relaxation of strict application of the zoning ordinance in exchange for greater creativity and environmental sensitivity. 
2.  Recognizing the economic and cultural advantages that will accrue to the residents of a planned community. 
3.  Encouraging a more creative and efficient approach to the use of the land. 
4.  Encouraging the preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics, natural features, and open space. 
5.  Encouraging a development pattern that is consistent with land use density, transportation facilities and community facilities objectives of the Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Standards. The provisions of this Code shall be interpreted in accordance with the following: 
1.  Rules of interpretation: 
a.  Where inconsistent therewith, the requirements set by this section shall be followed for planned developments. This section shall have no affect upon other developments or district requirements. 
b.  Planned developments may be excluded from certain requirements of the zoning code when specifically approved as a part of the planned development. Such exclusions shall only be granted for the purpose of creating better overall design and an improved living environment and not solely for the economic advantage of the developer. All provisions of the zoning codes not specifically excluded in the preliminary and/or final plan shall apply to the planned development. 
c.  Building permits shall not be issued that are not in conformity with the approved planned development. 
d.  Whenever a dispute arises concerning the interpretation and/or application of any section of this Code, the matter may be referred to the board of adjustments and appeals for hearing as governed elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Relation of planned development site to adjacent areas. The design of a planned development shall take into account the relationship of the site to the surrounding areas. The perimeter of the planned development shall be so designed to minimize undesirable impact of the development on adjacent properties and conversely, to minimize undesirable impact of adjacent land use and development characteristics on the planned development. 
3.  Minimum area for planned development. The minimum total area required for a planned development shall be five acres of contiguous land. Tracts of less than five acres may qualify only if the applicant can show that the minimum lot area requirement should be waived because a planned development is in the public interest and that one or both of the following conditions exist: 
a.  Unusual physical features of the property itself or of the surrounding neighborhood are such that development under the standard zoning would not be appropriate in order to conserve a physical or terrain feature of importance to the neighborhood or community. 
b.  The property is adjacent to or across the street from property that has been developed under the provisions of this section and will contribute to the amenities of the neighborhood. 
4.  Residential unit densities. A planned development may provide for a variety of housing types in any one of the basic residential zoning districts. The total number of dwelling units allowed in a development shall be determined by either: 
a.  The density specified by the city's Comprehensive Guide Plan. A plan may provide for a greater number of dwelling units per acre than would otherwise be permitted by the zoning regulations otherwise applicable to the site; however, the applicant has the burden to show that such excess will not have an undue and adverse impact on existing public facilities and on the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring property. The council, in determining the reasonableness of the increase in the authorized dwelling units per acre, shall recognize that increased density may be compensated for by additional private amenities and by increased efficiency in public facilities and services to be achieved by: 
1.  The location, amount and proposed use of common open-space, 
2.  The location, design and type of dwelling units, and 
3.  The physical characteristics of the site. 
4.  Open space. 
a[1].  A primary function of this planned development section is to encourage development which will preserve and enhance the worthwhile, natural terrain characteristics and not force intense development to utilize all portions of a given site in order to arrive at the maximum intensity or density allowed. In evaluating each individual proposal, the recognition of this objective will be a basic consideration in granting approval or denial including but not limited to the following: 
1.  The amount and location of private common open-space area shall be consistent with the stated purpose of this section and in no case shall be less than 15 percent of the total project area. The residential portion of the project area shall further conform to the mandatory public park, playground and open space area dedication requirements of [the] Code. 
2.  All open-space shall be labeled as such and as to its intent or designed functions. 
b.  Operation and maintenance of common facilities. In the event certain land areas or structures are provided within the planned development for recreational use or as service facilities, the owner of such land and buildings shall file a suitable agreement with the city that assures the continued operation and maintenance to a pre-determined reasonable standard. These common areas may be placed under the ownership of one of the following, depending which is more appropriate: 
1.  Landlord control. 
2.  Homeowner's association, provided all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The homeowner's association must be established prior to any sale. 
b.  Membership must be mandatory for each owner, and any successive buyer. 
c.  The open-space restrictions must be permanent, not for a given period of years. 
d.  The association must be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes and the maintenance of residential and other facilities. 
e.  Landowners must pay their pro rata share of the cost and the assessment levied by the association that can become a lien on the property in accordance with Minnesota Statutes. 
f.  The association must be able to adjust the assessment to meet changed needs. 
5.  Permitted uses. Uses approved and permitted under a planned development shall only include permitted, conditional and accessory uses allowed in residential districts in the city and those business, industry and institutional uses specifically approved as a part of the planned development and in accordance with standards herein provided. The property to be included in the planned development shall be in single ownership or under the management or supervision of a central authority, or otherwise subject to such supervisory lease or ownership control as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Code. 
C.  Procedure. 
1.  General. Planned Developments shall be proposed and approved in accordance with this section. 
2.  Concept plan. Prior to filing a petition, any person may request a meeting with the advisory planning commission to present a concept plan to discuss the feasibility of a planned development. Such request shall be made by addressing a letter to the advisory planning commission where upon said request shall be heard at a subsequent meeting. 
3.  Petition. The petition for a planned development shall be on a form provided by the city and shall include all of the following information: 
a.  Signature(s) of owner(s) and developer(s). 
b.  All data normally required by the city for a rezoning and preliminary plat petition. 
c.  All information and plans comprising a "preliminary development plan" as defined in herein. 
4.  Preliminary development plan approval. The petition for a "preliminary development plan" of a planned development shall be processed by the city in the same manner in which rezoning petitions are processed as described in the Zoning Code. 
5.  Development agreements. As a condition to approval of a preliminary development plan, the city shall require the owner and developer of a proposed planned development to execute an agreement which may include, but not be limited to, all information required in the preliminary development plan as provided herein. 
6.  Fees. The fee for a planned development shall be the same as the fee charged for a rezoning and preliminary plat when the latter is also included. 
7.  Performance bond. The owner and/or developer of a proposed planned development shall furnish a public contractor's performance bond as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes, with corporate surety in a penal sum equal to 125 percent of the city director of public works cost estimate for the required improvements to be furnished or installed by the owner and/or developer, including, but not limited to, street surfacing, curbs, gutters, sanitary sewer and water service and storm sewers. The performance bond shall be approved by the city attorney prior to its acceptance. A certified check shall be submitted by the owner and/or developer for the estimated inspection costs of the required improvements to be furnished or installed by said owner and/or developer. Said check shall be submitted at the time of the submission of the performance bond. 
8.  Variances. Variances granted as a part of a planned development shall not be subject to the zoning code. Said variances shall be permitted as a part of the overall approval of the planned development provided said variance from zoning code provisions are so stated in the planned development agreement. 
9.  Effect of approval of preliminary development plan. Upon approval of a preliminary development plan, a planned development may not be altered, revised or withdrawn without the approval of the city council. 
10.  [Public hearing.] A public hearing shall not be required provided the final development plan is in substantial conformance with the preliminary development plan. Any major change as determined by the city shall require a public hearing. 
11.  Council action. The approval of a preliminary development plan and a final development plan of a planned development shall require an affirmative vote of the majority of all members of the council except when the proposed rezoning is from an existing residential district to a planned development district with commercial or industrial uses in which case a two-thirds majority vote is required. 
12.  Preliminary development plan. The Preliminary Plan of a Planned Development shall include the following information: 
a.  All information required in the Subdivision Code for a preliminary plat. 
b.  A general development plan indicating: 
1.  The proposed site and existing development and adjacent properties. 
2.  The proposed use of all areas of the site. 
3.  The proposed density, type, size and location of all dwelling units. 
4.  The general size, location and use of proposed business, industrial or institutional buildings. 
5.  Public and private streets, entrance and exit drives, walkway locations. 
6.  Parking areas and stall arrangement. 
7.  Landscaping. 
8.  Park and open space lands. 
9.  Dimensions. 
10.  Proposed drainage and utility systems. 
c.  An alternative development site plan depicting each proposed use in the manner that would be required by any and all zoning requirements for the intended use under the equivalent, non-planned development zoning district application (i.e. setbacks, lot coverage, lot size, lot frontage, public streets, density, etc.). 
d.  A summary sheet indicating: 
1.  Area of land in each use or each separate intensity of use. 
2.  Number of residential dwelling units proposed in each area. 
3.  Number of acres of common open space. 
4.  Modifications of any provisions of the city Zoning Ordinance. 
e.  A staging plan indicating the geographical sequence and timing of development of the plan or portions thereof, including the date of beginning and completion of each stage. The staging plan shall also include the number of dwelling units, commercial structures, public streets, utilities and recreation areas. 
f.  A detailed plan of first phase development indicating buildings, parking areas, driveways and similar detail on the site plan and including architectural elevation drawings of all buildings. 
g.  A preliminary plat may be required by the city for those areas where development is imminent, and a sketch plan shall be required for the remaining areas. 
h.  A written statement by the applicant stating how the proposed planned development conforms to the stated objectives and purposes of this section. 
i.  A separate written statement by the applicant concisely stating how the planned development proposal would benefit the public interest. 
13.  Final development plan. The final development plan for a planned development shall be accompanied by a legal description of the total property together with the following: 
a.  A final plat adopted in accordance with the requirements of the Code, except as otherwise specifically provided in this section. 
b.  A final site plan showing the locations of all structures, including placement size and type, as well as streets, parking areas, walkways, open space and similar detail areas on a scaled and dimensional drawing. 
c.  A landscape plan showing the location, species and size of all plant materials. Grading information shall be located on the landscape plan. 
d.  A utility plan showing the location and size of all utilities and easements. The utility plan shall include sanitary sewer, water, storm sewer and drainage, electrical and gas. 
e.  Building plans shall be submitted in sufficient detail to warrant issuance of a building permit. Scale architectural drawings of the exterior of all buildings shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow the city to review said plans for the impact they will have upon adjoining properties and the general area in which the buildings are located. 
f.  Deed restrictions, covenants, agreements, by-laws or proposed homeowner's association or other documents or contracts controlling the use or maintenance of property. Where such information is lacking, the council may require a bond or similar guarantee to insure that areas held common by persons residing in the development will be developed and maintained. 
g.  Proposed zoning changes or variances with legal descriptions of any district boundary changes. 
h.  A final staging plan indicating the geographical sequence and timing of development of the plan or portions thereof, including the date of beginning and completion of each stage. 
i.  Any other information necessary to fully represent the intentions of the preliminary plan. 
14.  Standards and criteria for advisory planning commission and council action. The advisory planning commission may recommend and the council may act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a preliminary or final plan for a planned development. The advisory planning commission, in making a recommendation, and the council, in acting upon a plan, shall consider the following factors: 
a.  The consistency of the proposed planned development with the adopted or proposed Comprehensive Guide Plan of the city. 
b.  The extent to which the proposed planned development is designed to form a desirable and unified environment within its own boundaries in terms of relationship of structures, patterns of circulation, visual character and sufficiency of drainage and utilities. 
c.  The extent to which the proposed uses will be compatible with present and planned uses in the surrounding area. 
d.  That any exceptions to the city Zoning Ordinance are justified by the design or the development. 
e.  The sufficiency of each planned development phase's size, composition, and arrangement in order that its construction and operation is feasible without dependence upon any subsequent phase. 
f.  The burden or impact created by the planned development on parks, schools, streets, and other public facilities and utilities. 
g.  The impact of the planned development on environmental quality and on the reasonable enjoyment of the surrounding property. 
15.  Effect of final planned development approval. 
a.  Except as provided in this section, no building permit shall be issued for any building on land for which a plan for a planned development has been approved which does not conform to the approved final plan. 
b.  Except as provided in this section, development of land for which a planned development has been approved which does not conform to the approved final plan shall only be allowed after one of the following: 
1.  Amendment to the approved final plan of the planned development by the city council in the same manner as required for approval of a planned development. 
2.  Term of the approved planned development by the city council after notice and public hearing in the same manner as required for approval of the planned development. The council may further condition the vacation of a planned development in order to better protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
16.  Termination. Upon expiration of the specific time period approved by the city for total development of a planned development, the subject area shall become a permanent planned development district, and the conditions, provisions and restrictions of the final development plan shall continue to govern the use of the land. Provided, nevertheless, that if a planned development is not completed within the required time period, the planned development district classification shall automatically terminate as to that portion of the district that has not been developed. The requirements and provisions of the underlying zoning classification in its entirety shall thereafter apply to the undeveloped area. Any factual disputes arising under this subsection shall be presented to and determined by a majority vote of the city council. 
17.  Penalties for violation. Each provision of this Code is separable, and a judicial declaration of invalidity of any one provision thereof shall not invalidate the remainder. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding minimums as adopted by Minnesota State Statute. 
Subd. 19.  P Park District. 
A.  Purpose. The Park District is intended for public and private park uses and related facilities. 
B.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Camping grounds. 
2.  Freestanding satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
3.  Golf courses. 
4.  Parks. 
5.  Playgrounds. 
6.  Public structures. 
7.  Swimming pools. 
8.  Tennis courts. 
C.  Conditional uses. 
1.  Freestanding towers. 
2.  On-sale beer associated with golf course clubhouses. 
3.  Temporary on-sale beer. 
4.  Gun clubs. 
5.  Nursery, day. 
6.  Nursery, landscape. 
7.  Church. 
8.  School: public, private, vocational or technical. 
9.  Single-family dwelling. 
10.  Private recreational facilities and fields. 
11.  Conditional uses number 4 through number 10 shall meet the following standards: 
a.  A minimum lot size of four acres; 
b.  Streets are to be public and meet all city design standards; 
c.  Water and sanitary sewer facilities are required to be connected to city water and city sanitary sewer; 
d.  Ponds, water bodies and wetlands are to be preserved on site and mitigated as necessary on site; 
e.  Impervious surface on any lot may not exceed five percent of the area of the lot; 
f.  Parking must be proximate to the use; 
g.  Single-family dwellings shall not be within the 60 DNL area from the Minneapolis/St. Paul International airport. 
h.  Structures are to be clustered to minimize impervious surfaces. 
i.  Ponds, water bodies, wetlands and slopes greater than four to one (4:1) shall be preserved and not disturbed. 
D.  Permitted accessory uses. 
1.  Temporary outdoor events, subject to regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Banquet or conference facilities, provided the facilities are secondary and incidental to the primary use on the property. 
Subd. 20.  PF Public Facilities District. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is for city, state, and federal government buildings, public and private schools and hospitals. 
B.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Antennae on a city water reservoir tank or tower and public utility tower antennae, subject to regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
2.  Building mounted antennae, subject to regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
3.  Churches. 
4.  Freestanding satellite dishes, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
5.  Governmental buildings. 
6.  Hospitals. 
7.  Public utility structures and equipment. 
8.  Satellite dishes, subject to regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
9.  Schools. 
B.[1].  Conditional uses. 
1.  Daycare facilities associated with churches. 
2.  Electrical substations and other public utility facilities. 
3.  Freestanding tower and wind energy conversion systems, subject to regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
4.  On-sale beer at golf courses with clubhouses, subject to regulations in chapter 5. 
5.  Outdoor event—Seasonal, subject to regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
C.  Permitted accessory uses. 
1.  On-sale beer through temporary licenses with a maximum of four days only in conformity with chapter 5. 
2.  Temporary outdoor event, cultural/entertainment event, and outdoor food sales, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
3.  Private garages, off-street parking and loading spaces, as regulated by this chapter. 
4.  Community service operations when associated with churches, subject to site plan review as required elsewhere in this chapter. 
D.  Developments within a public facilities district shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Prior to construction or alteration of any such facility, a building permit shall be required. 
2.  Every structure within a public facilities district shall have a minimum setback from its lot or land area boundaries of two feet of setback for each one foot in height of such structure, excluding steeples, ornaments or antennas. This provision shall not allow a minimum structure setback of less than 30 feet nor require a minimum structure setback of more than 50 feet. (Example: 15-foot tall or less structure = minimum 30-foot setback; 20-foot tall structure = minimum 40-foot setback; and 25-foot or taller structure = minimum 50-foot setback.) 
Subd. 21.  CGD Cedar Grove District. 
A.  Intent. The intent of the "CGD" Cedar Grove District is to provide an area for compact, mixed use development made mutually compatible through a combination of careful planning and urban design and coordinated public and private investment. The mixture of land uses within the district is essential to establishing the level of vitality and intensity needed to support retail and service uses. The placement of building edges and treatment of building, parking, landscaping, and pedestrian spaces is essential to creating the pedestrian-friendly environment envisioned for the Cedar Grove District. The standards in this ordinance are intended to implement and effectuate the principles and relationships established in the City of Eagan Cedar Grove Design Framework, which will be carried out through specific standards related to site planning, architecture, building materials, landscaping, signage and other elements. 
B.  Permitted uses. Within the CGD, no structure or land may be used, except for one or more of the following uses, provided such use is equal to or less than 10,000 square feet in floor area: 
1.  Accessory store, apparel. 
2.  Altering, pressing and repair of wearing apparel. 
3.  Appliance store. 
4.  Art gallery. 
5.  Banks and other financial institutions, without drive-through facilities. 
6.  Barber shop. 
7.  Beauty shop. 
8.  Bookstore. 
9.  Restaurants—Full service and casual. 
10.  Camera store. 
11.  Candy, nut or confectionery store. 
12.  Club or lodge, private. 
13.  Copy service or printing service. 
14.  Department store. 
15.  Flower shop. 
16.  Furniture store. 
17.  Gift, novelty, or souvenir store. 
18.  Grocery store. 
19.  Hardware store. 
20.  Instrument store, musical. 
21.  Library. 
22.  Locksmith. 
23.  Luggage store. 
24.  Machines, business sales and service. 
25.  Magazine or newsstand. 
26.  Meat market for retail sale to the public. 
27.  Medical offices or clinics (for humans only). 
28.  Municipal buildings where the use conducted is customarily considered to be an office use. 
29.  Museum. 
30.  Musical instrument and musical recordings store. 
31.  Notions store. 
32.  Offices. 
33.  Optician. 
34.  Painting, wallpaper and decorating store for retail sales and service. 
35.  Pet store. 
36.  Repair and servicing of items, the sale of which is permitted in this district. 
37.  Shoe store. 
38.  Sporting goods store. 
39.  Stationery store. 
40.  Tanning salon. 
41.  Tobacco store. 
42.  Toy store. 
43.  Variety store. 
44.  Video sales and rental. 
C.  Accessory uses. Within the CGD, the following uses shall be permitted accessory uses: 
1.  Off-street parking of automobiles for patrons or employees of a permitted use. 
2.  Off-street loading areas as regulated herein. 
3.  Signs, fences, and decorative landscape features as regulated herein. 
4.  Customary uses incidental to the principal use as determined by the city council. 
5.  An outdoor dining area in conjunction with a full service or casual restaurant, except an outdoor dining area that does not meet the special use setback from a residential property or that provides seating for more than 24 persons is subject to a conditional use permit or planned development approval as applicable, and any outdoor dining area shall be subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
6.  Temporary outdoor event, cultural/entertainment event, and outdoor food sales, subject to regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
D.  Conditional uses. Within the CGD, no structure or land may be used for the following uses except by conditional use permit: 
1.  Animal clinic when contained within a building. 
2.  Hotel or motel. 
3.  On-sale and off-sale liquor establishments as regulated by the City Code. 
4.  Restaurant—Fast food and delivery or take-out and any outdoor dining area in conjunction therewith, subject to the regulations thereof elsewhere in this chapter. 
5.  Drive-through facilities for a permitted or conditional use, if provisions for vehicle stacking, vehicle maneuvering, outdoor speaker devices, appearance and lighting of outdoor menu boards, and other related issues can be shown to be in keeping with the intent and character of the CGD and compatible with surrounding uses. 
6.  Residential multi-family dwelling units, if within a structure containing at least four units. 
7.  Residential dwelling units within the same building as non-residential uses, if provisions for parking, security, noise, odors, and other related issues can be shown to be handled adequately and in keeping with the best interests of the residents. 
8.  Movie theater, if provisions for parking, lighting, signage, security, and hours of operation can be shown to be handled adequately and in keeping with the intent and character of the CGD. 
9.  School, public or private. 
10.  Parking ramp or parking garage. 
11.  Indoor recreational uses. 
12.  Buildings in excess of 50 feet in height, if such buildings can be shown to be in keeping with the intent and character of the CGD and compatible with surrounding long-term uses. 
13.  Any permitted use or any other conditional use, of 10,000 square feet or more in floor area, if such use can be shown to be in keeping with the intent and character of the CGD and compatible with surrounding uses. 
14.  Other uses determined by the city council to be similar in purpose and character to other permitted and conditional uses in this district. 
15.  Automobile service/repair. 
16.  Convenience gas stations. 
17.  Automobile car wash, as an accessory use. 
18.  Outdoor storage, as an accessory use. 
E.  Lot area, lot width, and yard requirements. 
1.  Setbacks. 
Principal Structure: 	
	
Front Yard: 	Build-to Line (0—10 feet) 
Side Yard/Interior: 	0 feet minimum 
Side Yard/Corner: 	Build-to Line (0—10 feet) 
Rear Yard: 	20 feet minimum 
Accessory Structure: 	
	
Front Yard: 	20 feet minimum 
Side Yard: 	0 feet minimum 
Side Yard (Street): 	20 feet minimum 
Rear Yard: 	5 feet minimum 
Parking: 	
	
Front Yard: 	5 feet minimum 
Side Yard: 	5 feet minimum 
Side Yard (Street): 	5 feet minimum 
Rear Yard: 	5 feet minimum 
 
2.  Front yard build-to line established. In the CGD in the front yard, a build-to line is established which provides a minimum and maximum front setback for buildings and other structures, from the right-of-way or property line. The minimum front building setback shall be zero feet and the maximum shall be ten feet from the right-of-way or property line, for all properties on streets within the CGD District (see Figure x). 
3.  For parking, different minimum setbacks apply, but there is no maximum. 
4.  For all properties within the CGD the required setbacks to Highway 13 and Cedar Avenue shall follow the rear yard setbacks above. 
5.  In the CGD, at least 85 percent of the street frontage of any lot shall be occupied by building facades meeting the build-to line. Other portions of a building beyond the 85% may be setback farther than required by the build-to line. A maximum of 15 percent of the street frontage of any lot shall be occupied by off-street parking. 
6.  The length of the building facade shall be measured as the maximum width of the building projected to the front lot line on lines perpendicular to the front lot line. 
7.  On lots with more than one street frontage, the build-to line shall apply on each side fronting a street. 
8.  The build-to line may be met either with an enclosed building or an arcade constructed with a permanent roof of the same materials as the remainder of the building. 
9.  At least the first and second floor must meet the build-to line. Arcades at street level and terracing of building facades above the second floor are encouraged. 
10.  At a minimum, the first 50 feet of the lot frontage on either side of a street intersection must be occupied by buildings meeting the build-to line. Parking or other space open to the sky is not allowed within this first 50 feet. 
11.  Screening of parking areas. Wherever a surface parking area faces a street frontage, such frontage shall be screened with a decorative wall, railing, hedge, or a combination of these elements, to a minimum height of two and one-half feet and a maximum height of three and one-half feet above the level of the parking lot, at the build-to line. 
12.  Parking structures. New parking structures shall maintain a setback equal to the setbacks required in this section for other structures, except that where such parking structure is adjacent to other parking in a side or rear yard condition, the parking structure may have a zero setback. Where a new parking structure is adjacent to an existing use in a side or rear yard condition, the parking structure must maintain at least a ten foot setback. 
13.  Drive-through lanes. Drive-through or drive-in lanes are not allowed within the build-to line or in front of any building; they must be located to the side or rear of a building and provide, at a minimum, stacking for six vehicles. 
14.  Building height: Building height is defined as the vertical distance from the average elevation of the adjoining ground level or the established grade, whichever is lower, to the top of the cornice of a flat roof; the top of a mansard roof; a point directly above the highest wall of a shed roof; the uppermost point of a round or other arch-type roof; the mean distance from the eave line to the peak of the highest gable on a pitched or hip roof. 
15.  Height limit. The maximum height of buildings in the CGD shall be 50 feet, except as allowed by conditional use permit. The minimum height shall be 24. 
F.  Building types. Within the CGD, no building shall be constructed and occupied except for the following types, described below, and depicted on the attached Appendix A, building types: 
1.  Building type A, mixed use. Type A buildings may include retail, office, or residential uses on the first floor and on upper floors. Parking may be included on a level below ground. Type A buildings may have a flat or pitched roof. 
2.  Building type B, apartments or condominiums. Type B buildings may include residential, office, or retail uses on the first floor, and residential apartments or condominiums on upper floors. Parking may be included on a level below ground. Detached garages are prohibited. Type B buildings may have a flat or pitched roof. 
3.  Building type C, townhomes. Type C buildings shall be residential townhomes on all floors, except that a portion of the first floor not fronting a street or public open space may include parking. Each residential unit shall be provided two enclosed parking spaces. Type C buildings shall have a pitched roof. Maximum height shall be 35 feet. Maximum depth of buildings perpendicular to a street shall be 50 feet. Minimum width of lots for individual units shall be 25 feet. 
4.  Building type (D), office/retail. Type (D) buildings shall include office or retail uses on the first floor, and office uses on upper floors. Parking may be included on two levels below ground. Type (D) buildings may have a flat or pitched roof. 
G.  Density. 
1.  Density of residential development within the CGD shall not be specifically defined. The goal is to provide maximum flexibility in attracting a mix of residential uses consistent with the long-term goals of the Cedar Grove District. 
H.  Streets. 
1.  All new developments or significant redevelopments in the CGD shall be served by public streets on blocks that are no more than 400 feet on a side between intersecting public streets. New or significantly modified existing streets shall conform to the Street Types established in this chapter and to the master street plan for Cedar Grove. 
2.  Within the CGD District there are established street types for the purpose of creating various streetscape environments, handling traffic safely and efficiently, and providing pedestrian access. On-street parking shall be provided on all streets within the CGD District except where specifically prohibited by the city when warranted for safety reasons. These street types, described below, and illustrated on the attached Appendix B, future street/road guidelines: 
a.  Type 1 - Parkway: Minimum right-of-way width of 120 feet, two-way street with parallel parking both sides, center landscaped median minimum 20 feet in width, landscaped boulevards both sides minimum ten feet in width, sidewalks both sides minimum eight feet in width. 
b.  Type 2 - Collector: Minimum right-of-way width of 80 feet, two-way street with parallel parking both sides, landscaped boulevard minimum six feet in width, sidewalks both sides minimum six feet in width. 
c.  Type 3 - Local/parallel parking: Minimum right-of-way width of 60 feet, two-way street with parallel parking on both sides, sidewalks on both sides. 
d.  Type 4 - Local/angled parking: Minimum right-of-way width of 60 feet, two-way street with angle parking on one side, sidewalks on both sides. 
I.  Parking. 
1.  Parking for residential units in the CGD shall be provided on site, and shall be calculated as required under this title. Such residential parking spaces shall be specifically reserved for the use of residents and visitors only, separate from any commercial, office, or other uses on site or nearby, and shall not be counted as part of any shared parking or joint parking arrangement. Parking in driveways at the rear of townhomes may be counted towards the requirements of this ordinance if it does not interfere with other traffic movement. 
2.  Parking for non-residential uses shall be as required under this title. If present, on-street parking directly in front of a given building or lot shall count toward fulfilling the total parking requirement. 
3.  On-grade parking is prohibited in the front yard directly in front of a building. Parking shall be provided to the side or rear of buildings in mid-block areas. 
4.  In the CGD, where parking fronts a public street the maximum parking lot width shall be 50 percent of the lot width, measured at the lot frontage. 
5.  Parking shall be prohibited within 50 feet of the intersection of any public streets within the Cedar Grove District. 
J.  Building and architectural provisions. 
1.  All buildings shall be designed to accomplish the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan and the principles of the Cedar Grove Design Framework. Building materials shall be attractive in appearance, durable with a permanent finish, and of a quality that is consistent with the standards and intent of the Design Framework. Where appropriate, buildings shall use reasonably similar materials and colors of adjacent buildings, with the exception of prohibited materials. 
2.  All buildings shall include the following elements: 
a.  Accent materials shall be provided and all sides of a building shall be treated as a front side; 
b.  Buildings containing office and retail uses shall maintain 40 percent minimum window coverage on each first floor front that faces a street or public open space; 
c.  Complimentary major material colors; 
d.  A combination of vertical and horizontal pattern designs in the building facade. 
3.  Any exterior building wall adjacent to or visible from a public street, public open space, or abutting property may not exceed 50 feet in length without significant visual relief consisting of one or more of the following: 
a.  The facade shall be divided architecturally by means of significantly different materials or textures, or 
b.  Horizontal offsets of at least four feet in depth, or 
c.  Vertical offsets in the roof line of at least four feet, or 
d.  Fenestration at the first floor level that is recessed horizontally at least one foot into the facade. 
4.  Building facades shall be divided into similar bays of roughly equal width between 20 and 40 feet in width. 
5.  Exterior building materials shall be classified primary, secondary, or accent materials. Primary materials shall cover at least 60 percent of the facade of a building. Secondary materials may cover no more than 30 percent of the facade. Accent materials may include door and window frames, lintels, cornices, and other minor elements, and may cover no more than ten percent of the facade. Allowable materials are as follows: 
a.  Primary exterior building materials may be brick, stone, or glass. Painted brick or bronze-tinted or mirror glass are prohibited as exterior materials. 
b.  Secondary exterior building materials may be decorative block or integrally-colored stucco. 
c.  Synthetic stucco may be permitted as a secondary material on upper floors only. 
d.  Accent materials may be wood or metal if appropriately integrated into the overall building design and not situated in areas that will be subject to physical or environmental damage. 
e.  All primary and secondary materials shall be integrally colored. 
f.  Decorative block shall be colored only by means of a pigment integral to the block material, not applied to the surface. 
g.  Sheet metal, corrugated metal, asbestos, iron, shakes, and plain flat concrete block (whether painted or integrally colored or not) are not acceptable as exterior wall materials on buildings within the Cedar Grove District. 
6.  All mechanical equipment, whether roof-mounted or ground-mounted, shall be completely screened from the ground-level view of adjacent properties and public streets, or designed to be compatible with the architectural treatment of the principal building. 
7.  All exterior trash enclosures or other accessory structures shall be constructed of the same materials and colors as the principal building. 
8.  Consistent interior window treatments are required for windows that are visible from a public street or open space in offices and multiple residential complexes. 
9.  All buildings containing non-residential uses on the ground floor shall meet the following standards: 
a.  The building shall have entrances to a street or public open space spaced no more than 100 feet apart. 
b.  Entrances shall be oriented conveniently to the street frontage and to on-street and off-street parking serving the use. 
10.  All buildings containing residential uses on the ground floor shall have a first floor elevation at least two and one-half feet above the adjacent street level in the front yard. This standard may be modified with a variance in unique or hardship situations if the intent is preserved. In addition, each first-floor unit must have an individual private entrance at street level. All such residential units must meet ADA and other applicable access requirements. 
11.  Trash handling: All trash, recyclable materials, and equipment for handling them, including compactors, shall be completely screened from eye level view from public streets and adjacent properties, whether in the front, side or rear, either by being stored within the principal structure, completely screened from view by the principal building, or stored within an accessory structure constructed of the same materials and colors as and attached to the principal building and enclosed by a roof and readily served through swinging doors or an overhead door on tracks. 
12.  Loading docks: Loading docks shall be not located in the front yard and shall be completely screened from eye-level view of public streets and public open spaces, by means of landscaping which is at least 80 percent opaque year-round within two years, or by a screen wall of the same materials and colors as the principal building. 
13.  Landscaping: 
a.  All land area not occupied by buildings, parking, driveways, sidewalks, or other hard surface shall be sodded or mulched and landscaped with approved ground cover, flowers, shrubbery and trees. 
b.  At least ten percent of the total land area within the perimeter of private parking and driveway areas shall be landscaped. Landscaped areas provided within the build-to line may be credited toward this ten percent landscaping requirement on a square-foot-for-square-foot basis, for up to half of the ten percent requirement, or five percent. 
c.  Parking lot landscaped islands shall be a minimum of 150 square feet in area and include at least one overstory or evergreen tree meeting the requirements of this ordinance. 
d.  Where parking abuts the site perimeter there shall be provided at least one overstory tree per 25 feet of site perimeter. 
e.  At least one overstory tree shall be provided for every 500 square feet of landscaped area on the entire site. 
f.  The landscape plan shall include a full complement of overstory, ornamental and evergreen trees, shrubbery, and ground covers that are hardy and appropriate for the locations in which they are planted, and which provide year-round color and interest. 
g.  Plant selection. The following trees may not be used to satisfy the landscaping requirement of this section: 
Acer negundo 	Box Elder 
Acer saccharinum 	Silver Maple 
Catalpa speciosa 	Northern Catalpa 
Elaegnus 	Russian Olive 
Ginkgo Biloba 	F. Ginkgo (female prohibited, male permitted) 
Morus alba 	Mulberry 
Populus deltoides 	Cottonwood 
Populus species 	Poplars 
 
h.  The following trees may be used to satisfy the landscaping requirement of this section, but only in areas that are reasonably protected from winter wind conditions: 
Picea pungens glauca 	Colorado Blue Spruce 
Pinus alba 	White Pine 
Pinus resinosa 	Red Pine 
Juniperous Virginiana 	Eastern Red Cedar 
 
i.  The following trees may be used to satisfy the landscaping requirement of this section, but only in areas that are not on, or immediately adjacent to, a public street boulevard: 
Tilia cordata 	Little Leaf Linden 
Fraxinus mandshurica mancana 	Mancana Ash 
 
14.  Signage: 
a.  All signs erected on any building or land within the Cedar Grove District must comply with the standards of this section and other applicable sections of this title. 
b.  Wall signs: 
1)  Wall signage is allowed on buildings in the Cedar Grove District within a horizontal band no more than three feet in height, at least ten feet and no more than 15 feet above the ground. 
2)  Wall signage may be either: 
a.  Attached: flat and parallel to the surface of the building and projecting no more than one foot from it, or 
b.  Projecting: perpendicular to the surface of the building and no more than one foot in thickness. 
3)  Attached wall signage shall consist of individual letters or script logos mounted on the building. 
c.  Projecting signs: 
1)  Projecting signs may project no more than four feet from the front edge of the building and be no more than 12 square feet in area. 
2)  Projecting signs may not extend over a public right-of-way or public property unless by conditional use permit. 
3)  Projecting signs may not extend over a designated parking space or loading area. 
d.  Box signs or cabinet signs, whether on a wall, projecting or on canopies/awnings, are prohibited. 
e.  Signs on canopies are allowed only if they are on a surface perpendicular to the ground and if all other requirements of this section as to area and location are adhered to. 
f.  Allowable area of wall signs is one and one-half square feet of signage per lineal foot of building frontage on a public street, public open space, or private parking area. Each wall shall be calculated individually and sign area may not be transferred from one side of a building to another side. In calculating the total allowable area of wall signage, only one side of a two-sided projecting sign shall be counted. 
g.  Freestanding signs, intended to identify tenant(s), provided said signage does not exceed 12 feet in height, are allowed provided the sign is located within a landscaped area or landscaped island. Such signage shall be constructed with a base, constructed of the same materials and colors as the principal building, with a minimum height of three feet and a total sign area not to exceed 45 square feet. In calculating the total allowable area of identification signage, only one side of a two-sided freestanding sign shall be counted. 
h.  Directional signs at driveways and within parking areas, if no more than five feet in height and no more than six square feet in area, are allowed. Directional signs must be setback at least two feet from right-of-way, lot lines, and parking spaces. 
15.  Lighting: 
a.  All exterior lighting in the Cedar Grove District shall be downcast cutoff type fixtures, and shall follow the styles and types identified in the Framework Manual. No light source may be more than 20 feet above the ground, except by conditional use permit for buildings more than 24 feet in height. 
b.  The applicant for any building project shall provide a photometric lighting diagram prepared by a qualified professional showing light levels, in foot-candles, from all exterior artificial lighting for all points on and within ten feet of the site. 
c.  Lighting levels in exterior parking areas shall average one and one-half foot candle, with a minimum of one-half foot-candle in all locations. 
d.  Lighting levels in interior parking areas shall average two foot-candles, with a minimum of one-half foot-candle in all locations. 
e.  Lighting levels shall not exceed one-half foot-candle at the abutting property line or right-of-way line, and no direct glare from lighting on site shall extend onto the public street, public open space or neighboring properties. 
K.  Reserved. 
L.  Administration. Cedar Grove Design Review. The Advisory Planning Commission (APC) will identify design review conformance as part of their standard land use and zoning review for applications in the Cedar Grove District. 
Subd. 22.  Reserved. 
Subd. 23.  T Transitional District. 
A.  Intent. The intent of the (T) Transitional Zoning District is: 
1.  To provide for the maintenance of existing uses on parcels of land that are inconsistent with the adopted Comprehensive Guide Plan land use designation. 
2.  To provide for the continued present use of a parcel of land until such time as market forces warrant a change to a use consistent with the Comprehensive Guide Plan land use designation. 
B.  Purpose. 
1.  To allow an existing use to remain conforming until such time as development is approved that the city deems consistent with the Comprehensive Guide Plan at which time the city will consider changing the zoning designation. 
2.  To provide for orderly (re)development of contiguous parcels of land. 
3.  To discourage piecemeal, lot-by-lot development or leapfrog development that would result in the isolation or inefficient re-use of existing parcels of land. 
4.  To ensure that contiguous parcels of land are served with adequate access and public infrastructure. 
C.  Permitted uses. 
1.  The use and scope of use that existed as of October 17, 2002 (adoption date of this ordinance). 
D.  Conditional uses. 
1.  None. 
(Ord. No. 367, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 10-28-03; Ord. No. 379, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 6-24-04; Ord. No. 382, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 9-16-04; Ord. No. 385A, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 1-13-05; Ord. No. 395, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 1-3-06; Ord. No. 397, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 2-21-06; Ord. No. 399, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 4-18-06; Ord. No. 452, 2nd series, §§ 1—7, eff. 2-16-10; Ord. No. 466, 2nd series, § 1, 11-16-2010; Ord. No. 471, 2nd series, § 2, 2-15-2011; Ord. No. 477, 2nd series, §§ 2—8, eff. 4-20-2011; Ord. No. 499, 2nd series, §§ 2—5, eff. 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 500, 2nd series, §§ 2—8, eff. 5-1-2012; Ord. No. 524, 2nd series, §§ 1—4, eff. 12-3-2013; Ord. No. 528, 2nd series, §§ 1, 2, eff. 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 531, 2nd series, §§ 2—8, eff. 6-3-2014; Ord. No. 542, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-17-2015; Ord. No. 547, 2nd series, §§ 2—5, eff. 8-3-2015; Ord. No. 554, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 6-7-2016; Ord. No. 564, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 8-4-2017; Ord. No. 571, 2nd series, §§ 2—10, eff. 11-17-2017; Ord. No. 577, 2nd series, §§ 1—7, eff. 6-22-2018; Ord. No. 581, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-8-2019)  
Secs. 11.61, 11.62. - Reserved.  
Sec. 11.63. - AOD—Airport Overlay District. 
Subd. 1.  Purpose and intent. The airport overlay district is established to adopt by reference and implement the 2004 Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport (Wold-Chamberlain Field) Zoning Ordinance, as amended April 29, 2004 ("2004 MSP Zoning Ordinance"). The 2004 MSP Zoning Ordinance creates zones and establishes boundaries that extend into the city. It is the purpose of the airport overlay district to protect the public health, safety, general welfare and ensure land use compatibility to prevent potential obstructions or hazards to air traffic in the air space above and around the city within the airport overlay district. 
Subd. 2.  Adoption. The Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport (Wold-Chamberlain Field) Zoning Ordinance as amended April 29, 2004 ("2004 MSP Zoning Ordinance"), together with Exhibits A—F are incorporated herein by reference and are available at the city clerk's office in the Eagan Municipal Center. 
Subd. 3.  Established boundaries. The airport overlay district shall apply to all land within the city designated to be within one of the three safety zones set forth in the 2004 MSP Zoning Ordinance. 
Subd. 4.  General restrictions. No use shall be made of any land in any of the safety zones identified in the 2004 MSP Zoning Ordinance that is contrary to the provisions set forth in the 2004 MSP Zoning Ordinance. 
Subd. 5.  Designation of zoning administrator. For the purpose of administering and enforcing this section, the city's zoning administrator shall be the Eagan City Planner. 
(Ord. No. 443, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 7-21-09)  
Sec. 11.64. - ANZ—Aircraft Noise Zone Overlay District. 
Subd. 1.  Authority and findings. 
A.  Statutory authority. This section is adopted pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 473.192. 
B.  Findings of fact. The City of Eagan finds that development and redevelopment within certain areas of the city is impacted by aircraft noise; that certain uses of land are inappropriate in areas of high aircraft noise; that some structures do not adequately attenuate aircraft noise resulting in negative impacts on the health, safety and welfare of the residents or inhabitants of the structures; that, through proper construction methods and materials, the means exist to attenuate aircraft noise to interior levels which alleviate such negative impacts; and that the requirements of this section are necessary to promote and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Eagan. 
Subd. 2.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to require that certain buildings within the city's aircraft noise zone as identified herein, be constructed with materials and in such a manner that aircraft noise is attenuated by the structure to an interior level which has no adverse impact on the health, safety and general welfare of the residents, in accordance with the Metropolitan Council's guidelines for land use compatibility with aircraft noise. These guidelines are contained in Appendix L of the Metropolitan Council's 2030 Transportation Policy Plan (TPP). 
Subd. 3.  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings given: 
Additions: Any extension or expansion of an existing building normally occupied by people. 
Aircraft noise zone: Any one of the four zones and buffer zone established from the MSP 2007 Noise Area and identified in the Metropolitan Council Transportation Policy Plan and shown on the official zoning map of the City of Eagan and incorporated herein by reference. 
Appurtenance: The visible, functional, or ornamental objects accessory to and part of a building not normally occupied by people including garages and accessory buildings; and other unconditioned spaces including screen porches, gazebos, decks. 
Compatible use (COMP): A use that is acoustically acceptable for both indoors and outdoors. 
Conditional use (COND): A use that is not permitted, unless it meets the structural performance standards as set forth in Table L-4, and the factors set forth in Table L-5 of the Metropolitan Council 2030 Transportation Plan, Appendix L—Land Use Compatibility Guidelines for Aircraft Noise. The review of COND projects within the buffer zone shall be accomplished by the city; and the Metropolitan Council shall review COND projects located within noise zones 1 through 4. Within these zones, any land use [project] defined as COND under the compatibility guidelines and that is identified by the city as a planned development or requires a different zoning designation will be processed like a comprehensive plan amendment and reviewed under the factors described in Table L-5. 
dBA: A unit of sound pressure level weighted by use of the A metering characteristics and weighting as specified in the American National Standards Institute specification for sound level meters (ANSI S1.4-1983), which is hereby incorporated by reference. "dBA" is also referred to as an A-weighted decibel. 
Incompatible use (INCO): A use that is not permitted even if acoustical treatment was incorporated in the structure and outside uses restricted. 
Infill development: A vacant parcel or parcels of land proposed for development of uses similar to or less noise sensitive than the surrounding developed parcels. (For example, a new house on a vacant lot in a residential neighborhood, or a new industry on a vacant parcel in an established industrial area). 
DNL: The day-night average level, or the 24-hour equivalent continuous sound level (time averaged A-weighted sound level) from midnight to midnight, obtained after the addition of ten dBA to sound levels measured from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
Leq: The equivalent continuous sound level which, over the period of one hour, has the same A-weighted sound energy as the time varying sound. 
Low-frequency noise: Noise with a frequency of 100 Hz or lower. 
New development: A vacant parcel or parcels of land in excess of one acre or requested to be rezoned for development. (For example, a residential subdivision, industrial park or shopping center). 
Noise reduction level: The difference between the exterior and interior sound level, expressed in dBA, during the same time period. 
Noise buffer zone: As defined by the Metropolitan Council, an area outside the aircraft noise zone, and for MSP, it is defined as a one statute-mile beyond the noise zone 4 (DNL 60-64) contour line. Generally, the noise buffer zone becomes an extension of noise zone 4. To extend noise zone 4 into the buffer zone, the acoustic gradations link needs to be maintained. Thus, for any particular land use in noise zone 4, the corresponding designation for the buffer zone would be the next lowest designation. The purpose of the buffer zone is to provide additional protection for noise sensitive uses within the context of preventive land-use measures, allow for contour expansion/contraction over time, and provide flexibility in using other tools in support of noise efforts (e.g., a TIF district), that may be partially outside the then "current" noise contours. 
Provisional use (PROV): A use that is not permitted, unless it meets certain structural performance standards to be acceptable according to MS473.192 (metropolitan area Aircraft Noise Attenuation Act). Structures built after December 1983 shall be acoustically constructed so as to achieve the interior sound levels described in the Structural Performance Standards, Table L-5 of the Metropolitan Council 2030 Transportation Plan, Appendix L—Land Use Compatibility Guidelines for Aircraft Noise. 
Recognized acoustical specialist: A person qualified by education and experience to conduct sound level analysis of buildings and approved for such purpose by the city. The approved individual will have at least three years of field experience of sound control and a degree from a recognized institute of higher learning in acoustics or a closely related discipline; or demonstrated expertise in the process of sound analysis of buildings. 
Reconstruction of MAC Noise Insulation Program Homes: Replacing or repairing an existing home that received the 5dB package of airport noise home mitigation under the Metropolitan Airports Commission Home Mitigation Program when the replacement of the home is due to a purposeful teardown and total replacement of the home or when the replacement or repair of the home is due to damage to or destruction of the home by storm, fire or other peril. 
Redevelopment: A parcel of land with an existing structure or structures which are proposed to be rehabilitated or demolished for different uses. For purposes of the section, this does not apply to individual lots occupied by single-family detached homes, unless the property is subject to previous planned development or subdivision conditions or the property received the 5dB package of airport noise home mitigation under the Metropolitan Airports Commission Home Mitigation Program. 
Sound: Energy that is transmitted by pressure waves in the air or in other materials and is the objective cause of the sensation of hearing. 
Sound attenuation: The reduction in sound level which occurs between the source and receiver by means of construction methods and materials. 
Sound leak: An opening in a structure through which sound can pass. 
Sound level: The level of sound pressure measured with a sound level meter and one of its weighting (frequency) networks. When A-weighting is used, the "sound level" is expressed as dBA. 
Sound transmission class (STC): A single number rating for describing the degree of sound transmission loss specified for a wall, window, partition or other building element. The higher the STC, the more attenuation the building element will afford. (Ord. 232, 5-19-1987) 
A.  The aircraft noise zones established in this section shall overlay the zoning districts established in chapter 11 of this Code, so that any parcel of land lying in an overlay zone shall also lie on one or more of the established zoning districts. Property within a given overlay zone shall be subject to the requirements established by the other applicable regulations of this chapter and the Code. 
B.  Within each aircraft noise overlay zone, all uses shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations for the underlying zoning districts, provided, the appropriate building permit is first obtained and all requirements for conditional and provisional uses under this section are met. No use designated as incompatible (INCO) shall be permitted. 
C.  Application of provisions: This section shall apply to all new development, redevelopment, reconstruction of MAC Noise Insulation Program Homes, and construction of a building associated with a new subdivision or planned development, or amended use within an existing planned development. This section shall not apply to additions, remodeling or rehabilitation of an existing residential building, to additions or remodeling of an existing MAC Noise Insulation Program Home, to the construction of an appurtenance to an existing residential building, or to new residential structures constructed on an existing lot (as of the date of this ordinance [from which this section is derived]) where a new subdivision is not created. 
A.  Aircraft noise zones established: The following aircraft noise zones are as follows: 
Aircraft noise zone 1 	DNL 75+ 
Aircraft noise zone 2 	DNL 74—70 
Aircraft noise zone 3 	DNL 69—65 
Aircraft noise zone 4 	DNL 64—60 
Noise buffer zone 	1-Statute mile beyond DNL 60 
noise contour 
 
B.  Boundaries: The boundaries of the aircraft noise zones are as delineated on the zoning map of the City of Eagan, on file in the office of the city clerk for public use and inspection, and incorporated herein by reference. 
A.  Noise compatibility tables are adapted from the Metropolitan Council's 2030 Transportation Policy Plan—Appendix L, Land Use Compatibility Guidelines for Aircraft Noise, and as revised in the 2006 Metropolitan Council Builder's Guide—Mitigating Aircraft Noise. Land use compatibility shown in Table 1 hereto establish acceptable uses within each noise zone applicable to the scope of this section. 
B.  The noise reduction level requirements, as set forth in Table 2, expressed in dBA, are established for each type of land use, the amount of interior sound level reduction necessary for the use to be compatible in the applicable aircraft noise zone and to meet structural performance standards as set forth in Table L-4 of Appendix L—Land Use Compatibility Guidelines for Aircraft Noise, of the 2030 Metropolitan Council's Transportation Policy Plan. 
C.  Any construction requiring a building permit on land located within an aircraft noise zone under the scope of this section shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements set forth in the noise reduction requirements in this section. The necessary reduction will be achieved through the enforcement of provisions in this section and the Builder's Guide. Where a particular structure contains different land uses, the more stringent requirements of the applicable Tables shall apply, except where it is architecturally possible to achieve the appropriate noise reduction level for each different use, and the uses are acoustically separated by a wall or partition with a minimum STC of 25. 
Table 1 

Land Use Compatibility 
Type of Development 
  
  	New Structures Associated with New Development, New Subdivisions, New or Amended Planned Developments 
	Noise Exposure Zone and Level (dBA) 
Land Use Category 	1 	2 	3 	4 	BZ 
	DNL 
75+ 	DNL 
74—70 	DNL 
69—65 	DNL 
64—60 	DNL 
64—60 
Residential: 
  Single/multiplex, with individual entrance 
  Multiplex/apartment, with shared entrance 
  Mobile home 	  
INCO 
  
INCO 
  
INCO 	  
INCO 
  
INCO 
  
INCO 	  
INCO 
  
COND 
  
INCO 	  
INCO 
  
PROV 
  
COND 	  
COND 
  
COMP 
  
PROV 
Preschools and K-12 schools, churches, hospitals, and nursing homes 	INCO 	INCO 	INCO 	COND 	PROV 
Cultural, entertainment and recreation: 
  Indoor 
  Outdoor 	  
  
COND 
COND 	  
  
COND 
COND 	  
  
COND 
COND 	  
  
PROV 
COND 	  
  
COMP 
PROV 
Office, commercial, retail 	COND 	PROV 	PROV 	COMP 	COMP 
Services: 
  Transportation/passenger facilities 
  Transient lodging 
  Other medical, health and education 
  Other services 	  
COND 
  
INCO 
COND 
  
COND 	  
PROV 
  
COND 
PROV 
  
PROV 	  
PROV 
  
PROV 
PROV 
  
PROV 	  
COMP 
  
PROV 
COMP 
  
COMP 	  
COMP 
  
COMP 
COMP 
  
COMP 
Industrial, communication and utilities 	PROV 	COMP 	COMP 	COMP 	COMP 
Agriculture, land/water areas, and 
resource extraction 	COMP 	COMP 	COMP 	COMP 	COMP 
 
Table 2 

Land Use Compatibility Guidelines and Noise Reduction

Requirements for Aircraft Noise 
Type of Development 
  
  	New Structures Associated with New Development, New Subdivisions, New or Amended Planned Developments 
	Noise Exposure Zone and Level (dBA) 
Land Use Category 	1 	2 	3 	4 	BZ 
	DNL 
75+ 	DNL 
74—70 	DNL 
69—65 	DNL 
64—60 	DNL 
64—60 
Residential: 
  Single/multiplex, with individual entrance 
  Multiplex/apartment, with shared entrance 
  Mobile home 	  
INCO 
  
INCO 
  
INCO 	  
INCO 
  
INCO 
  
INCO 	  
INCO 
  
24 
  
INCO 	  
INCO 
  
19 
  
19 	  
19 
  
COMP 
  
19 
Preschools and K-12 schools, churches, hospitals, and nursing homes 	INCO 	INCO 	INCO 	19 	19 
Cultural, entertainment and recreation: 
  Indoor 
  Outdoor 	  
  
30+ 
30+ 	  
  
29 
29 	  
  
24 
24 	  
  
19 
19 	  
  
COMP 
19 
Office, commercial, retail 	30+ 	29 	24 	COMP 	COMP 
Services: 
  Transportation/passenger facilities 
  Transient lodging 
  Other medical, health and education 
  Other services 	  
30+ 
  
INCO 
30+ 
  
30+ 	  
29 
  
29 
29 
  
29 	  
24 
  
24 
24 
  
24 	  
COMP 
  
19 
COMP 
  
COMP 	  
COMP 
  
COMP 
COMP 
  
COMP 
Industrial, communication and utilities 	30+ 	COMP 	COMP 	COMP 	COMP 
Agriculture, land/water areas, and 
resource extraction 	COMP 	COMP 	COMP 	COMP 	COMP 
 
A.  The City of Eagan building inspector is authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this section. 
B.  Plans and specifications: 
1.  Required plans and specifications: 
a.  All applicants for a building or occupancy permit shall include with the application all plans, specifications or other information required by this section. The plans and specifications shall describe in sufficient detail all pertinent features of the building, building materials, heating and ventilation systems, including, but not limited to, the STC ratings of exterior roof/ceilings, walls, windows, and doors; and other pertinent data as may be requested by the city to indicate conformance with the applicable noise reduction level requirements as specified in the noise compatibility tables. To assure the elimination of sound leaks, the plans and specifications shall demonstrate compliance with the following standards: 
(1)  All mechanical ventilation systems shall be installed that will provide the minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements as provided in the State and International Building Code for the proposed occupancy without the need to open any exterior doors or windows. 
(2)  The perimeter of all exterior windows and door frames shall be sealed airtight to the exterior wall construction. 
(3)  Fireplaces shall be equipped with well fitted chimney closing devices. 
(4)  All ventilation ducts, except range hoods, connecting interior space to outdoors shall be provided with a bend such that no direct line of sight exists from the exterior to the interior through the vent duct. 
(5)  Doors and windows shall be constructed so that they are close fitting. Weather stripping seals shall be incorporated to eliminate all edge gaps. 
(6)  All penetrations through exterior walls by pipes, ducts, conduits and the like shall be caulked airtight to the exterior construction. 
b.  The city may require that plans and specifications be certified by a recognized acoustical specialist for compliance with this section. 
c.  General reduction techniques may be referenced in the Metropolitan Council Builder's Guide. 
2.  Approval or denial of permit: 
a.  Within 30 days of receipt of appropriate plans and specifications, the city shall approve or reject the plans based upon the ability of the proposed materials and construction techniques to adequately attenuate noise. The city will approve the plans and specifications only if one of the two following requirements (i. or ii.) is met: 
i.  The plans and specifications adequately document the use of construction assembly that meet or exceed the STC ratings required by the following table: 
Table 5 

STC Ratings Required for Building Elements Specified 
Noise Level Reduction 	Required STC Rating Needed for Compliance* 
dBA 	Roof/Ceiling 	Walls 	Windows 	Doors 
20 	40 	40 	30 	20 
25 	45 	45 	35 	25 
30 	50 	50 	40 	30 
35 	55 	55 	45 	35 
40 	60 	60 	50 	40 
 
* All values—2 STC. The STC laboratory test of construction materials and assemblies must be conducted according to requirements of the American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM E90 or ASTM E 336); or 
ii.  The plans and specifications have been certified by a recognized acoustical specialist as achieving the interior noise level reduction required by the applicable portion of the noise compatibility table. 
b.  In the event that the drawings are rejected, the reasons for such rejection will be submitted to the applicant in writing. No construction shall occur prior to the approval of the appropriate plans and specifications. All construction shall be performed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications as determined by the city and shall be deemed to meet the noise attenuation requirements of this section. 
C.  Inspections: 
1.  All construction or work for which a building permit is required shall be subject to inspections by the city. Inspections of noise attenuation work shall be performed during the required building construction inspections specified by the City of Eagan Building Code. 
2.  When inspection indicates that the construction is not in accordance with the approved plans, the city may order such corrective action as may be necessary to meet the noise attenuation requirements of this section. In lieu of performing such corrective action, a building owner may submit a test report based upon field tests showing compliance with the noise reduction level requirements contained in the applicable noise compatibility table. The field test shall be performed in accordance with the "American Society for Testing Materials (ASTM) Standard E 336-84, Part A1.2.2. Outside to Inside (Level Reduction)." 
(Ord. No. 436, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-3-09; Ord. No. 465, 2nd series, § 1, 11-16-2010)  
Sec. 11.65. - S—Shoreland Overlay District. 
Subd. 1.  Purpose and intent. The unregulated use of shorelands within the city contributes to the pollution of public waters and impairment of the local tax base, thereby threatening the public health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, it is in the best interests of public health, safety and welfare to regulate the use and development of shorelands of public waters to preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve the economic and natural environmental values of shorelands, and provide for effective and efficient use of waters and related land resources. 
Subd. 2.  Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to conduct, including, but not limited to, the use of any shoreland of public waters; the size and shape of shoreland lots; the use, size, type and location of structures on shoreland lots; the installation and maintenance of water supply and waste treatment systems; the grading and filling of any shoreland area; the cutting of shoreland vegetation; and the subdivision of land which has shoreland area. 
Subd. 3.  Enforcement. The city shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this section. It is unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this section, including violation of conditions or restrictions of building permits, shoreland alteration permits, variances or conditional use permits. 
Subd. 4.  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This section shall not repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions, except to the extent the provisions of this section are more restrictive. 
Subd. 5.  Definitions. For purposes of this section only, the following terms shall have the meaning stated: 
A.  Bluff means a topographic feature, such as a hill, cliff, or embankment, having all of the following characteristics. An area with an average slope of less than 18 percent over a horizontal distance for 50 feet or more shall not be considered part of the bluff. 
1.  Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area; 
2.  The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water level of the water body; 
3.  The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25 feet or more above the ordinary high water level averages 30 percent or greater; and 
4.  The slope must drain toward the water body. 
B.  Bluff impact zone means a bluff and the land located within 20 feet from the top of a bluff. 
C.  Building line means a line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high water level at the minimum required setback beyond which a structure may not extend. 
D.  Clearcutting means the removal of an entire stand of trees. 
E.  Commercial planned development means a planned development of various commercial uses. 
F.  Commercial use means the principal use of land or buildings for the sale, lease, rental or trade of products, goods, and services. 
G.  DNR means the commissioner of the department of natural resources. 
H.  Deck means a horizontal, unenclosed platform, with or without attached railings, seats, trellises, or other features, attached or functionally related to a principal use or dwelling site and at any point extending more than three feet above ground. 
I.  Duplex means a dwelling structure on a single lot, having two dwelling units, attached by common walls and each unit equipped with separate sleeping, cooking, eating, living, and sanitation facilities. 
J.  Dwelling site means a designated location for residential use by one or more persons using temporary or movable shelter, including camping and recreational vehicle sites. 
K.  Dwelling unit means any structure or portion of a structure, or other shelter designed as short-term or long-term living quarters for one or more persons. 
L.  Extractive use means the use of land for the removal of surface or subsurface sand, gravel, rock, industrial minerals, a nonmetallic mineral, or peat not regulated by Minn. Stat. §§ 93.44—93.51 and amendments thereto. 
M.  Forest land conversion means the clearcutting of forested lands to prepare for a new land use other than reestablishment of a subsequent forest stand. 
N.  Industrial use means the use of land or buildings for the production, manufacture, warehousing, storage, or transfer of goods, products, commodities, or other wholesale items. 
O.  Intensive vegetation clearing means the complete removal of trees, grasses or shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row, or block. 
P.  Ordinary high water level (OHWL) means an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel. 
Q.  Planned development means a development characterized by a unified site design for a number of dwelling units or dwelling sites on a parcel, whether for sale, rent or lease, whereby these units or sites provide areas of common space, density, increase mix of structure types and land uses. Planned developments may include, but are not limited to, condominiums, timeshare condominiums, cooperatives, full fee ownership, commercial enterprises, or any combination of these, or cluster subdivisions of dwelling units, residential condominiums, townhouses or apartment buildings, and accessory land uses to the principal uses. 
R.  Public waters has the meaning given it in Minnesota Water Law (Minn. Stat. § 103G.005, subd. 15). 
S.  Residential planned development means a use where the nature of residency is nontransient and the major or primary focus of the development is not service oriented. 
T.  Riparian lot means a lot which borders on a lake, river or stream. 
U.  Semipublic use means the use of land by a private, nonprofit organization to provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some persons outside the regular constituency of the organization. 
V.  Sensitive resource management means the preservation and management of areas unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints such as shallow soils over groundwater or bedrock, highly erosive or expansive soils, steep slopes, susceptibility to flooding or occurrence of flora and fauna in need of special protection. 
W.  Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between a structure, sewage treatment system, or other feature and an ordinary high water level, sewage treatment system, top of a bluff, road, highway, property line, or other facility. 
X.  Sewage treatment system means a septic tank and soil absorption system or other individual or cluster-type sewage treatment system as described and regulated in subdivision 9 of this section. 
Y.  Sewer system means the pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force main and all other constructions, devices, appliances, facilities or appurtenances used for conducting sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal. 
Z.  Shore impact zone means land located between the ordinary high water level of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50 percent of the structure setback. 
AA.  Shoreland, shoreland area, shoreland district and shoreland overlay district mean land located within the following distances from public waters: 1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level of any lake, pond, or flowage or the landward extent of the watershed divide; and 300 feet from rivers and streams, or the landward extent of a floodplain designated by ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is greater. 
BB.  Significant historic site means any archaeological site, standing structure, or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the National Register of Historic Places or is listed in the state register of historic sites, or is an unplatted cemetery within the provisions of Minn. Stat. § 307.08. A historic site meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after review by the state archaeologist or the director of the Minnesota Historical Society. All unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to be significant historic sites. 
CC.  Steep slopes means land where agricultural activity or development is either not recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and the site's soil characteristics, as mapped and described in available county soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and construction techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. Where specific information is not available, steep slopes are lands having average slopes over 12 percent, as measured over horizontal distances of 50 feet or more, that are not bluffs. 
DD.  Structure means any building or appurtenance, except aerial or underground utility pipes or lines, including, but not limited to, decks, sewer, electric, telephone, telegraph, gas, towers, poles and other supporting facilities. 
EE.  Subdivision is as defined in chapter 13 of this Code. 
FF.  Surface-water-oriented commercial use means the use of land for commercial purposes, where access to and use of a surface water feature is an integral part of the normal conductance of business. Marinas, resorts, and restaurants with transient docking facilities are examples of such use. 
GG.  Toe of the bluff means the lower point of a 50 foot segment with an average slope exceeding 18 percent. 
HH.  Top of the bluff means the higher point of a 50 foot segment with an average slope exceeding 18 percent. 
II.  Undue hardship means the property in question cannot be put to reasonable use under the conditions allowed by the official controls; the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to his property, not created by the landowner; and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality. Economic considerations alone shall not constitute an undue hardship if a reasonable use for the property exists under terms of the official controls. 
JJ.  Variance has the meaning given it in this chapter. 
KK.  Wetland means a surface water feature classified as a wetland in the United States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971). 
Subd. 6.  Administration. 
A.  Permits required. The provisions of chapter 4 of the City Code regarding the issuance of building permits shall apply to this section. 
1.  No buildings, building additions, including fences higher than six feet, decks, signs or sewage treatment systems shall be constructed, installed or altered, and no grading or filling activities not exempted by subdivision 12(I) of this section shall be permitted without first obtaining a permit from the city. Application for a permit shall be filed with the city on the form provided by the city. The application shall include the necessary information so that the city can determine the site's suitability for the intended use and that a conforming sewage treatment system will be provided should any building permits or conditional use permits be issued. 
2.  Any permit issued hereunder shall state that an identified, existing sewage treatment system, as defined by subdivision 9, shall be reconstructed or replaced in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
3.  The general provisions of this section shall be complied with before the issuance of the permit. 
B.  Zoning compliance. Zoning compliance by the city shall be required for each activity requiring a permit as specified in subparagraph A, above. This will specify that the use of land conforms to the requirements of this ordinance. Any use, activity, or construction not authorized by permit shall be unlawful. 
C.  Variances. 
1.  No variance may be granted except in accordance with Minn. Stat. ch. 462 and the provisions of this chapter. A variance shall not circumvent the general purposes and intent of this section. No variance may be granted that would allow any use that is prohibited in the zoning district in which the subject property is located. Conditions may be imposed in the granting of a variance to ensure compliance with this chapter, and to protect adjacent properties and the public interest. In considering a variance request, the city council will also consider whether the property owner has reasonable use of the land without the variance, whether the property is used seasonally or year-round, whether the variance is being requested solely on the basis of economic considerations, and the characteristics of development on adjacent properties. 
2.  The city shall hear and decide requests for variances, including variances for sewage treatment systems in shoreland districts, in accordance with the zoning provisions governing variances. When a variance is approved after the department of natural resources has formally recommended denial in the hearing record, the notification of the approved variance required therein shall also include the summary of the public record/testimony and the findings of facts and conclusions which supported the issuance of the variance. 
3.  For existing developments, the application for variance shall clearly demonstrate whether a conforming sewage treatment system is present for the intended use of the property. All variances granted shall require reconstruction of a nonconforming sewage treatment system. 
D.  Notifications to the department of natural resources. 
1.  Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances, amendments, planned development or conditional uses under shoreland management controls shall be sent to the DNR or the DNR's designated representative and postmarked at least ten days prior to the hearing. Notices of hearings to consider proposed preliminary plats shall include copies thereof. 
2.  A copy of approved amendments and subdivisions/plats, and final decisions granting variances, planned developments, or conditional uses under shoreland management controls must be sent to the DNR or the DNR's designated representative and postmarked within ten days of final action. 
Subd. 7.  Shoreland classification. 
A.  Shoreland classification system. The public waters of the city have been classified in this subdivision consistent with criteria found in Minnesota Rules, part 6120.3300, and the Protected Waters Inventory Map for Dakota County, Minnesota and the shoreland area for the water bodies listed below shall be as defined in this section and as shown on the official zoning map of the city: 
1.  Lakes: 
		DNR ID# 	Land Section (T27N-R23W) 
Natural Environment Lakes (NE) 	
a. 	Holland 	19-65 	26, 35 
b. 	Gerhardt 	19-69 	33SW 
c. 	Jensen 	19-71 	34 
d. 	O'Brien 	19-72 	35SW 
e. 	Unnamed (Cattail L.; LP-21: in Leb. Hills R. P.) 	19-73 	35 
f. 	Unnamed (Portage L.; LP-19: in Leb. Hills R. P.) 	19-74 	35SE 
g. 	Schultz 	19-75 	35 
h. 	Gun Club 	19-78 	4, 5 
Recreation Development Lakes (RD) 	
i. 	Blackhawk 	19-59 	16, 17, 21 
j. 	McCarthy 	19-60 	22 
k. 	Unnamed (Schwanz L.; LP-32) 	19-63 	25, 26 
l. 	McDonough 	19-76 	35, 36 
General Development Lakes (GD) 	
m. 	Unnamed (Shanahan P.; FP-8) 	19-54 	1 
n. 	Lemay's (LeMay L.; DP-2) 	19-55 	10 
o. 	O'Leary 	19-56 	15 
p. 	Fish 	19-57 	15, 16 
q. 	Bald 	19-61 	23NE 
r. 	Unnamed (Hay L.; LP-31) 	19-62 	25 
s. 	Quigley (Carlson L.; LP-42) 	19-66 	27 
t. 	Thomas 	19-67 	27, 28 
u. 	Unnamed (Pitt Lake) (Cliff L.; AP-11) 	19-68 	29SW 
v. 	Unnamed (Almquist L.; BLP-4) 	19-70 	33 
w. 	Unnamed (Holz L.; LP-28) 	19-64 	36 
x. 	Unnamed (Fitz L.; LP-26) 	19-77 	36 
 
2.  Urban rivers: 
Minnesota River. 
3.  Tributaries: 
a.  Kennealy Creek Section 18; 
b.  Harnack Creek Section 18. 
B.  Land use and shoreland zoning regulations. 
1.  The shoreland of the water bodies classified in this subdivision shall be an overlay district which shall be applied and superimposed upon all existing land use zoning districts, or as amended by the city, which lie within the shoreland. The regulations and requirements of this section shall be in addition to those established for the land use zoning district which jointly apply, provided the more restrictive regulation for use, setback, height, site coverage, density and any other applicable regulation shall apply. 
2.  District boundaries for the shoreland overlay districts shall be as shown on the official zoning map of the city. 
3.  Land use zoning districts in the shoreland area shall be in conformance with the criteria specified in Minnesota Rules, part 6120.3200, subpart 3. 
4.  Conditional use permits shall be processed by the city as provided by the provisions of this chapter. 
5.  Nonconforming uses. Any approved use within a shoreland district in existence prior to the effective date of this section as amended which was permitted by the previous ordinance requirements but which does not meet the requirements of this section, as amended, shall be declared to be a nonconforming use. Nonconforming uses, including substandard sanitary facilities, shall be allowed to continue. However, any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming use which will increase the present use's dimensions shall not be permitted. Any improvement shall require any substandard sanitary facilities to be upgraded in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
Subd. 8.  Dimensional requirements. The following minimum requirements shall apply to all shorelands of the public waters within the city, except where any requirement of the land use zoning district, as shown on the official zoning map, is more restrictive than the requirement set forth herein, the land use zoning district requirement shall apply. 
A.  Unsewered areas. 
(1)  Single detached dwelling uses which are not served by municipal sanitary sewer services within a shoreland overlay district shall comply with the following dimensional requirements: 
Single Detached Dwelling Uses 	Natural 
Environment 
Waters 	Recreational 
Development 
Waters 	General 
Development 
Waters 
Lot area (s.f.) 
 Riparian and nonriparian 	80,000 	40,000 	40,000 
Lot width (ft.) 1 
 Riparian 	200 	100 	150 
 Nonriparian 	200 	100 	100 
Structure and sewer system setback from OHWL (ft.) 2 	150 	100 	75 
Structure setback from roads and highways 	Determined by the zoning district provisions of this chapter 
Maximum structure height 	Determined by the zoning district provisions of this chapter 
Maximum impervious surface coverage (%) 	25 	25 	25 
 
1 Lot width must be met at both the building setback line and at the OHWL. 
2 Structure setbacks apply to principal and accessory structures. 
(2)  Attached (multiple) dwelling uses and commercial and industrial uses shall be prohibited in areas not served by municipal sanitary sewer services. 
B.  Sewered areas. 
(1)  Single detached dwelling uses which are served by municipal sanitary sewer services within a shoreland overlay district shall comply with the following dimensional requirements: 
Single Detached Dwelling Uses 	Natural 
Environment 
Waters 	Recreational 
Development 
Waters 	General 
Development 
Waters 
Average lot area (s.f.) 
 Riparian 	40,000 	20,000 	15,000 
 Nonriparian 	20,000 	15,000 	12,000 
Minimum lot width (ft.) 1 	125 	100 	75 
Structure setback from OHWL (ft.) 2 	100 	75 	50 
Structure setback from roads and highways (ft.) 2 	Determined by the zoning district provisions of this chapter 
Maximum structure height (ft.) 	Determined by the zoning district provisions of this chapter 	35 	35 
Maximum impervious surface coverage (%) 3 	25 	25 	25 
 
1 Lot width must be met at both the building setback line and OHWL. 
2 Structure setbacks apply to principal and accessory structures. 
3 May be increased with conditional use permit; see provisions of Subd. 9.L. of this section. 
(2)  Attached (multiple) dwelling uses, pursuant to a planned development, which are served by municipal sanitary sewer services shall comply with the following dimensional requirements: 
Attached Multiple Dwelling Uses 	Natural Environment Waters 2 	Recreational Development Waters 	General Development Waters 
Average lot area per unit 	— 	Determined by PD 
Minimum lot width 1 (ft.) 	— 	200 	200 
Structure setback from OHWL (ft.) 4 	— 	75 	50 
Structure setback from roads and highways (ft.) 4 	— 	Determined by the zoning district provisions of this chapter 
Maximum structure height 	— 	Four stories above ground; over 35 feet must meet provisions for CUP in Sec. 11.50, Subd. 4 of this chapter 
Maximum impervious surface coverage (%) 3 	— 	25 	25 
 
1 Lot width must be met at both the building setback line and OHWL. 
2 Attached (multiple) dwelling uses are prohibited within the shoreland of natural environment waters. 
3 May be increased with conditional use permit; see provisions of Subd. 9.L. of this section. 
4 Structure setbacks apply to principal and accessory structures. 
(3)  Attached (multiple) dwelling uses by planned development only. 
(4)  Commercial and industrial uses which are served by municipal sanitary sewer services shall comply with the dimensional requirements: 
Commercial and Industrial Uses 	Natural Environment Waters 2 	Recreational Development Waters 	General Development Waters 
Average lot area per unit 
 Riparian 	— 	40,000 	40,000 
 Nonriparian 	— 	40,000 	20,000 
Minimum lot width 1 (ft.) 	— 	75 	100 
Structure setback from OHWL (ft.) 4 	— 	75 	50 
Structure setback from roads and highways (ft.) 4 	— 	Determined by the zoning district provisions of this chapter 
Maximum structure height 	— 	Four stories above ground; over 35 feet must meet provisions for CUP in Sec. 11.50, Subd. 4 of this chapter 
Maximum impervious surface coverage (%) 3 	— 	25 	25 
 
1 Lot width must be met at both the building setback line and OHWL. 
2 Commercial and industrial uses are prohibited within the shoreland of natural environment waters. 
3 May be increased with conditional use permit; see provisions of Subd. 9.L. of this section. 
4 Structure setbacks apply to principal and accessory structures. 
(5)  Commercial and industrial uses and attached (multiple) residential dwelling uses are prohibited within the shoreland of natural environment waters. 
C.  Urban rivers and tributaries. No development shall be permitted along urban rivers and tributaries. 
D.  Lot area and width requirements. The provisions of this subdivision with respect to the minimum lot area in square feet and minimum lot width requirements in lineal feet shall apply to residential lots created after the date of enactment of this section, as amended. Only land above the ordinary high water level of public waters can be used to meet lot area and lot width requirements. These minimum requirements shall be met at both the ordinary high water level and at the building line. 
Subd. 9.  General provisions. 
A.  Lots for controlled accesses. Lots used for controlled accesses to public waters or as recreation areas by owners of nonriparian lots within subdivisions shall meet or exceed the following standards: 
1.  Lots shall meet the minimum width and area requirements for residential lots and be suitable for the intended uses; 
2.  In the event docking, mooring, or over-water storage of more than six watercraft is present on a controlled access lot, the width of the lot (keeping the same lot depth) shall be increased by 25 percent in lot frontage for each watercraft beyond six; 
3.  Lots shall be jointly or commonly owned by all purchasers of lots in the subdivision or by all purchasers of nonriparian lots in the subdivision who are provided riparian access rights on the access lot in a manner acceptable to the city and the DNR; and 
4.  Land covenants or other equally effective legal instruments shall be executed and provide the following restrictions: 
(a)  Lot owners have authority to use the access lot and what activities are allowed. The activities may include watercraft launching, loading, storage, beaching, mooring, or docking. They may also include other outdoor recreational activities that do not significantly conflict with general public use of the public water or the enjoyment or normal property rights of adjacent property owners. Examples of the nonsignificant conflict activities include swimming, sunbathing, or picnicking. 
(b)  The total number of vehicles allowed to be parked on the lot. 
(c)  The total number of watercraft allowed to be continuously moored, docked, or stored over water. 
(d)  Centralization of all common facilities and activities in the most suitable locations on the lot to minimize topographic and vegetation alterations. 
(e)  All parking areas, storage buildings, and other facilities to be screened by vegetation or topography as much as practical from view from the public water. 
B.  Placement and design of structures. When more than one setback applies to a site, structures and facilities must be located to meet all setbacks. Where structures exist on the adjoining lots of a proposed building site, structure setbacks required for a new proposed building or an addition to an existing building may be altered without a variance to conform to the average setbacks on the adjoining lots from the ordinary high water level, provided the proposed building site is not located in a shore impact zone or bluff impact zone. 
C.  Floodplain regulations. 
1.  Structures shall be located in accordance with the floodplain regulations of the City Code. 
2.  Accessory structures, where allowed, may have the lowest floor placed lower than the elevation determined by the procedures in floodplain regulations if the structure is constructed of flood-resistant materials to the flood elevation, electrical and mechanical equipment is placed above the flood elevation and, if long duration flooding is anticipated, the structure is built to withstand ice action, wind-driven waves and debris. 
D.  Accessory structures. Accessory structures in shoreland districts shall satisfy minimum structure setbacks required in this section and comply with the following: 
1.  The accessory structure shall not exceed ten feet in height, exclusive of safety rails; 
2.  The accessory structure shall not exceed 150 square feet in area. 
3.  Detached decks shall not exceed eight feet above grade at any point; and 
4.  The accessory structure shall not be used for human habitation nor shall it contain water supply or sewage treatment facilities. 
E.  Stairways, lifts, landings and docks. Stairways and lifts are the preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts shall meet the following design requirements: 
1.  The stairways and lifts shall not exceed four feet in width, except stairways used in public open space recreational properties and planned developments; 
2.  The stairway and lift landings on residential lots shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, except landings used in public open space recreational properties and planned developments; 
3.  Canopies or roofs shall not be permitted on stairways, lifts or landings; 
4.  Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above the ground on posts or pilings or placed into the ground, provided they are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion; 
5.  Stairways, lifts, and landings shall be located on a portion of the lot that most reduces the visibility of these stairways, lifts and landings from the public water. 
6.  Structures for mobility impaired persons including ramps, lifts, or mobility paths are permitted for achieving access to shore areas, provided that the dimensional and performance standards of sub-items (1) to (5) above are complied with in addition to the requirements of Minnesota Rules, part 1341; and 
7.  Docks shall not exceed five feet in width unless a shoreland building permit is obtained therefor. 
F.  Significant historic sites. No structure shall be placed on a significant historic site in a manner that affects the historical value of the site unless adequate information about the site, as determined by the Minnesota Historical Society, has been removed and documented in a public repository. 
G.  Steep slopes. The city shall evaluate possible soil erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters before issuing a permit for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways, structures, or other improvements on steep slopes. When determined necessary, conditions shall be attached to issued permits to prevent soil erosion and to preserve existing vegetation screening of structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters. 
H.  Height of structures. All structures in all shoreland districts shall not exceed 35 feet in height, unless a conditional use permit is obtained therefor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Any application for a conditional use permit hereunder shall be subject to notice and comment by the DNR before the permit is issued by the city. 
I.  Shoreland alterations. To prevent soil erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping, and protect fish and wildlife habitat, shoreland alterations are subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Vegetation alterations. 
(a)  Any vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, roads and parking areas regulated by this section are exempt from the regulations in this provision. 
(b)  Except for agricultural and forest management uses: 
(1)  Clearcutting and intensive vegetation clearing within the shore impact zones and on steep slopes shall be prohibited. No intensive vegetation clearing for forest land conversion to another use outside of these areas shall be conducted without first obtaining a conditional use permit. No such permit shall be issued unless a land disturbance and erosion control permit and plan is approved in accordance with the provisions of chapter four of this Code and is approved by the soil and water conservation district in which the property is located. 
(2)  In shore impact zones and on steep slopes, limited clearing or cutting, pruning, and trimming of trees and shrubs may be conducted to provide a view from the principal dwelling site to the public water and to make installation or construction of stairways, lifts, picnic areas, access paths, beach and watercraft areas and water-oriented accessory structures possible, provided that: 
(aa)  The screening for structures, vehicles, or other facilities as viewed from the water is not substantially reduced; 
(bb)  Along rivers, existing shading of water surfaces is preserved; and 
(cc)  In the shore impact zone, live trees larger than six inches in diameter shall not be cut, except to provide for water-oriented accessory structures or to provide a water-viewing corridor not to exceed 20 percent of the shoreline width of the lot. 
(3)  The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards. 
2.  Topographic alterations/grading and filling. 
(a)  Grading, filling and excavations for the construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways under a validly issued building permit do not require the issuance of a separate grading and filling permit but shall be subject to the provisions of this subdivision. 
(b)  Public roads and parking areas are regulated by this subdivision. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any provisions in this section to the contrary, a permit shall be required for: 
(1)  The movement of more than ten cubic yards of material on steep slopes and within shore or bluff impact zones. 
(2)  The movement of more than 50 cubic yards of material outside of steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones. 
(d)  The following considerations and conditions shall be adhered to during the issuance of construction permits, grading and filling permits, conditional use permits, variances and subdivision approvals: 
(1)  Any filling that occurs in any type 3, 4, or 5 wetland over two and one-half acres in area shall require a permit from the DNR; 
(2)  Alterations shall be conducted in a manner in order that the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time possible; 
(3)  Mulch or similar material shall be used for temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation cover shall be established as soon as weather conditions allow; 
(4)  Soil erosion control measures shall be used; 
(5)  Altered areas shall be stabilized to acceptable erosion control standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation districts and the United States Soil Conservation Service; 
(6)  No fill or excavated material shall be placed in a manner that creates an unstable slope or finished slopes of 30 percent or greater; 
(7)  No fill or excavated material shall be placed on steep slopes without the city engineer's review for continued slope stability; 
(8)  No fill or excavated material shall be placed in bluff impact zones; 
(9)  Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public waters shall be in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Water Law (Minn. Stat. Ch. 103G); 
(10)  No alterations of topography shall be allowed, except if they are an accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely affect adjacent or nearby properties; 
(11)  No natural rock riprap shall be placed, including associated grading of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, unless the finished slope is not greater than 3:1 (may be increased by DNR permit), the landward extent of the riprap is within ten feet of the ordinary high water level, and the height of the riprap above the ordinary high water level does not exceed three feet; and 
(12)  The provisions of City Code Chapter 4 shall apply to excavations and fills under this section. 
(e)  Connection to public waters. No excavation shall be conducted where the intended purpose is connection to public water, including boat slips, canals, lagoons, and harbors, without first obtaining a permit from the DNR. 
J.  The wetlands protection and management regulations set forth elsewhere in this chapter shall apply and compliance therewith shall be met. 
K.  Placement and design of roads, driveways, and parking area. 
1.  Public and private roads and parking areas shall be designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from view from public waters. Documentation shall be provided to the city that all roads and parking areas are designed and constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation district, or other applicable technical materials. 
2.  Roads, driveways and parking areas shall meet minimum required setbacks and shall not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when other reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives exist, they may be placed within these areas, provided they are constructed in a manner to minimize adverse impacts as determined by the city. 
3.  Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and access-related parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones provided the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this subparagraph are met. For private facilities, the grading and filling provisions of this subdivision shall be met. 
L.  Stormwater management. All developments shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  When possible, existing natural drainageways, wetlands, and vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter, and retain stormwater runoff before discharge to public waters. 
2.  Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities and erosion potential that will reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods must be used to retain sediment on the site. 
3.  When development density, topographic features, and soil and vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities, including diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, waterways, and ponds, shall be utilized. Stormwater management measures using surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration shall be used rather than buried pipes and manmade materials and facilities when practical and reasonably possible. Settling basins to intercept and treat urban runoff shall, at a minimum, be sized to meet Nationwide Urban Runoff Program (NURP) criteria. 
4.  Impervious surface coverage of lots must not exceed 25 percent of the lot. This may be increased provided the city has approved and implemented a community-wide stormwater management plan affecting the subject site, granted a conditional use permit permitting an increase in impervious coverage, and required the necessary water quality mitigation features to meet non-degradation standards for phosphorous for the nearest downstream recreational water body identified in the Eagan Water Quality Management Plan. 
5.  When constructed facilities are used for stormwater management, a document from a duly qualified individual shall be filed with the city. The document shall state that the constructed facilities are designed and installed consistent with the field office technical guide of the local soil and water conservation district. 
6.  New constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters must provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris before discharge. 
M.  Special provisions for public/semipublic, agricultural, forestry and extractive uses. 
1.  Any surface-water-oriented uses and public or semipublic uses when permitted by Code which have need for access to and use of public waters may be located on parcels or lots with public waters frontage. Uses with water-oriented needs located on parcels or lots with public waters frontage shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas and structures shall be constructed and maintained; 
(b)  No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs shall be placed in or upon public waters. The city may install and maintain signs conveying information or safety messages; 
(c)  No outside lighting shall be located within the shore impact zone or over public waters unless it is used primarily to illuminate potential safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent direct illumination out across public waters. This does not preclude use of navigational lights; and 
(d)  Commercial uses such as boat rides, on-board vendors or similar uses shall be prohibited. 
(e)  Any uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons shall be centralized and constructed in a manner to avoid obstructions to navigation and the least size reasonably necessary to meet the need; except uses without water-oriented needs unless such uses are set back double the normal ordinary high water level setback or substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography. 
2.  Agriculture use standards. 
(a)  In all lake and river shoreland areas, general cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones are maintained in permanent vegetation or managed under an approved conservation plan (resource management systems) consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation districts of the United States Soil Conservation Service (as provided by a qualified individual or agency). The shore impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land uses is equal to a line parallel to and 50 feet from the ordinary high water level. 
(b)  Animal feedlot and grazing operations shall be prohibited. 
3.  Forest management standards. The harvesting of timber and associated reforestation shall be conducted consistent with the provisions of the Minnesota Nonpoint Source Pollution Assessment-Forestry and the provisions of Water Quality in Forest Management Best Management Practices in Minnesota. 
4.  Extractive use standards. 
(a)  Site development and restoration plan. No extractive uses shall be conducted without first obtaining approval by the city. An extractive use site development and restoration plan shall be approved and followed over the course of operation of the site. The plan shall address dust, noise, possible pollutant discharges, hours and duration of operation, and anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations and identify actions to be taken to mitigate adverse environmental impact, and erosion, and to rehabilitate the site after extractive activities end. 
(b)  Setbacks for processing machinery. Processing machinery shall be located consistent with setback standards for structures from ordinary high water levels of public waters and from bluffs. 
5.  Mining of metallic minerals and peat standards. Mining of metallic minerals and peat may be a permitted use in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Stat. §§ 93.44—93.51. 
N.  Conditional uses. The provisions of this chapter regarding conditional use permits shall apply to all conditional uses with shoreland area, in addition to the following: 
1.  Site evaluation required. Prior to the issuance of any permit hereunder, an evaluation of the water body and the topographic, vegetation, and soil conditions on the site shall be made to ensure: 
(a)  The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of public waters, both during and after construction; 
(b)  The least visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed from public waters; 
(c)  The site is adequate for water supply and on-site sewage treatment and public utilities are utilized when available; and 
(d)  The types, uses, and number of watercraft that the project will generate are compatible in relation to the suitability of public waters to safely accommodate these watercraft. 
2.  Conditions of conditional use permits. The city council, upon consideration of the findings of the evaluation conducted pursuant to item 1, above, and the intent and purposes of this section, may issue a conditional use permit hereunder subject to, but not limited to, the following conditions: 
(a)  Increased setbacks from the ordinary high water level; 
(b)  Limitations on the natural vegetation to be removed or the requirement that additional vegetation be planted; and 
(c)  Special provisions for the location, design, and use of structures, sewage treatment systems, watercraft launching and docking areas, and vehicle parking areas. 
O.  Water supply and sewage treatment. 
1.  Water supply. Any public or private supply of water for residential purposes shall meet or exceed the state department of health, county and the state pollution control agency standards for water quality. 
2.  Sewage treatment. 
(a)  All private sewage treatment systems shall meet or exceed the state pollution control agency's standards for individual sewage treatment systems contained in the document titled, "Individual Sewage Treatment Systems Standards, Chapter 7080," a copy of which is hereby adopted by the city by reference and incorporated as a part of the City Code. 
(b)  All sewage shall be connected to public systems when available. 
(c)  All on-site sewage treatment systems shall comply with the setback requirements provided in subdivision 11 of this section. 
(d)  An evaluation to determine all proposed sites suitable for individual sewage treatment systems shall be made upon consideration of the following: 
(1)  Depth to the highest known or calculated ground water table or bedrock; 
(2)  Soil conditions, properties, and permeability; 
(3)  Slope; and 
(4)  The existence of lowlands, local surface depressions, and rock outcrops. 
(5)  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide sufficient information, through either public documents or field investigations, in order for the foregoing considerations to be addressed. 
(e)  Nonconforming sewage treatment systems shall be regulated and upgraded in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  A sewage treatment system not meeting the requirements of this subdivision must be upgraded, at a minimum, at any time a permit or variance of any type is required for any improvement on or use of the property. For the purposes of this provision, a sewage treatment system shall not be considered nonconforming if the only deficiency is the sewage treatment system's improper setback from the ordinary high water level. 
(2)  The city will require upgrading or replacement of any nonconforming system identified by this program within five years. Any sewer system installed according to applicable local shoreland management standards adopted under Minn. Stat. §§ 103F.201, 103F.205, 103F.211, 103F.215 and 103F.221 and amendments thereto, in effect at the time of installation, may be considered as conforming unless they are determined to be failing, except that systems using cesspools, leaching pits, seepage pits, or other deep disposal methods or systems with less soil treatment area separation above groundwater than required by the state pollution control agency's chapter 7080 for design of on-site sewage treatment systems shall be considered nonconforming. 
(f)  All on-site sewage treatment systems shall comply with regulations in the City Code. 
P.  Subdivision provisions. 
1.  Land suitability. No preliminary plat shall be approved unless each lot, created through subdivision, including planned unit developments, is suitable in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration. In determining whether a lot is suitable by the city, the city shall consider the following: 
(a)  Susceptibility to flooding; 
(b)  Existence of wetlands; 
(c)  Soil and rock formations with severe limitations for development; 
(d)  Severe erosion potential; 
(e)  Steep topography; 
(f)  Inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities; 
(g)  Nearshore aquatic conditions unsuitable for water-based recreation; 
(h)  Important fish and wildlife habitat; 
(i)  Presence of significant historic sites; and 
(j)  Any other feature of the natural land likely to be harmful to the health, or welfare of the city. 
2.  Consistency with other controls. Subdivisions must conform to all City Code regulations. A preliminary plat shall not be approved when a later variance from one or more standards in official controls would be needed to use the lots for their intended purpose, when areas are not served by publicly owned sewer and water systems, a domestic water supply is not available or a sewage treatment system consistent with City Code is not provided for every lot. Each lot shall meet the minimum lot size and dimensional requirements, contiguous lawn area requirements that are free of limiting factors sufficient for the construction of two standard soil treatment systems where private sewage systems are permitted. Preliminary plat lots that would require use of holding tanks shall not be approved. 
Subd. 10.  Planned development (cluster developments). 
A.  Types of planned developments permitted. No planned developments (PDs) shall be permitted, except for new projects on undeveloped land, redevelopment of previously built sites, or conversions of existing buildings and land in exclusively planned development and zoning districts as classified in subdivision 7 of this section and on the official zoning map of the city. 
B.  Application for planned development. 
1.  Planned development uses shall comply with the regulations applicable in the planned development zoning district as provided in this chapter. 
2.  Any application for a planned development use in a shoreland zone shall provide the following information, in addition to the information required under Minnesota Statutes and section 11.50 of this chapter: 
(a)  Surface water features; 
(b)  Existing and proposed vegetative detail; 
(c)  Deed restrictions, covenants, or owners' association bylaws; 
(d)  Details of water-oriented uses; 
(e)  Longterm plans for preservation and maintenance of open space; 
(f)  Two-foot integral contours; 
(g)  Other information deemed necessary by the city council. 
C.  Public utilities. Public utilities, including municipal sanitary sewer and water, shall be utilized for all planned development and planned development uses (PD) in the city. 
D.  Site evaluation. Prior to the issuance of any permit under this subdivision, an evaluation of the site's suitable area, density, maintenance and design, open area, erosion, stormwater management plan, facilities, centralization, design plan and conversion shall be made in accordance with the following standards and procedures: 
1.  Site suitable area. A site's suitable area shall be evaluated using the following procedures and standards: 
(a)  Shoreland tier dimensions. The project parcel shall be divided into tiers by locating one or more lines approximately parallel to a line that identifies the ordinary high water level at the following intervals, proceeding landward: 
Type of Lake 	Sewered 
(feet) 
General development lakes, first tier 
(riparian) 	200 
General development lakes, second and additional tiers 	200 
Recreational development lakes 	267 
Natural environment lakes 	320 
 
(b)  Suitable area calculation. The suitable area within each tier is calculated by excluding from the tier area all wetlands, bluffs, or land below the ordinary high water level of public waters. This suitable area and the proposed project are then subjected to either the residential or commercial planned unit development density evaluation steps to arrive at an allowable number of dwelling units or sites. 
E.  Residential and commercial planned development use. The procedures for determining the base density of a planned development and density increase multipliers are as follows: 
1.  Residential planned development base density evaluation. The suitable area within each tier is divided by the minimum single residential lot size standard for lakes to determine the maximum permitted density. Proposed locations and number of dwelling units or sites for residential planned developments are then compared with the tier, density, and suitability analyses herein and the design criteria in subparagraph G, below. 
2.  Commercial planned development base density evaluation. 
(a)  Determine the average inside living area size of dwelling units or sites within each tier, including both existing and proposed units and sites. Computation of inside living area sizes shall not include decks, patios, stoops, steps, garages, or porches and basements, unless they are habitable space. 
(b)  Select the appropriate floor area ratio from the following table: 
COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT FLOOR AREA 
RATIOS PUBLIC WATERS CLASSES 
Average Unit Floor Area 
(sq. ft.) 	General 
Development 
Lakes 	Recreational 
Development 
Lakes 	Natural 
Environmental 
Lakes 
200 	0.056 	0.028 	0.014 
300 	0.065 	0.032 	0.016 
400 	0.056 	0.028 	0.014 
500 	0.065 	0.032 	0.016 
600 	0.072 	0.038 	0.019 
700 	0.082 	0.042 	0.021 
800 	0.091 	0.046 	0.023 
900 	0.099 	0.050 	0.025 
1,000 	0.108 	0.054 	0.027 
1,100 	0.116 	0.058 	0.029 
1,200 	0.125 	0.064 	0.032 
1,300 	0.133 	0.068 	0.034 
1,400 	0.142 	0.072 	0.036 
1,500 and above 	0.150 	0.075 	0.038 
 
(c)  Multiply the suitable area within each tier by the floor area ratio to yield total floor area for each tier allowed to be used for dwelling units or sites. 
(d)  Divide the total floor area by tier, computed in item 2 above, by the average inside living area size determined in item 1 above, to determine a base number of dwelling units and sites for each tier. 
(e)  Allowable densities may be transferred from any tier to any other tier further from the water body, but shall not be transferred to any other tier closer. 
3.  Proposed locations and number of dwelling units or sites for the commercial planned development are then compared with the tier, density and suitability analyses herein and the design criteria as provided in this division. 
F.  Density increase multipliers. 
1.  Increases to the dwelling unit or dwelling site base densities previously determined are allowable if the dimensional standards in this section are met or exceeded and the design criteria in subparagraph G below are satisfied. The allowable density increases in item 2, below, will only be allowed if structure setbacks from the ordinary high water level are increased to at least 50 percent greater than the minimum setback, or the impact on the water body is reduced an equivalent amount through vegetative management, topography, or additional means acceptable to the city and the setback is at least 25 percent greater than the minimum setback. 
2.  Allowable dwelling unit or dwelling site density increases for residential or commercial planned unit developments: 
Density Evaluation Tiers 	Maximum Density Increase Within Each Tier 
(Percent) 
First 	50 
Second 	100 
Third 	200 
Fourth 	200 
Fifth 	200 
 
G.  Maintenance and design criteria. 
1.  Before final approval of a planned development, adequate provisions shall be developed for preservation and maintenance in perpetuity of open spaces and for the continued existence and functioning of the development. 
2.  Open space preservation. Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other equally effective and permanent means shall be provided to ensure longterm preservation and maintenance of open space. The instruments shall include all of the following protection: 
(a)  Commercial uses prohibited (for residential PDs). 
(b)  Vegetation and topographic alterations shall be prohibited except by routine maintenance. 
(c)  Construction of additional buildings or storage of vehicles and other materials shall be prohibited. 
(d)  Uncontrolled beaching of watercraft shall be prohibited. 
3.  Development organization and functioning. Unless an equally effective alternative community framework is established, when applicable, all residential planned developments shall use an owners' association with the following features: 
(a)  Membership shall be mandatory for each dwelling unit or site purchases and any successive purchasers; 
(b)  Each member shall pay a pro rata share of the association's expenses, and unpaid assessments shall become liens on units or sites; 
(c)  Assessments shall be adjustable to accommodate changing conditions; and 
(d)  The association shall be responsible for insurance, taxes, and maintenance of all commonly owned property and facilities. 
H.  Open space standards. Planned developments shall contain open space meeting all of the following standards: 
1.  At least 50 percent of the total project area shall be preserved as open space; 
2.  Dwelling units or sites, road rights-of-way, or land covered by road surfaces, parking areas, or structures, except water-oriented accessory structures or facilities, are developed areas and shall not be included in the computation of minimum open space; 
3.  Open space shall include areas with physical characteristics unsuitable for development in their natural state, and areas containing significant historic sites or unplatted cemeteries; 
4.  Open space may include outdoor recreational facilities for use by owners of dwelling units or sites, by guests staying in commercial dwelling units or sites, and by the general public; 
5.  Open space shall not include commercial facilities or uses, but may contain water-oriented accessory structures or facilities; 
6.  The appearance of open space areas, including topography, vegetation, and allowable uses, shall be preserved by use of restrictive deed covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance, or other equally effective and permanent means; and 
7.  The shore impact zone, based on normal structure setbacks, shall be included as open space. For residential PDs, at least 50 percent of the shore impact zone area of existing developments or at least 70 percent of the shore impact zone area of new developments shall be preserved in its natural state. For commercial planned developments, at least 50 percent of the shore impact zone must be preserved in its natural state. 
I.  Erosion control and stormwater management. Erosion control and stormwater management plans shall be developed and the PD shall: 
1.  Be designed and the construction managed to minimize the likelihood of serious erosion occurring either during or after construction. This shall be accomplished by limiting the amount and length of time of bare ground exposure. Temporary ground covers, sediment entrapment facilities, vegetated buffer strips, or other appropriate techniques shall be used to minimize erosion impacts on surface water features. Erosion control plans approved by the soil and water conservation district may be required if project size and site physical characteristics warrant; and 
2.  Be designed and constructed to effectively manage reasonably expected quantities and qualities of stormwater runoff. Impervious surface coverage within any tier shall not exceed 25 percent of the tier area, except that for commercial PDs increased impervious surface coverage may be allowed in the first tier of general development lakes with an approved stormwater management plan and consistency with this section. 
J.  Centralization and design of facilities. Centralization and design of facilities and structures shall be done in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Planned developments shall be connected to publicly owned (municipal) water supply and sewer systems if available; 
2.  Dwelling units or sites shall be clustered into one or more groups and located on suitable areas of the development. They shall be designed and located to meet or exceed the following dimensional standards for the relevant shoreland classification: setback from the ordinary high water level, elevation above the surface water features, and maximum height. Setbacks from the ordinary high water level shall be increased in accordance with this subparagraph for developments with density increases; 
3.  Shore recreation facilities, including but not limited to swimming areas, docks, and watercraft mooring areas and launching ramps, shall be centralized and located in suitable areas. Evaluation of suitability shall include consideration of land slope, water depth, vegetation, soils, depth to groundwater and bedrock, or relevant factors. The number of spaces provided for continuous beaching, mooring, or docking of watercraft shall not exceed one for each allowable dwelling unit or site in the first tier. Launching ramp facilities, including a small dock for loading and unloading equipment, may be provided for use by occupants of dwelling units or sites located in other tiers; 
4.  Structures, parking areas, and other facilities shall be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color, or other means acceptable to the city, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions. Vegetative and topographic screening shall be preserved, if existing, or may be required to be provided; 
5.  Accessory structures and facilities, except water-oriented accessory structures, shall meet the required principal structure setback and shall be centralized; and 
6.  Water-oriented accessory structures and facilities may be allowed if they meet or exceed design standards provided in this subdivision and are centralized. 
K.  Conversions. The city shall not permit existing land uses and facilities to be converted to residential planned developments. 
L.  Existing unit conditions. Existing dwelling unit or dwelling site densities that exceed standards in this subdivision may be allowed to continue but shall not be allowed to be increased. 
Subd. 11.  Nonconformities. Nonconformities, as of the effective date of this section, may continue, but shall be administered according to applicable state statutes and other regulations of the city for future alterations and additions, repair or replacement after damage, discontinuance of use, and intensification of use, except that the following standards shall also apply in shoreland areas: 
A.  Construction on nonconforming lots of record. 
1.  Lots of record in the office of the county recorder on the effective date of local shoreland controls that do not meet the requirements of subdivision 8 of this section may be allowed as building sites without variances from dimensional requirements, provided the use is permitted in the zoning district, the lot has been in separate ownership from abutting lands at all times since it became nonconforming, the lot was in compliance with official shoreland controls in effect at the time it was created, and the lot meets all sewage treatment and setback requirements of this section are met. 
2.  A variance from setback requirements must be obtained before any use, sewage treatment system, or building permit is issued for a lot. In evaluating the variance, the board of adjustment shall consider sewage treatment and water supply capabilities or constraints of the lot and shall deny the variance if adequate facilities cannot be provided. 
3.  If, in a group of two or more contiguous lots under the same ownership, any individual lot does not meet the shoreland dimensional requirements of this section, then the lot shall not be considered as a separate parcel of land for the purposes of sale or development. The lot must be combined with the one or more contiguous lots so they equal one or more parcels of land, each meeting the shoreland dimensional requirements of this section as reasonably possible. 
B.  Additions/expansions to nonconforming structures. 
1.  Any additions, enlargements or expansion to the outside dimensions of an existing nonconforming structure shall meet the setback, height, and other dimensional requirements of this section. Any deviation from these requirements shall be authorized by a variance as provided in this section. 
2.  Deck additions may be allowed without a variance to a structure not meeting the required setback from the ordinary high water level if all of the following requirements are met: 
(a)  The structure existed on the date the structure setbacks were established; 
(b)  A thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals no reasonable location for a deck which would meet or exceed the existing ordinary high water level setback of the structure; 
(c)  The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level does not exceed 15 percent of the existing setback of the structure from the ordinary high water level or does not encroach closer than 30 feet, whichever is more restrictive; and 
(d)  The deck is constructed primarily of wood, and is not roofed or screened. 
C.  Nonconforming sewage treatment systems shall conform to the sewage treatment system regulations as provided in this section. 
D.  Public utility connections. Any new commercial or residential development permitted in any shoreland district where available shall be connected to the public utilities. 
(Ord. No. 366, 2nd series, eff. 10-7-03; Ord. No. 414, 2nd series, § 3, eff. 7-28-07; Ord. No. 338, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-4-08; Ord. No. 452, 2nd series, § 8, eff. 2-16-10)  
Sec. 11.66. - Floodplain Overlay Districts: Floodway District (FW) and Flood Fringe District (FF). 
Subd. 1.  Finding of facts and purposes. 
A.  A portion of the lands within the regulating jurisdiction of the city is subject to recurrent flooding by overflow of rivers and other watercourses causing a hazard to life and property, disruption of commerce and governmental services and the interruption of transportation and communications, all of which are found by the council to be detrimental to the health, safety, welfare and property of residents of the city. 
B.  It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by minimizing the losses described in subparagraph A above. 
C.  Statutory authorization. The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in Minn. Stat. chs. 103F and 462, delegated the authority to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Minn. Stat. ch. 103F further provides that communities subject to recurrent flooding must participate and maintain eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
D.  Statement of purpose. The purpose of this section is to maintain the city's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program and to minimize potential losses due to periodic flooding including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
E.  Warning of disclaimer of liability. This section does not imply that areas outside of the floodplain district or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding and flood damages. This section shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this section or any administrative decisions lawfully made thereunder. 
Subd. 2.  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
Accessory use or structure means a use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure. 
Basement means any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or base sub-grade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level. 
Equal degree of encroachment means a method of determining the location of floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows. 
Flood fringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" as used in the Flood Insurance Study for Dakota County, Minnesota and Incorporated Areas. 
Floodplain means the area(s) adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse which have been or may be covered by the 100-year regional flood. For purposes of land within the city, floodplain shall consist of the floodway and the flood fringe areas delineated on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) panels adopted herein. 
Floodproofing means a combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages. 
Floodway means the bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and those portions of the adjoining land which are reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include the term "recreational vehicle." 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. For the purposes of this section, the term recreational vehicle shall be synonymous with the term travel trailer/travel vehicle. 
Regulatory flood protection elevation means a point not less than one foot above the water surface profile associated with the regional flood plus any increases in the flood heights attributable to encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway. It is the elevation to which uses regulated by this section are required to be elevated or floodproofed. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, recreational vehicles not meeting the exemption provisions of this section and other similar items. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means within any consecutive 365-day period, any reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(a)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(b)  Any alteration of an "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic structure." For the purpose of this section, "historic structure" shall be as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59.1. 
Subd. 3.  General provisions. 
A.  Adoption of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. The National Flood Insurance Program regulations as codified in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 59 to 78, and any amendments thereto established and adopted hereafter from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference as though set forth verbatim herein. 
B.  Adoption of flood insurance study and flood insurance rate maps. The Flood Insurance Study for Dakota County, Minnesota and Incorporated Areas, the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Dakota County, Minnesota and Incorporated Areas with Panel Nos. 27037C0080E, 27037C0081E and 27037C0090E, and the Flood Insurance Rate Map Index for Dakota County, Minnesota and Incorporated Areas (Map Number 27037CIND4A), with all of the aforementioned documents having an effective date of December 2, 2011, and being developed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, are hereby adopted by reference as the official floodplain zoning district map and made a part of this section. The official floodplain zoning district map shall be on file in offices of the city clerk and the city planner. 
C.  Lands to which floodplain regulations apply. Regulations in this section shall apply to all lands designated on the FIRM adopted in this section as floodplain within the jurisdiction of the city. 
D.  Map interpretation. The boundaries of the floodplain district shall be determined by scaling distances on the official floodplain district map. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the floodplain district, the city shall make the necessary interpretations based on the ground elevations that existed on the site at the time the city initially enacted floodplain regulations in this Code or the date of the first National Flood Insurance Program map that delineated or identified a floodplain on the site, whichever is earlier, and on the regional (100-year) flood profile, if available. 
E.  Relationship to other city zoning regulations. The floodplain zoning districts shall be considered an overlay zoning district to all existing land use regulations of the city. The permitted and conditional uses set forth in this section shall be permitted only if the use is a permitted or conditional use in the established, underlying zoning district as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. The requirements of this section shall apply in addition to other legally established regulations of the city and where the floodplain regulations contained in this section impose greater restrictions, the provisions of the floodplain regulation shall apply. 
F.  Compliance. No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located, enlarged or extended, converted, repaired, maintained, constructed or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this section. Within the floodplain, all uses not listed as a permitted use or a conditional use in this section shall be prohibited. In addition: 
1.  Modifications, repair and maintenance, additions, structural alterations or repair after substantial damage to existing legal, nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the general provisions of this section and specifically the nonconforming structures and uses regulations in this chapter; and 
2.  As-built elevations for elevated or floodproofed structures must be certified by ground surveys as provided in this section. Floodproofing techniques must be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as specified in this section. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be unlawful and constitute a violation of this chapter. Each day that a violation of this section exists constitutes and shall be deemed as a separate violation of this section and this chapter. 
G.  Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this section to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this section imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this section shall apply. 
H.  Annexations. The flood insurance rate map panels adopted by reference hereinabove may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the jurisdiction of the city at the time of adoption of this section, as amended. If any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the city after the date of adoption of this section, as amended, the newly annexed floodplain lands shall be subject to the provisions of this section immediately upon the date of annexation into the city. 
I.  Permit requirements . 
1.  No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair (including normal maintenance and repair), improve, move, remodel or rehabilitate, or demolish any building or structure without first obtaining a separate permit for each building or structure from the protective inspection department. This provision applies to any such construction upon a nonconforming structure or any structure damaged by flood, fire, tornado, winds, or any other source. 
2.  No man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the construction of a dam, fence, or on-site septic system, the placement of fill, excavation of materials or the storage of materials or equipment within the floodplain shall be commenced until a permit has been obtained from the protective inspection department for each change. 
3.  No manufactured home shall be placed on improved or unimproved real estate within a floodway and no manufactured home shall be placed on improved or unimproved real estate within a flood fringe without first obtaining a permit for each manufactured home from the protective inspection department. 
4.  To obtain a permit, the applicant shall make application, pursuant to the building/construction regulations in this Code, to the protective inspection department. No construction or other activity as identified above in this paragraph may commence until after such time that the permit has been issued, subject to the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
5.  The city's chief building official is appointed as the person responsible for receiving applications and examining the plans and specifications for the proposed construction, and the city planner is appointed as the person responsible for receiving applications and examining the plans and specifications for a proposed development or subdivision to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations adopted herein. 
6.  After reviewing the application, the responsible persons may require any additional measures, which are necessary to meet the minimum requirements of this chapter. 
7.  The responsible persons shall review proposed construction, development or subdivisions to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal, state or local laws and this Code. 
8.  The city planner shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the commissioner of the department of natural resources prior to the city authorizing any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work in the beds of public waters pursuant to Minn. Stat. ch. 103G, this shall suffice as adequate notice to the commissioner of natural resources. A copy of said notification shall also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
9.  As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date such supporting information becomes available concerning physical changes that increase or decrease the 100-year flood elevation, the city planner shall notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy of said technical or scientific data. 
Subd. 4.  Districts : 
A.  Floodway district. The floodway district shall include those areas designated as floodway on the flood insurance rate map as adopted herein. 
B.  Flood fringe district . The flood fringe district shall include those areas designated as floodway fringe on the flood insurance rate map as adopted herein, as being within zone AE but being located outside of the floodway. 
Subd. 5.  Floodway district (FW) and flood fringe district (FF). 
A.  Floodway district (FW) permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted uses within the floodway district (FW), provided they are not prohibited by any other Code provision and comply with the standards for floodway permitted uses set forth herein: 
1.  Agricultural uses not involving a structure, such as: general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting. 
2.  Any use of land which does not involve a structure, an addition to the outside dimensions to an existing structure or an obstruction or alteration to flood flows such as fill, excavation, or storage of materials or equipment. 
3.  Loading areas and parking areas for industrial and commercial uses. 
4.  Private and public recreational uses not involving a structure, such as: tennis courts, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, hunting and fishing areas, and hiking and horseback riding trails. 
5.  Residential uses not involving a structure, such as: lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas. 
6.  Outdoor storage of recreational vehicle provided it meets the exception criteria as set forth in clause J.4.(d) of this subdivision and is otherwise permitted by the underlying zoning district. 
B.  Floodway conditional uses. The following uses shall only be permitted by conditional use permit within the floodway of the floodplain district (FP), provided they are not prohibited by any other Code provisions and comply with the standards for floodway conditional uses herein: 
1.  Structures accessory to the permitted uses within the floodway and conditional uses set forth in this paragraph. 
2.  Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials. 
3.  Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water control structures. 
4.  Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and pipelines. 
5.  Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials. 
6.  Placement of fill or construction of fences. 
7.  Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the ten-year frequency flood event. 
C.  Standards for floodway permitted uses: 
1.  The use shall have a low-flood damage potential. 
2.  The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of materials or equipment. 
D.  Standards for conditional uses: 
1.  All uses. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill for roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or equipment, or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause any increase in the stage of the 100-year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected. 
2.  All floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the procedures and standards for conditional use permits set forth in this chapter. 
3.  Land excavation or disturbance. 
(a)  Fill, dredge spoil, and all other similar materials deposited or stored in the floodplain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method. 
(b)  Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be allowed in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan is submitted which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the plan. 
(c)  Dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow temporary, on-site storage of fill or other materials which would have caused an increase to the stage of the 100-year or regional flood but only after the city council has approved a plan which assures the removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time available. 
4.  Accessory structures: 
(a)  Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation. 
(b)  Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to be the least obstructive to the flow of flood waters and: 
(1)  Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and 
(2)  So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures. 
(c)  Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally dry floodproofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 floodproofing classifications in the state building code. As an alternative, an accessory structure may be floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 floodproofing classification in the state building code provided the accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square feet in size at its largest projection, and for a detached garage, the detached garage must be used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage. All floodproofed accessory structures must meet the following additional standards: 
(1)  The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls; 
(2)  Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly floodproofed; and 
(3)  To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be a minimum of two "automatic" openings in the outside walls of the structure having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There must be openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy this requirement for automatic openings. 
5.  Storage of materials and equipment: 
(a)  The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited. 
(b)  Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the city council. 
6.  Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or cross section of protected wetlands or public waters shall be subject to the provisions of Minn. Stat. ch. 103G. Community-wide structural works for flood control intended to remove areas from the regulatory floodplain shall not be allowed in the floodway. 
7.  A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway shall not cause an increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream. 
E.  Floodway district prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in the floodway district (FW): 
1.  The placement of new or used principal buildings or structures in the floodway area, including residential structures. New residential subdivisions are also prohibited. 
2.  Recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds shall not be permitted. 
3.  Manufactured homes shall not be permitted. 
F.  Flood fringe (FF) district permitted uses. Any use permitted pursuant to the underlying zoning district is a permitted use within the flood fringe portion of the floodplain district, subject to the standards for flood fringe uses set forth herein. 
G.  Standards for flood fringe district permitted uses : 
1.  All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on fill so that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for structures shall be no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation and the fill shall extend at such elevation at least 15 feet beyond the outside limits of the structure erected thereon. 
2.  As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures that do not exceed 500 square feet at its largest projection may be floodproofed in accordance with the accessory structure requirements under the standards for floodway conditional uses herein. 
3.  The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
H.  Flood fringe district conditional uses. Any structure or use that does not comply with the standards for flood fringe permitted uses shall only be permitted by a conditional use permit, provided it is permitted pursuant to the underlying zoning district and comply with all standards applicable to flood fringe uses set forth herein. 
I.  Standards for flood fringe conditional uses. 
1.  Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be utilized to elevate a structure's lowest floor above the regulatory flood protection elevation, subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  Design and certification. The structure's design and as-built condition must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as being in compliance with the general design standards of the state building code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities must be at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or be designed to prevent flood water from entering or accumulating within these components during times of flooding. 
(b)  Specific standards for above-grade enclosed areas. Above-grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages must be designed to internally flood and the design plans must comply with the following: 
(1)  There shall be a minimum of two openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. The automatic openings shall have a minimum net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding unless a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that a smaller net area would suffice. The automatic openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters without any form of human intervention; and 
(2)  The enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the state building code and shall be used solely for building access, parking of vehicles or storage. 
Alternative elevation methods may include the use of stilts, pilings, parallel walls, etc., or above-grade, enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be considered above-grade and not a structure's basement or lowest floor if: 1) the enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of the structure; 2) it is designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood resistant materials; and 3) it is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. 
2.  Basements shall be subject to the following: 
(a)  A residential basement is prohibited if any part of the basement is constructed below the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
(b)  A non-residential structure of which any part thereof is constructed below the regulatory flood protection elevation is permitted, provided the structure is structurally dry floodproofed in accordance [with] the FP-1 or FP-2 floodproofing classification in the state building code, making the structure watertight with the walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. Structures floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not be permitted. 
3.  Storage of materials and equipment: 
(a)  The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited. 
(b)  Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the governing body. 
J.  Standards for all flood fringe district uses . 
1.  All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the variance shall be subject to a condition that specifies limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate flood warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist. 
2.  In industrial and commercial use zones, accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks, and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation provided the property has an operational flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be inundated to a depth and velocity such that when multiplying the depth (in feet) times velocity (in feet per second) the product number exceeds four upon occurrence of the regional flood. 
3.  Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method in accordance with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) criteria for specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested. 
4.  Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles: 
(a)  Manufactured home parks shall be permitted only if permitted in the underlying zoning district and shall be subject to consideration of all the standards for flood fringe uses. 
(b)  The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are located in floodplain districts will be treated as a "new structure" and shall be subject to all standards applicable to permitted and conditional flood fringe standards set forth herein. If vehicular road access for pre-existing manufactured home parks is not in accordance with the provisions herein, then replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed until the property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan and warning system acceptable to the city. 
(c)  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(d)  Recreational vehicles shall not be permitted except for purposes of storage while not in use, provided: 
(1)  It has current licenses required for highway use. 
(2)  It is highway ready which shall mean on wheels or the internal jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks and has no permanent structural type additions attached to it. 
(3)  It is permitted under the underlying zoning district. 
Recreational vehicles that would be otherwise exempt from this section as listed above are not exempt when development occurs on the parcel exceeding $500.00 for a structural addition to the recreational vehicle or exceeding $500.00 for an accessory structure such as a garage or storage building. The recreational vehicle and all additions and accessory structures will then be treated as a new structure and shall be subject to the elevation/floodproofing requirements and the use of land restrictions specified in this section. There shall be no development or improvement on the parcel or attachment to the recreational vehicle that hinders the removal of the recreational vehicle to a flood free location should flooding occur. 
5.  Floodplain developments shall not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse or drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment limit has not been specified on the official floodplain zoning district map. 
Subd. 6.  Floodplain evaluation procedure. 
A.  Site evaluation. Upon receipt of an application for a building permit, conditional use permit, variance, or a new development, use or subdivision approval within the floodplain district, the city shall require the applicant to furnish sufficient site development plans. Floodway and flood fringe delineations and 100-year flood elevations that are provided in the flood insurance study and flood insurance rate map panels adopted in subdivision 3.B of this section must be utilized for making floodway and flood fringe boundary and regulatory flood protection elevation determinations 
under this section. Procedures consistent with Minnesota Rules (Technical Standards and Requirements for Floodplain Evaluation and Minimum Floodplain Management Standards for Local Ordinances) shall be followed during the technical evaluation and review of the development proposal. 
B.  Notification to DNR. The city shall submit one copy of all information required by subdivision 6.A of this section to the department of natural resources' area hydrologist for review and comment at least ten days prior to the granting of a conditional use permit, variance or zoning amendment, and at least 20 days prior to the granting of a subdivision approval by the city. The city shall notify the department of natural resources' area hydrologist within ten days after a conditional use permit, variance, subdivision or manufactured park development/subdivision is approved by the city. The city shall also provide notice to the commissioner of the department of natural resources no less than ten days prior to a hearing on the application for a conditional use permit, variance, or subdivision, if a hearing is required. 
C.  Certification of lowest floor elevations. Lowest floor elevation shall not be permitted below the regulatory flood protection elevation unless the structure is floodproofed in accordance with the provisions of this section. The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this section. The community development director or project planner shall maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) for all alterations or additions, to existing structures in the floodplain district. 
Subd. 7.  Special provisions for floodplain variances. 
A.  For floodplain regulation purposes, a variance means a modification of a specific permitted development standard required in an official control, including this section, to allow an alternative development standard not stated as acceptable in the official control, but only as applied to a particular property for the purpose of alleviating a hardship, practical difficulty or unique circumstance as defined and elaborated upon in the city's zoning provisions. 
B.  The council may authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such relief or variance from the floodplain regulations as will not be contrary to the public interest and only for those circumstances such as hardship, practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the property under consideration, as provided for in the state enabling legislation for planning and zoning for Minnesota cities. In the granting of such a variance, the council shall clearly identify in writing the specific condition that exists consistent with the criteria specified in the enabling legislation which justified the granting of the variance. The variance shall otherwise be processed in accordance with the variance regulations in this chapter. No variance shall have the effect of allowing a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection for the particular area and a variance will not be granted if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. A variance will not be granted if the proposal does not provide the least restrictive relief considering the flood hazard. 
C.  Variances shall only be granted by the city upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, a determination that the failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances. 
Subd. 8.  Subdivision of land within floodplain. 
A.  Review criteria . No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for the reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. All lots within the floodplain districts shall be of adequate size to provide area for the building site outside of the floodway district at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. All subdivisions shall have water and sewage treatment facilities that comply with the provisions of this section and road access both to the subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation. For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the floodway and flood fringe district boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the required elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents. This subdivision shall apply to the development of a manufactured home park, if otherwise permitted by the underlying zoning district regulations. 
B.  Removal of special flood hazard area designation . The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested. 
Subd. 9.  Public utilities, railroads, roads, and bridges. 
A.  Public utilities . All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the floodplain shall be floodproofed in accordance with the state building code or elevated to above the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
B.  Public transportation facilities . Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located within the floodplain shall comply with the provisions of the section. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be provided where failure or interruption of these transportation facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health or safety. 
C.  On-site individual sewage treatment and water supply systems . Where public utilities are not provided: 1) on-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and 2) new or replacement individual sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters and they shall not be subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding. Any individual sewage treatment system designed in accordance with the state's current statewide standards for individual sewage treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance with this section. 
Subd. 10.  Nonconforming uses. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this section, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this section may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Historic structures, as defined in the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, shall be subject to the provisions of [this] subdivision. 
B.  No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. 
C.  A structural alteration within the inside dimensions of a nonconforming use or structure is permissible provided it utilizes flood resistant materials in accordance with any of the floodproofing classifications (i.e., FP-1 through FP-4) allowable in the state building code so as not to result in increasing the flood damage potential of that use or structure and as further restricted in subdivision 10.D and subdivision 10.F of this section. A structural addition to a structure must be elevated on fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation or otherwise floodproofed in accordance with this section. 
D.  The cost of all structural alterations or additions to any nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure, unless the conditions of this section are satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and additions must include all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost of labor. If the cost of all previous and proposed alterations and additions exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure, then the structure must meet the standards set forth in this section for new structures. 
E.  If any nonconforming use of a structure or land or nonconforming structure is substantially damaged, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this section. The chief building official may issue a permit for reconstruction if the use is located outside the floodway and, upon reconstruction, is adequately elevated on fill or otherwise floodproofed in conformity with the provisions of this section. 
F.  If a substantial improvement is made by any combination of a building addition to the outside dimensions of the existing building or a rehabilitation, reconstruction, alteration, or other improvement to the inside dimensions of an existing nonconforming structure, then the addition and the existing nonconforming structure must meet the requirements of this section for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is in the floodway or flood fringe. 
G.  In addition to the provisions herein, all nonconforming uses within floodway and flood fringe districts shall be subject to the general zoning regulations for nonconforming structures and uses set forth elsewhere in this chapter. If any provision in this section is contrary to any provision in the general zoning regulations for nonconforming structures and uses set forth elsewhere in this chapter, the provisions in this section shall apply and control, specifically noting paragraphs D and E in this subdivision. 
Subd. 11.  Amendments to floodplain regulations. The floodplain designation on the official zoning map shall not be removed from floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the commissioner of natural resources if he/she determines that, through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use. 
All amendments to this section, including amendments to the official zoning map, must be first submitted to and approved by the commissioner of natural resources. Any amendment to the floodplain designation on the official zoning map must meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) technical conditions and criteria and must first receive FEMA approval. The commissioner of natural resources must be given ten days' written notice of all public hearings to consider an amendment to this section and said notice shall include a draft of the amendment or technical study under consideration. 
Subd. 12.  Administration. 
A.  State and federal permits . Prior to granting a permit or processing an application for a conditional use permit or variance, the zoning administrator shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal permits. 
B.  Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered, or nonconforming use . It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, altered, or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the zoning administrator stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this section. 
C.  Construction and use to be as provided on applications, plans, permits, variances and certificates of zoning compliance . Permits, conditional use permits, or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this section, and punishable as provided by this Code 
D.  Certification . The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this section. Floodproofing measures shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect. 
E.  Record of first floor elevation . The chief building official shall maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the floodplain. The chief building official shall also maintain a record of the elevation to which structures or alterations and additions to structures are floodproofed. 
F.  Flood insurance notice and record keeping . The chief building official or city planner shall notify the applicant for a variance that: 1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and 2) such construction below the 100-year or regional flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. The city shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Ord. No. 366, 2nd series, eff. 10-7-03; Ord. No. 512, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 11-7-2012)  
Sec. 11.67. - Wetlands protection and management regulations. 
Subd. 1.  Council findings and intent. 
A.  The council finds that wetlands serve a variety of beneficial functions. Wetlands maintain water quality, reduce flooding and erosion, provide food and habitat for wildlife, provide open space, and are an integral part of the city's environment. Wetlands are important physical, educational, ecological, aesthetic, recreational and economic assets to the city. They are critical to the city's stormwater management and other aspects of health, safety and general welfare. Regulating wetlands and the land uses around them is therefore in the public interest. 
B.  In order to protect wetlands, the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act of 1991 (hereinafter referred to as the WCA) and any future amendments thereto are adopted by reference as though set forth verbatim herein. Any activities exempted from the provisions of the WCA are also exempted from the requirements of this section, insofar as they relate to the WCA. The provisions of this section cover all wetlands, as defined herein and including those governed by the department of natural resources. 
Subd. 2.  Purposes and implementation. 
A.  Through the adoption and enforcement of this section, the city will promote the general health, safety, and welfare of its residents by both conserving and protecting wetlands, and requiring sound management practices and mitigation when development occurs in the vicinity of wetlands. Through the implementation of this section, the city seeks to accomplish the following: 
1.  To satisfy the requirements of the WCA and, thereby, achieve no net loss of wetlands within the city. 
2.  To streamline the city administration of the WCA by providing sequencing and varied replacement requirements based on the functional values of the wetland and resulting management classifications. 
3.  To allow appropriate usage of wetlands to preserve water quality and prevent downstream flooding. 
4.  To protect and restore wetlands adjacent to contiguous open green space. 
5.  To address potential nonpoint source impacts from future development with the establishment of wetland buffer requirements to complement existing stormwater requirements. 
6.  To enhance wildlife values of wetlands. 
7.  To identify potential wetland banking areas. 
8  Manage wetlands for their sensitivity to stormwater. 
B.  To accomplish these purposes, the city will: 
1.  Utilize and continue to complete its wetland inventory and utilize related assessment information for wetlands in Eagan. 
2.  Utilize Eagan's Water Quality and Wetland Management Plan and the provisions of this section. 
3.  Establish conservation easements over wetlands and wetland buffers that are subject to this section. 
Subd. 3.  Definitions. 
Building setback: For purposes of this section, the minimum horizontal distance between the nearest point of a building or the principal structure and the edge of the wetland buffer. 
Contiguous open green space: Interconnected natural areas that can provide adjacent upland habitat and/or provide habitat connections between wetlands that were identified and mapped in a 2002 study of Eagan's land cover by the Dakota County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Minnesota Routine Assessment Method (MNRAM): A methodology approved by Minnesota Board of Water and Soil Resources that assesses wetlands based on their ability to perform desired functions, such as improving water quality, reducing flow rates, and providing fish and wildlife habitat and that evaluates characteristics such as plant community diversity and structure, connectivity to other habitat types, location in the watershed, and a wide range of other factors. 
Native vegetation: Plants original to the Twin Cities area and not introduced as a result of settlement or subsequent human activity. 
No grade zone: The portion of the wetland buffer where no grading or wetland alteration activity is permitted. 
Plant community: An interacting assemblage of plant populations sharing a given habitat. 
Principal structure: A building or structure that is the primary/principally used structure on a lot. 
Redevelopment: The removal of the principal structure to the extent of more than 50 percent of its market value or size and (2) reconstruction on the same property. It is not considered redevelopment if construction is for less than 75 percent of a principal structure that was damaged by an involuntary force, such as fire, wind, or vandalism. 
Other structure: Any non-principal structure or piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
Wetland: Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water. Consistent with the WCA, wetlands are to be identified and delineated using the methodology set forth in the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands (Interagency Task Force on Wetland Delineation, 1987). For purposes of this definition, wetlands must have three of the following attributes: 
1.  Contain a predominance of hydric soils; 
2.  Are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; 
3.  Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such vegetation. 
This definition does not include wetlands created from uplands either: (1) for stormwater storage and management purposes or (2) by actions not intended to create the wetland and approved, permitted, funded or overseen by a public entity. 
Wetland alteration activity: Human-induced actions that alter the existing or natural condition of a wetland or wetland buffer, including grading, filling, and dredging; dumping, cutting, pruning, topping, and clearing native vegetation; and discharging pollutants (except stormwater). Wetland alteration activities do not include walking, passive recreation, fishing, planting that enhances native vegetation, activities that improve the existing or natural condition of a wetland or wetland buffer, or other similar activities allowed under the WCA. 
Wetland buffer: An undisturbed or re-established vegetated area between the wetland boundary and a line parallel to and a horizontal distance (in feet) from the wetland boundary. 
Wetland buffer width averaging: Buffer width averaging is allowed under circumstances as defined herein. It is used when a buffer width is below the buffer width minimum in one area and above the buffer width minimum in other areas to meet the total surface area of wetland buffer as required for the wetland as classified. 
Wetland boundary: The line delineating the outer edge of a wetland that shall be established according to the 1987 Corps of Engineers (COE) Wetlands Delineation Manual (Environmental Laboratory, 1987). 
Wetland functions: The natural processes performed by wetlands, including providing wildlife and fisheries habitat; facilitating primary production; maintaining the availability and quality of water, such as purifying water, acting as a recharge and discharge area for groundwater aquifers and moderating surface water and stormwater flows; improving stormwater quality; providing aesthetic benefits; as well as performing other functions, including but not limited to those set out in U.S. Army Corps of Engineers regulations 33 CFR § 320.4(b)(2). 
Wetland management classifications: 
Protect: These wetlands are valuable for protection of rare species and have high vegetation or wildlife habitat; OR they have moderate ecological quality and are important for contiguous open green space. 
Priority: These wetlands are important for contiguous open green space. 
Priority A: These wetlands have moderate ecological quality and are important for either flood storage or water quality protection. 
Manage: These wetlands are less important for flood storage, water quality protection, or contiguous open green space than the other classifications of wetlands, but have moderate ecological quality. 
Manage A: Wetlands are important for flood storage or water quality protection but have low ecological quality. 
General use: Wetlands that have been significantly altered and degraded through past disturbance. 
Wetland management plan: The chapter of the city's water quality and wetland management plan set forth in this Code. 
Subd. 4.  General provisions. 
A.  The provisions of this section shall apply to any wetland alteration activities within delineated wetlands and designated wetland buffers. In accordance with this section, wetland buffers and setbacks from wetland buffers shall be required under any of the following circumstances: 
1.  When any parcel of land with a wetland is subdivided to create a new lot or when a new principal structure is constructed on an existing vacant parcel of land; or 
2.  When redevelopment occurs on a parcel of land with a wetland; or 
3.  When any new construction or wetland alteration activity occurs on a parcel of land with a wetland. 
In determining whether any wetland alteration activities are occurring, the city will consider the following factors: 
a.  The portion of the property disturbed by the subdivision of land, the redevelopment of land, or the new construction drains to a wetland; 
b.  City land disturbance and erosion control regulations apply; or 
c.  Activity results in a net increase in impervious surfaces that drain to a wetland, or results in the relocation of impervious surfaces closer to a wetland, or results in changes to drainage patterns (slopes, meander patterns, etc.) that increase the velocity or rate of runoff to a wetland. 
B.  Any unclassified wetland shall be assigned a management classification and incorporated onto the city maps during the city's review and approval process of proposals having wetland alteration activities as provided herein. It is the responsibility of an applicant to have an existing wetland delineated by a certified wetland delineator utilizing approved methods as stated in the WCA and to assess wetland(s) utilizing the MNRAM (Version 3.0 or later version). The city shall classify wetlands delineated and assessed accordingly based on the criteria provided in the wetland management plan. 
C.  This section establishes six wetland management classifications as defined herein. 
Subd. 5.  Wetland sequencing and replacement requirements. 
This section incorporates the requirements of the WCA, with the exception of the following rules which are modified herein: 
• WCA Rules Ch. 8420.0520 Sequencing Requirements 
• WCA Rules Ch. 8420.0541 Actions Eligible for Credit 
• WCA Rules Ch. 8420.0543 Location of Replacement Wetlands 
• WCA Rules Ch. 8420.0546 Size of Replacement Wetlands 
The modifications to the above-identified WCA rules are summarized in Table 5-1 and are set forth below: 
Table 5-1 
Management Classification 	Sequencing 	Replacement Ratio 	Location 
Priority 	Supplemental Requirements 
Protect 	No impact without demonstration of significant public benefit 	3:1 	1st On site 2nd Within City 	Replace lost plant & wildlife habitat functions and values. Replace lost contiguous open green space linkages and functions 
Priority 	No impact without demonstration of significant public benefit 	Meet WCA Rules 	1st On Site 2nd Within City 	Replace lost contiguous open green space linkages and functions 
Priority A 	WCA sequencing requirements apply 	Meet WCA Rules 	Meet WCA Rules 	Replace lost functions for nutrient removal and stormwater storage. Replace lost contiguous open green space linkages 
Manage 	WCA sequencing requirements apply 	Meet WCA Rules 	Meet WCA Rules 	Replace lost plant diversity and wildlife functions and values 
Manage A 	WCA sequencing requirements apply 	Meet WCA Rules 	Meet WCA Rules 	Replace lost functions for nutrient removal stormwater storage 
General Use 	WCA sequencing requirements apply 	Meet WCA Rules 	Meet WCA Rules 	Meet WCA Rules 
 
A.  Sequencing requirements (WCA Rules Ch. 8420.0520). 
1.  The city will strictly enforce avoidance of impacts to protected and priority wetlands. The city may allow impacts to protect and priority wetlands only if there is demonstration of significant public benefit. 
2.  The city may review proposed impacts to general use wetlands to determine if they meet WCA requirements for sequencing flexibility, as described under WCA rules Ch. 8420.0520 Subp. 7a. 
3.  The city will follow WCA sequencing requirements for Priority A, Manage, Manage A, and general use wetlands. 
B.  Actions eligible for credit (WCA Rules Ch. 8420.0541). In accordance with Table 5-1, protect wetlands shall be replaced on a 3:1 total basis. At least 2:1 of total replacement of protect wetlands is eligible for replacement credit or banking credit as provided in WCA rules Ch. 8420.0541. The remaining 1:1 of total replacement may follow provisions of WCA rules Ch. 8420.0541 or may be fulfilled by other activities found acceptable by the city. Other activities may include but are not limited to: Installation of stormwater best management practices (BMPs), increasing flood storage capacities, connecting upland habitat, establishing wetland buffers around existing wetlands, expanding wetland buffers beyond minimum requirements of this section, and restoring native vegetation. 
C.  Location of replacement wetlands (WCA Rules Ch. 8420.0543). 
1.  Protect and priority wetlands shall be replaced according to the following priority: 
a.  On-Site 
b.  Off-site but within the city 
2.  Priority A, Manage, Manage A, and general use wetlands shall be replaced in accordance with WCA rules. 
D.  Size of replacement wetlands (WCA Rules Ch. 8420.0546). 
1.  Protect wetlands shall be replaced in accordance with Table 5-1, and an applicant may complete actions and be eligible for credit, as described herein. 
2.  Priority, Priority A, Manage, Manage A, and general use wetlands shall be replaced in accordance with WCA rules. 
E.  Functions and values of replacement wetlands. The functions and values of wetlands the city approves for draining, filling, or excavation shall be replaced according to the following: 
1.  Replacements for Protect, Priority, and Priority A wetlands shall provide vegetative diversity and maintenance of a variety of wetland communities; promote productive wildlife habitat; and have wetland buffers that contain native vegetation. The city may require such replacement wetlands to be located within or adjacent to contiguous open green space. 
2.  Replacements for Manage and Manage A wetlands shall have one or more of the following functions: stormwater treatment, water quality, and/or connectivity to contiguous open green space. 
3.  Replacements for general use wetlands shall meet WCA requirements. 
Subd. 6.  Wetland buffers. 
A.  This subsection establishes minimum requirements for wetland buffers and the associated buffer protection requirements for each wetland management classification, as indicated in Table 6-1. 
Table 6-1 
Management Classification 	Permanent Wetland Buffer Minimum Width (feet) 	Vegetative 
Requirements 	Protection Requirements 
Protect 	50* 	Native, non-invasive vegetation 	25' no-grade zone around wetland. Restore any graded area to native vegetation**, subject to judgment of city staff. 
Priority 	40* 	Native, non-invasive vegetation 	25' no-grade zone around wetland. Restore any graded area to native vegetation**, subject to judgment of city staff. 
Priority A 	40 or to edge of 100 yr HWL whichever is greater* 	Native, non-invasive vegetation 	Stormwater treatment practices allowed within buffer; maintain 15' minimum Wetland Buffer between the practice and the wetland. 
Manage 	30* 	City's discretion; non-invasive vegetation 	25' no-grade zone around wetland. Restore any graded area to native vegetation**, subject to judgment of city staff. 
Manage A 	20 or to edge of 100 yr. HWL whichever is greater* 	City's discretion; non-invasive vegetation 	Stormwater treatment practices allowed within Wetland Buffer; maintain 15' minimum Wetland Buffer between the practice and the wetland. 
General Use 	None 	City's discretion; non-invasive vegetation 	Not Applicable 
 
* Add 20% to wetland buffer minimum width requirements in areas where slopes are six percent or greater. 
** Native vegetation for wetland buffer plantings is required to have a seed origin in accordance with MnDOT requirements for native seed, per the 2003 (or most recent) MnDOT seeding manual, at a minimum. 
B.  Wetland buffer flexibility: The city may allow a variance from wetland buffer requirements, as provided herein, to avoid unreasonable restrictions on existing uses of properties. If a variance is granted, the city may require alternative requirements including but not limited to wetland buffer width averaging to fulfill minimum width; redirecting drainage to an area where a wetland buffer is feasible; combining methods such as rain gardens, rain barrels, vegetated swales, or other BMPs to replace functions of wetland buffers to filter and treat drainage; and/or protecting additional upland to connect to contiguous open green space and to replace wildlife values. 
C.  Easements: 
1.  Conservation easements will be required over lands with a Protect, Priority, Priority A, or Manage wetland and its wetland buffer. 
2.  Wetland buffer easements will be required over lands with a Manage A wetland and its wetland buffer. 
D.  Permitted activities: 
1.  The following activities may occur within wetland buffers: 
a.  Planting of native vegetation, provided no change is made to the ground elevation; 
b.  Wildlife and nature preserves; 
c.  Public and private flood control structures, ponding and drainage facilities and associated accessory appurtenances; 
d.  Environmental monitoring or control facilities, including those related to water quality and wildlife regulation; 
e.  Overhead utility poles and lines that are less than two feet in diameter, underground utility lines and distribution equipment, light poles, traffic signals, traffic regulatory signs, mailboxes and other equipment that provides an essential public service; 
f.  No other structures may be erected or installed unless the city determines that a particular structure or its erection, installation, or maintenance will not occur as a wetland alteration activity. 
2.  The following activities are permitted in a wetland buffer: 
a.  Maintenance of an existing public or private lawfully located road, other structure, or facility, including drainage facilities, water conveyance structures, dams, fences, or trails, and any facility used to provide transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph, telecommunication, or other services; 
b.  Weed control consistent with state, county, and city laws and regulations. 
Subd. 7.  Wetland buffer vegetative requirements. 
A.  This subsection establishes vegetative requirements for wetland buffers. 
1.  Wetland buffer requirements: 
a.  Less than 30 percent of the wetland buffer shall consist of noxious weeds; 
b.  More than 90 percent of the wetland buffer is vegetated; and 
c.  More than 90 percent of the wetland buffer contains vegetation other than turf grass (Kentucky blue grass). 
The city's designated official shall determine if a wetland buffer is acceptable at the time of the wetland boundary review. 
2.  When a wetland buffer is not acceptable or is graded as part of a proposed use for a property, a wetland buffer landscaping plan shall be submitted to the city for approval. At a minimum, the plan shall include the following: 
a.  A plan sheet that shows the location of the wetland buffer within the subdivision. This sheet should also show wetland buffers that are considered acceptable in their current state and identify them as areas that shall not be disturbed during grading. 
b.  For wetland buffers that are not acceptable, a plan shall be developed that provides species and planting and/or seeding locations. The plan must include the following: 
1.  Wetland buffer areas shall be planted with a seed mix containing 100 percent perennial native plant species, except for a one-time planting of annual nurse or cover crop such as oats or rye. 
2.  Native seed shall be of local ecotype and be from stock originating within 300 miles of the site, and shall represent species that were historically part of the native vegetation of the Dakota County region. Seeding rates shall follow Minnesota Department of Transportation (MnDOT) or Board of Water and Soil Resources (BWSR) Standard Specifications for Construction. 
3.  Native shrubs or trees may be part of the planting plan. Shrubs and/or trees shall be distributed so as to provide a natural appearance and shall not be planted in rows. Plants shall be of local ecotype and represent species that were historically part of the native vegetation of Dakota County. 
4.  Native grasses, forbs, trees and shrubs shall be planted by a qualified contractor utilizing methods described in the MNDOT Standard Specifications for Construction. 
5.  No fertilizer shall be used in establishing new wetland buffers. 
c.  Wetland buffers (both natural and created) shall be protected by erosion control measures as determined by the city. These must be employed during construction until permanent ground cover is established to prevent siltation of the wetland buffer and wetland. 
B.  In cases of new development or redevelopment, vegetation in the Wetland buffer shall be installed prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The city may waive this requirement in lieu of a cash escrow or letter of credit equal to 150 percent of the cost to install the required wetland buffer. 
C.  The city may allow the disturbance of an existing wetland buffer area during the course of construction activity. This disturbance must be kept to a minimum, soils must be uncompacted to a level that will accommodate root growth, and the wetland buffer must be re-established as required by the city. The city may require a cash escrow or letter of credit equal to 150 percent of the cost to re-establish the wetland buffer to its original condition. 
D.  When the city requires a wetland buffer planting and maintenance because the wetland buffer is considered unacceptable, according to this subsection, the city may require a cash escrow or letter of credit equal to 150 percent of the estimated cost of the vegetation and installation. The escrow or letter of credit must be valid for up to two years and may be used by the city to replace any vegetation that dies. 
Subd. 8.  Wetland buffer protection requirements. 
A.  The clearing and removal of vegetation in the wetland buffer is prohibited, except for selective clearing and pruning of individual trees and shrubs which are dead, diseased, noxious weeds, or hazards. 
B.  No structures are allowed in the wetland buffer, except as provided herein. 
C.  Activities including, but not limited to, building, paving, mowing, cutting, filling, dumping, yard waste disposal or fertilizer application are prohibited in the wetland buffer. Mowing may be permitted when approved by the city as a wetland buffer management strategy. However, invasive non-native vegetation, such as European buckthorn and noxious weeds, may be removed. 
D.  Before grading or construction near a wetland or wetland buffer, the owner or contractor must place and maintain appropriate erosion control practices on the upland side of the wetland buffer. These practices must remain in place until all development activities that may affect the wetland and the wetland buffer area have been finished and adequate vegetative cover has been established. 
E.  Where acceptable to adjacent property owners, leaving dead trees and branches in the wetland buffer is encouraged to support the native natural environment by providing habitat to birds and wildlife. 
F.  The property owner or homeowner association that is responsible for the maintenance of a wetland buffer must: 
1.  Maintain and repair damage to wetland buffers from such activities as mowing, cutting, grading or other prohibited activities, unless mowing is approved by the city as a wetland buffer management strategy. Permission must be obtained from the city before implementing wetland buffer management strategies, which may include mowing, burning, and the use of herbicides. 
2.  Ensure that all soil surfaces in the wetland buffer are planted with the permitted vegetation and that there is no open soil surface that may result in erosion. 
Subd. 9.  Wetland buffer markers. When a land-use application requires a wetland buffer, the applicant and/or landowner must place markers at the upland edge of the wetland buffer at least every 75 feet (or a minimum of one per lot). Wetland buffer markers will be provided by the city. 
Subd. 10.  Wetland setbacks. 
A.  Wetland setbacks. 
1.  All structures (principal and other), must be set back at least 25 feet from the outer wetland buffer line. 
Structure exceptions to the 25-foot setbacks include: Play structures, uncovered porches, decks, patio slabs, open terraces, stairways, walkway areas may extend up to ten feet into the required wetland buffer line setbacks. 
2.  Parking or driveway areas must be setback at least ten feet from the outer wetland buffer line. 
3.  A setback from the wetland buffer line is not required for overhead utility poles and lines that are less than two feet in diameter, underground utility lines and distribution equipment, light poles, traffic signals, traffic regulatory signs, mailboxes, and other equipment that provides an essential public service. 
4.  A setback is not required for fences or retaining walls. However, they may not be located within the wetland buffer. 
5.  An existing structure, driveway or parking area meeting the required setback from a city-designated wetland boundary or wetland buffer is considered a legal nonconforming development if a later WCA delineation or implementation of a wetland buffer shows that the wetland or its wetland buffer is closer than the required setback. 
Subd. 11.  Wetland submittal requirements. 
A.  Applicants planning to conduct wetland alteration activities as described herein shall also ensure the following are provided as part of the submittals for city approval: 
1.  Grading plan with locations and sizes of any stormwater pipes. 
2.  Existing and proposed drainage areas to wetlands. 
3.  Wetland delineation report prepared within the last three years by a certified wetland delineator. 
4.  Exhibit showing wetland boundaries and labeling wetland classifications according to city's wetland map. 
Wetlands unclassified at the time of submittal shall be addressed as described herein. 
5.  Wetland buffer landscaping plan that meets the requirements herein. 
6.  All other submittals required by the WCA if wetland impacts are proposed. 
B.  City staff shall verify that wetland submittal requirements have been met before consideration of approval. 
Subd. 12.  Variances. Variances from the requirements of this section may be granted in accordance with provisions of zoning chapter as regulated by the City Code, so long as the variances do not violate WCA rules. 
Subd. 13.  Violations. Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law. 
Subd. 14.  Authority/enforcement actions. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Eagan from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. Such actions may include but are not limited to: 
1.  In responding to a suspected ordinance violation, the City of Eagan may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it including but not limited to prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, and/or orders for corrective measures to the guilty party. 
2.  When an ordinance violation is either discovered by or brought to the attention of the city, the city can immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of the violation of the official control. 
3.  The city shall notify the suspected party of the requirements of this ordinance and all other official controls and the nature and extent of the suspected violation of these controls. If the structure and/or use is under construction or development, the city may order the construction or development immediately halted until a proper permit or approval is granted by the community. If the construction or development is already completed, then the city may either: (1) Issue an order identifying the corrective actions that must be made within a specified time period to bring the use or structure into compliance with the official controls; or (2) notify the responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact permit/development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 414, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 7-28-07)  
Sec. 11.68. - Residential revitalization overlay district. 
Subd. 1.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to promote the best interests of the city's residents and the public health, safety and welfare by permitting an upward deviation from the maximum building coverage requirements set forth in this chapter for specifically identified properties/neighborhoods. An upward deviation from the maximum building coverage requirements set forth in this chapter to pre-1971 residential platted lots, which will comprise the established overlay districts hereunder, will promote revitalization and improvements thereto due to the lots' generally small lot sizes and improvements or additions to homes are prohibited due to the building coverage maximums. 
Subd. 2.  Establishment of districts. A residential revitalization overlay district shall be established and all properties within a district shall be delineated and mapped by resolution of the council. A residential revitalization overlay district shall consist exclusively of individual lots of record that were platted prior to January 1, 1971, are less than 12,000 square feet in area, and zoned for single-family detached dwellings. 
Subd. 3.  Scope of application. The provisions of this section apply only to a lot of record or parcel that would qualify to be within or is within a residential revitalization overlay district. The provisions of this section do not apply to any lot of record or parcel located within a Shoreland Overlay District to the extent that the maximum impervious surface requirements shall be met regardless of permissible building coverage under this section. 
Subd. 4.  The maximum building coverage requirement set forth elsewhere in this chapter as applicable to an individual lot of record under this section may be increased up to 25 percent or a maximum of 2,400 square feet total building coverage, whichever is less, provided the following conditions are met: 
A.  The proposed additional building or structure is not prohibited in the zoning district in which the subject property is located. 
B.  The proposed additional building or structure will meet all setback, building height, and accessory building size restriction requirements and is otherwise in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  The proposed additional building or structure is not prohibited and is otherwise in compliance with all provisions of this Code and any applicable county, state or federal law. 
D.  The proposed additional building or structure will not cause or result in alteration of the present drainage patterns as to adversely affect surrounding properties or water body resources. Notwithstanding, the city may approve an upward deviation under this section provided it imposes conditions with the approval to alleviate all adverse effects of the altered drainage patterns. 
E.  The proposed additional building or structure is a reasonable use of the property and is generally characteristic of the surrounding properties or neighborhood. 
F.  There are no pending City Code violations on the property. 
(Ord. No. 573, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 1-12-2018)  
Sec. 11.69. - Reserved.  
Sec. 11.70. - Performance Standards. 
Subd. 1.  Purpose. The guiding of urban development so as to develop a compatible relationship of uses depends upon certain standards being maintained. Uses permitted in the various districts, conditional and accessory uses shall conform to the following standards: 
A.  Noise. Any use producing noise shall be in conformance with the minimum standards as adopted and enforced by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. 
B.  Smoke and particulate matter. Any use established, enlarged, or remodeled after the effective date of this chapter shall be so operated as to meet the minimum requirements of the state pollution control agency regarding emission of smoke and particulate matter. 
C.  Toxic or noxious matter. The discharge of toxic or noxious matter shall conform with the minimum standards as adopted by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. 
D.  Odors. The discharge of odors shall conform with the air quality standards as adopted by the pollution control agency. 
E.  Vibrations. Any use creating periodic earth shaking vibrations shall be in conformance with the minimum standards concerning vibration as adopted and enforced by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. 
F.  Glare and heat. Any use producing heat or light transmission shall be in conformance with the minimum standards as adopted and enforced by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. 
G.  Waste material. Waste material resulting from or used in industrial or commercial manufacturing, fabricating, servicing, processing or trimming shall not be washed into the public storm sewer system nor the sanitary sewer system, but shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the city engineer which is consistent with the policies and standards of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. 
H.  Bulk storage (liquid). All uses associated with the bulk storage of oil, gasoline, liquid fertilizer, chemical and similar liquids shall comply with the requirements of the state fire marshals and state department of agriculture offices and have documents from those offices stating the use is in compliance. 
I.  Radiation emission. All activities that emit radioactivity shall comply with the minimum requirements of the state pollution control agency. 
J.  Electrical emission. All activities which create electrical emissions shall comply with the minimum requirements of the Federal Communications Commission. 
K.  Explosives. Any use requiring the storage, utilization or manufacturing of products which could decompose by detonation shall be located not less than 400 feet from a residentially zoned property. 
Subd. 2.  Land reclamation and mining. Land reclamation and mining shall be permitted in all districts by conditional use permit and otherwise licensed or regulated by other Code provisions. 
A.  The conditional use permit shall include, as a condition thereof, an approved finish grade plan that will not adversely affect the adjacent land. 
B.  An approved program for regulating the type of fill permitted, for control of rodents, fire, vehicular ingress and egress, hours of operation, unstable slopes, material dispersed from wind or hauling of material to or from the site and general maintenance of the site. 
Subd. 3.  Design and maintenance of off-street parking areas. 
A.  Drainage. All parking lots, except those for less than four vehicles, shall be graded according to a drainage plan that has been approved by the city engineer. Catchbasins, sumps, and underground storm sewers may be required, and all such lots and driveways shall be surfaced with a material to control dust and drainage as approved by the city engineer. 
B.  Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be shaded or diffused so as to reflect the light away from the adjoining property and away from abutting traffic. 
C.  All off-street parking areas shall be constructed with curbs or similar barriers to contain all vehicles. 
D.  All off-street parking areas for four vehicles or more shall be constructed with concrete curbs. 
E.  Where a parking lot for four or more vehicles is located adjacent to or across the street from a residential use, a solid screen shall be constructed and maintained of not less than three and one-half feet in height to capture the vehicle light beams and muffle the vehicle noise. 
F.  Driveways may only exceed a grade of ten percent where approved by the city engineer. A level area shall be provided for an automobile in front of the garage on residential lots. 
Subd. 4.  Off-site off-street parking and outdoor storage as conditional use. 
A.  Scope of application. For purposes of this subdivision only, off-site off-street parking and off-site outdoor storage shall mean such activity as a principal use on a parcel of land which shall be deemed servient to a dominant parcel on which a principal use is located and served by the off-site off-street parking or off-site outdoor storage on the servient parcel. The council intends this provision to provide supplementary off-site off-street parking or off-site outdoor storage that which complements the existing off-street parking or outdoor storage on the dominant parcel. It is not the council's intention to allow off-site outdoor storage or off-street parking in greater amounts, greater number of spaces or greater area on the servient parcel than exists on the dominant parcel. 
B.  Conditional use permit application. All applications for a conditional use permit for off-site off-street parking and off-site outdoor storage shall include a detailed, to-scale site plan specifying the dimensions, location, design and compliance with the performance standards set forth herein. 
C.  Performance standards, termination and noncompliance. 
1.  Standards. No off-street parking or outdoor storage, as described in subparagraph A, shall be permitted unless the following conditions are met, in addition to those standards set forth in section 11.40 subd. 4: 
(a)  The dominant parcel, which shall be served by the off-street parking or outdoor storage on the servient parcel, cannot physically accommodate the parking or storage needs of the principal use on the dominant parcel. 
(b)  The parcel on which the off-street parking or outdoor storage is located and the dominant parcel which the off-street parking or outdoor storage serves shall be within the same zoning districts, provided in R-4 districts the servient parcel shall be within a R-4 district, limited business LB, neighborhood business NB, general business GB, community shopping center CSC, limited industrial I-1, general industrial I-2, and research/development RD districts. 
(c)  The servient parcel on which the off-street parking or outdoor storage area is located is a reasonable distance not to exceed 660 feet at the closest point from the lot line of the dominant lot to be served by the off-street parking or outdoor storage area. 
(d)  The off-site off-street parking area shall meet the requirements for off-street parking set forth in this chapter. 
(e)  The off-site outdoor storage area shall meet the requirements set forth in section 11.70, subd. 20, except those provisions governing building or height restrictions. 
(f)  Off-site off-street parking and off-site outdoor storage on the servient parcel shall have fewer parking spaces, less area, and less outdoor storage area than the dominant parcel. 
2.  Termination. Any conditional use permit issued under this subdivision or any right to obtain a conditional use permit under this subdivision shall terminate upon the development of the servient lot on which the off-street parking or outdoor storage area is located or upon the termination of the principal use located on the dominant parcel to which the off-street parking or outdoor storage area serves, whichever occurs first. 
3.  Noncompliance. Failure to comply with any of the standards or conditions set forth herein or in the conditional use permit or any other violation of City Code provisions shall constitute sufficient cause for the termination of the conditional use permit by this council following a public hearing. 
Subd. 5.  Minimum required off-street parking. The following minimum parking spaces shall be provided and maintained by ownership, easement or lease, for and during the life of the respective uses hereinafter set forth. Where a specific requirement is not stated, the council shall determine the adequacy of parking when approving a site plan. 
Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required. 
A.  Banks, savings and loans and financial institutions. At least one parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area plus five stacking spaces for each drive-through window. 
B.  Bowling alley. At least five parking spaces for each alley, plus additional spaces as may be required herein for related uses such as a restaurant. 
C.  Church, club. At least one parking space for each three and one-half seats based on the design capacity of the main assembly hall. 
D.  Convenience stores with and without motor fuel sales. At least one off-street parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area. 
E.  Day care facility. Ten parking spaces, plus one space for each 500 square feet in the principal structure. 
F.  Drive-in or drive-through food establishment. At least one space per 60 square feet of gross floor area. 
G.  Hospital. At least one and one-half parking spaces for each patient bed. 
H.  Manufacturing, industrial, fabricating or processing of a product. At least one parking space for each 500 square feet of manufacturing space and one space for each 250 square feet of office space. 
I.  Medical or dental clinic. At least three parking spaces for each staff doctor practicing on the premises at any one time or one space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater. 
J.  Motel and hotel. At least one space for each dwelling unit or lodging room, plus one additional space for each eight units. Additional spaces shall be required for liquor or restaurant facilities. 
K.  Motor vehicle service and repair. At least four off-street parking spaces plus two off-street parking spaces for each service stall. 
L.  Multiple dwellings, including townhouses, apartments and condominiums. 
1.  [Reserved]. 
2.  No detached garages shall be permitted. All garages shall be attached or underground. 
3.  For each building at least one enclosed or underground garage space per unit and at least 0.5 outdoor parking space per unit shall be provided. 
M.  Offices. At least one parking space for each 150 square feet of net leasable floor area. 
N.  Restaurants, cafes, bars, taverns, nightclubs. At least one parking space for each three seats based on capacity design. 
O.  Retail store. At least one off-street parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area up to a total floor area of 10,000 square feet. At least one off-street parking space for each 250 square feet of floor area between 10,001 and 30,000 square feet. At least one off-street parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area thereafter. 
P.  Single-family dwelling. At least two enclosed parking spaces for each dwelling unit. 
Q.  Special residential facility: 
1.  Assisted living housing: At least one parking space for each unit of which 50 percent of all required parking spaces shall be enclosed or within an underground garage. 
2.  Independent living housing: See multiple dwellings. 
3.  Nursing home, convalescent home, sanitarium or other full care facility: At least one parking space for each six beds for which accommodations are offered, plus one additional parking space for each 15 beds. 
4.  When a special residential facility provides full continuum of care housing units (i.e., independent living, assisted living, and full care units) in or as part of a single facility, one parking space per unit shall be provided of which 0.5 spaces per unit shall be provided in an enclosed or underground garage space. 
R.  Theater. At least one parking space for each three seats. 
S.  Two-family dwellings. At least two enclosed parking spaces for each dwelling unit. 
T.  Warehousing, wholesaling, furniture stores, appliance stores. At least one parking space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area up to 6,000 square feet and one parking space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area over 6,000 square feet. 
U.  Uses not listed. For those uses not specifically listed, the city shall determine an appropriate standard based on similar uses. 
V.  Proof of parking. The city may also consider a proof of parking when a business can demonstrate a proposed use will not require the minimum number of spaces as stated in this section. When parking is reduced, the city may require that area to be reserved in open space for future parking needs. 
Subd. 6.  Joint parking facilities. In an effort to minimize the amount of hardcover and maximize real estate potential, the city may consider joint use of off-street parking areas. A conditional use permit shall be required for joint use parking areas and could allow a reduction of 30 of the required spaces. Required parking facilities serving two or more uses may be located on the same lot or in the same structure except in residential districts, provided that the total number of parking spaces so furnished shall be not less than the sum total of the separate requirements for each use during any peak hour parking period when the parking facility is utilized at the same time by two or more uses. Conditions required for joint use are: 
A.  The proposed joint parking space is within 400 feet of the main entrance of the use it will serve; 
B.  The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal hours of the two or more buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed; and 
C.  The conditional use permit shall be considered void or be revoked if there is a change of use that would cause similar hours of operation or peak demand periods. 
D.  Any other conditional use permit criteria as contained in the Code. 
Subd. 7.  Parking space design. 
	Residential 
Districts 	Business 
Districts 	RD 
District 	BP 
District 	I-1 
District 	I-2 
District 	PF 
District 
Parking Space Size 
90 degree 	9.5' × 18' 	10' × 19' 	10' × 19' 	10' × 19' 	10' × 19' 	10' × 19' 	10' × 19' 
60 degree 	11.5' × 19.5' 	11.5' × 19.5' 	11.5' × 19.5' 	11.5' × 19.5' 	11.5' × 19.5' 	11.5' × 19.5' 	11.5' × 19.5' 
Aisle Width 
90 degree 	24' 	24' 	24' 	24' 	24' 	24' 	24' 
60 degree 	16' 	16' 	16' 	16' 	16' 	16' 	16' 
 
Subd. 8. \ Parking lot setbacks. 
	Residential 
Districts 	Business 
Districts 	RD 
District 	BP 
District 	I-1 
District 	I-2 
District 	PF 
District 
Minimum Parking Setbacks 
Public street 	20' 	20' 	20' 	20' 	20' 	20' 	20' 
Side or rear yard 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 
Adjacent to residential or agricultural zoning district 		20' 					20' 
Directly adjacent to residential zoning district or properties guided for residential use 			50' 	50' 	100' 	100' 	20' 
Directly adjacent to properties guided for parks or public facilities 	20' 	20' 	50' 	50' 	50' 	50' 	20' 
Adjacent to properties guided for residential or public use when separated by a street 	20' 	20' 	50' 	50' 	50' 	50' 	20' 
 
Subd. 9. \ Parking ramps. Parking ramps shall meet the setback requirements of the principal structure. The exterior materials and design shall be consistent with the principal structure and shall be located and oriented on the site in a manner that minimizes their impact on adjacent properties. 
Subd. 10. \ Residential driveways. The maximum width of a residential driveway at the right-of-way shall be 22 feet. 
Subd. 11. \ Off-street loading areas. 
A.  All loading areas, including maneuvering area, shall be off-street and shall be located on the same lot as the building or use to be served. 
B.  Loading areas shall not be permitted along the front side or within a front yard of a building. 
C.  Where a loading area faces a public street, a minimum 40 foot wide landscaped yard, including berms, and vegetation shall be provided and maintained along said public street. 
D.  Where a loading area is proposed within 300 feet of any residential district, a conditional use permit shall be required. In issuing said permit, the council shall find that said loading area shall be developed in a manner so as not to have a detrimental effect upon the adjoining residential area. 
E.  Loading and delivery areas shall not interfere with employee or customer building entrances and/or site circulation. 
F.  Loading dock doors, railings and other appurtenances shall be compatible with the overall color scheme of the principal structure. 
G.  In BP zoning districts, loading docks and maneuvering areas shall be solidly screened from all streets and adjacent properties. 
Subd. 12. \ Landscaping. 
A.  Findings, purpose and scope. 
1.  The city council finds: 
(a)  Trees produce oxygen, a necessary element for human survival; 
(b)  Trees appreciably reduce the ever-increasing environmentally dangerous carbon dioxide content of the air and play a vital role in purifying the air breathed; 
(c)  Trees transpire considerable amounts of water each day, thereby purifying the air; 
(d)  Trees participate in the natural process of neutralizing wastewater passing through the ground from the surface to groundwater tables and lower aquifers; 
(e)  Trees, through their root systems, stabilize the groundwater tables and play an important and effective part in soil conservation, erosion control, and flood control; 
(f)  Trees are an invaluable physical, aesthetic, and psychological counterpoint to the urban setting, making urban life more comfortable by providing shade and cooling the air and land, reducing noise levels and glare, and breaking the monotony of human developments on the land, particularly parking areas; and 
(g)  Trees affect the desirability of land and its property values. 
2.  Purpose. Based on the foregoing findings, the council declares that it is desirable and essential to the health, safety, and welfare of the city to protect certain existing trees and plant materials, to require new and additional plant materials and trees, to prohibit the planting of certain species and to require the maintenance of plant materials and trees as set forth in this subdivision. 
3.  Scope. The provisions of this subdivision shall apply only to privately owned property, excluding any property within public rights-of-way which are regulated in chapter 7 of the Code. 
B.  Landscape plan. 
1.  Plan required. A landscape plan shall be approved by the city and implemented by the property owner: 
(a)  For any new development or new building construction in any commercial, multiple residential (R-2, R-3 and R-4), industrial institutional zoning district, and planned development districts, except as otherwise provided by specific planned development agreements; 
(b)  For any existing commercial, industrial or institutional building to be expanded by ten percent or greater square feet, where an approved landscape plan is not on file with the city; and 
(c)  No building permit for any construction described in items (a) and (b) of this subparagraph shall be issued unless a landscape plan required hereunder is approved by the city. 
(d)  The plan as required under item (b), above, may be implemented over a period of three years, and a performance guarantee shall not be required. However, if the plan is not fully implemented within three years, the city may complete the landscaping and, if necessary, attempt to recover its cost from the benefitted property for the improvement by billing or assessment, as appropriate. 
2.  Landscape plan required. In every case where landscaping is required by provision of the Code or by an approval granted by the city, for a building or structure to be constructed on property, the applicant for the building permit shall submit a landscape plan prepared in accordance with the provisions of this subdivision. The landscape plan shall include the following information: 
(a)  General. Name and address of developer, owner, and contact person; name and address of state-registered landscape architect, or state-certified nurseryperson; date of plan preparation; date and description of all revisions; name of project or development. 
(b)  Site map. One scale drawing of the site based upon a survey of property lines with indication of scale and north point; name and alignment of proposed and existing adjacent on-site streets; location of all proposed and existing utility easements and rights-of-way; location of existing and proposed buildings; topographic contours using main sea level datum at two-foot contour intervals; existing and proposed location of parking areas; water bodies; proposed sidewalks and trails. 
(c)  Landscape plan. Two scale drawings of proposed landscaping for the site based upon a survey of property lines with indication of scale and north point; existing and proposed topographic contours using mean sea level datum at two-foot intervals; details of proposed planting beds and foundation plantings; delineation of both sodded and seeded area; location and identification of proposed landscape or manmade materials used to provide screening from adjacent and neighboring properties; location and identification of trees; details of fences, tie walls, planting boxes, retaining walls, berms and other landscape improvements and details in legible scale; location of landscape islands and planter beds with identification of plant materials used. 
(d)  Planting schedule. A table containing the common names and botanical names, size of plant materials, root specifications, quantities, and special planting instructions. 
3.  Performance guarantee. 
(a)  A performance guarantee shall be required to insure completion and maintenance of all landscaping in accordance with the approved landscape plan required hereunder. 
(b)  The performance guarantee shall be approved in form as to security by the city. 
(c)  The performance guarantee shall be in the amount of $7,500.00, subject to modification by the council. 
(d)  The performance guarantee shall cover two full calendar years subsequent to the completion of the landscaping as provided in the approved landscape plan and shall be released only upon inspection and written notice of conformance by the city. 
(e)  For any landscaping or screening that is unacceptable, the applicant shall replace the material to the satisfaction of the city before the guarantee is released. Where this is not done, the city, at its sole discretion, may use the proceeds of the performance guarantee to accomplish performance. 
C.  Landscape specifications. 
1.  All landscape plans and landscaping under this subdivision shall follow and be in compliance with the following requirements, together with all other Code regulations: 
(a)  Minimum size at time of planting. 
(1)  Deciduous overstory plantings shall be a minimum of two and one-half caliper inches. 
(2)  Deciduous understory trees shall be a minimum of one and one-half caliper inches. 
(3)  Coniferous trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height. 
(4)  Hedge and shrub materials shall be a minimum of three feet in height. 
(b)  Minimum required plant material. The landscape plan and landscaping thereunder shall provide for plant material equal to three percent of the value of the building(s), not including the cost of land and site improvements. Credit may be given for existing plant materials, which will be preserved. The city may approve a landscape plan which does not meet this standard, where the intent and purpose of this subdivision is otherwise met. 
(c)  Planting islands. Planting islands shall be required where necessary to visually break up expanses of hard-surface parking areas, to provide safe and efficient traffic movement, and to define rows of parking. Planting islands shall occupy at least five percent of the parking area. Planting islands shall not be required in parking areas with less than 50 parking spaces. Planting islands shall be edged with concrete curbs. 
(d)  Method of installation. All deciduous and coniferous trees shall be planted in accordance with American Nurseryman's Standards. 
(e)  Lawn maintenance and establishment. Lawn maintenance and establishment shall be required in accordance with chapter 10 of the Code. 
(f)  Slopes and berms. Slopes and berms steeper than three feet horizontal to one foot vertical shall not be permitted unless specifically approved by the city. In areas where steeper slopes are allowed, there shall be special landscape treatment such as special seed mixtures, terracing, retaining walls, or fiber blankets. 
(g)  Landscape maintenance. The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscaped areas and the installation of healthy replacement plants for any plants that die or are removed due to disease. Maintenance shall include removal of litter, dead plant materials, unhealthy or diseased trees, and necessary pruning. Natural watercourses within a buffer shall be maintained as free flowing and free of debris. 
(h)  Erosion control. All areas of any site shall be restored and maintained in accordance with the land disturbance erosion control regulations and any other provisions of the City Code. 
(i)  Placement of plant materials. No plant materials shall be permitted within any utility easement or street right-of-way, except as otherwise permitted under chapter 7 of the Code. 
(j)  Diseased and nuisance trees. Prior to grading, all diseased and nuisance trees on the subject property shall be identified by the city forester in accordance with chapter 10 of the Code. All diseased and nuisance trees so identified shall be removed from the property at the time of grading and prior to the commencement of building construction. Diseased and nuisance trees shall not count toward calculation of significant tree inventory. 
(k)  Tree preservation. Tree preservation shall be required in accordance with the tree preservation regulations as adopted by the council. 
(l)  Completion deadline. All plant materials required for screening purposes shall be planted to completion within six months from date of issuance of a building permit unless otherwise approved by the city due to the time of the year or construction for a large project. In no case shall the period exceed six months from issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
D.  Landscaping along freeway corridors. 
1.  Purpose. The provisions in this subparagraph are adopted in order to preserve, protect and enhance existing landscapes and landscaping which were provided by the Minnesota Department of Transportation and is located along Interstate Highways 35E and 494 and T.H. 77 (Cedar Avenue). 
2.  Visual penetration areas. The requirements herein shall apply to those areas along the freeway system in the city where the visual penetration of the motorist extends beyond the right-of-way boundary as identified in the comprehensive plan. 
3.  Existing wooded lots. Existing wooded areas designated for residential development shall be preserved for a minimum of 50 feet adjacent and parallel to the freeway right-of-way. Beyond 50 feet, existing wooded areas shall be preserved, except that a maximum of 40 percent of the wooded area may be developed with an impervious surface provided all other applicable Code provisions pertaining to impervious surface, preservation of trees, vegetation and slopes are met. 
4.  Screening visual penetration areas. Adjacent to the freeway right-of-way, a planting screen of a mixture of overstory and understory coniferous plant material shall be planted which shall provide a visual screen at time of maturity. This planting shall be provided within the minimum setback area required adjacent to freeway right-of-way. 
E.  Irrigation system. 
1.  System required. 
(a)  All landscape plans and implementation thereof required by this subdivision shall include an underground irrigation system in all districts except agricultural, R-1 single-family residential, and public parks. Planned development districts shall also be subject to the requirement unless the development is single-family residential. 
(b)  Exception. If the property area to be landscaped is very large or reserved for future expansion or is to be kept in a natural state, an underground irrigation system is not required. 
2.  System specification. All irrigation systems shall be fully automatic programmable systems, capable of alternate date watering. Each system shall be capable of achieving one inch of precipitation per week under an alternate day watering regime. The system shall provide head to head coverage with uniform levels of total precipitation throughout all irrigated areas and shall provide full and equal coverage onto public rights-of-way to the back of curb. Systems which extend beyond private property onto public rights-of-way shall be subject to approval by the city under chapter 7 of the Code. The system shall meet state department of health standards and shall provide backflow preventers. All systems shall have a designated billing address. 
F.  Screens and buffers. 
1.  Definition and purpose. Screens and buffers are designated units of yard or open area where distance, planting, berming and fencing help minimize adverse impacts of public nuisances, such as: noise, glare, activity, or dust, which are oftentimes associated with parking, storage, signs or buildings. 
2.  Screen and buffer requirements. 
(a)  All parking, loading service, utility, and outdoor storage areas shall be screened and buffered from all public streets and adjacent differing land use by a combination of any of the following: berms, walls, fences, shrubs, deciduous overstory, understory or coniferous trees or hedge materials. The height and depth of the screening shall be consistent with the height and size of the area to be screened. When natural materials, such as trees or hedges, are used to meet the screening requirements of this item, density and species of planting shall be such as to achieve 75 percent opacity year round at maturity. 
(b)  Exception to requirements. Screen and buffer requirements may be waived or modified by the city where the intent is otherwise satisfied by significant change in elevation, an existing screen, significant distance or similar circumstances. 
(c)  Whenever an I-1, I-2, RD or BP district is across the street from property guided for residential or public facilities land uses, or directly abutting property guided PF (public facilities) a buffer yard/setback with a minimum depth of 50 feet shall be maintained adjacent to the street, to provide screening of all loading and outside storage areas. Screening may consist of landscaping, berms, fencing and walls, or any combination thereof, to provide a minimum height of six feet and a minimum 75 percent opacity at the time of installation. 
(d)  Whenever an I-1 or I-2 district is directly abutting property guided for residential land uses, a buffer yard/setback with a minimum depth of 100 feet shall be maintained, to provide screening of all parking, loading and outside storage areas. Screening may consist of landscaping, berms, fencing and walls, or any combination thereof to provide a minimum height of six feet and a minimum 75 percent opacity at the time of installation. 
(e)  Whenever an RD or BP district is directly abutting property guided for residential land uses, a buffer yard/setback with a minimum depth of 50 feet shall be maintained to provide screening of all loading and outside storage areas. Screening may consist of landscaping, berms, fencing and walls, or any combination thereof to provide a minimum height of six feet and a minimum 75 percent opacity at the time of installation. 
(f)  In the RD and BP districts, a minimum three-foot high solid screen, consisting of plantings, berms, and/or decorative walls shall be provided within the required setback where off-street parking areas abut a public right-of-way or property with a different zoning or land use designation. 
(g)  In the RD and BP districts, ground level view of all mechanical utilities shall be completely screened from contiguous properties and adjacent streets. 
3.  Completion deadline. All plant materials required within a specified screen or buffer area shall be planted to completion within six months from date of issuance of a building permit unless otherwise approved by the city due to the time of the year or construction for a large project. In no case shall the period exceed six months from issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
4.  Responsibility for screen or buffer. The property owner of the heavier use district shall be responsible for the establishment of a buffer. An adjacent owner of the lighter use shall be required to provide plant material and other normal landscape features along the common lot line which will aid in the creation of the buffer. 
G.  Trees on public property. Trees located within the public right-of-way (boulevard area) or public easement shall be planted and maintained in accordance with the provisions of chapter 7 of the Code. 
H.  Prohibited tree species. It is unlawful to introduce any of the following prohibited species to any lot or land parcel where such trees are not naturally occurring or to plant upon public land or right-of-way: 
1.  Ginkgo (female only) 
2.  Box elder 
3.  Non-disease-resistant elm species 
4.  Nonhybrid cottonwood species 
Subd. 13. \ Tree preservation. 
A.  Findings and purpose statement. The city council finds it is in the best interest of the city to protect, preserve, and enhance the natural environment of the community and to encourage a resourceful and prudent approach to the development and alteration of wooded areas. In the interest of achieving these objectives, the city has established the comprehensive tree preservation regulations herein to promote the furtherance of the following: 
1.  Protection and preservation of the environment and natural beauty of the city; 
2.  Assurance of orderly development within wooded areas to minimize tree and habitat loss; 
3.  Evaluation of the impacts to trees and wooded areas resulting from development; 
4.  Establishment of minimal standards for tree preservation and the mitigation of environmental impacts resulting from tree removal; 
5.  Provision of incentives for creative land use and environmentally compatible site design which preserves trees and minimizes tree removal and clearcutting during development; and 
6.  Enforcement of tree preservation standards to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community. 
B.  Tree preservation plan. 
1.  Scope of application. A tree preservation plan shall be submitted to and approved by the city and implemented in accordance therewith in connection with any of the following: 
(a)  New development in any zoning district; 
(b)  New building construction in any zoning district; 
(c)  Expansion of any existing commercial, industrial or institutional building or impervious surface by ten percent or greater square feet, where an approved tree preservation plan is not on file with the city; and 
(d)  Any project for which a city grading permit is required. 
2.  Submission requirements. The tree preservation plan required hereunder shall be submitted with any preliminary subdivision plans as required by the subdivision regulations of this Code; incorporated as a part of any landscape plan as required by the zoning regulations of this Code; or incorporated as part of a grading plan and an application for any grading permit as required by this Code. All tree preservation plans must be certified by a forester or landscape architect retained by the applicant. 
The proposed grading plan shall be submitted to the city at least five working days prior to the issuance of the grading permit to ensure compliance with the approved tree preservation plan. All sites shall be staked, as depicted in the approved grading plan, and the required tree protection fencing shall be installed before grading is to commence. The city shall inspect the construction site prior to the beginning of the grading to ensure that protective fencing and other protective measures are in place. No encroachment, grading, trenching, filling, compaction, or change in soil chemistry shall occur within the fenced areas protecting the critical root zone of the trees to be saved. 
Applicants of single-family residential building permits are required to prepare an individual lot tree preservation plan when significant tree, specimen trees, and/or significant woodlands exist on site. Individual lot tree preservation plans are not required to be prepared by a forester or landscape architect. 
3.  Plan requirements. All applicants shall submit a tree preservation plan prepared in accordance with the provisions of this subdivision. The tree preservation plan shall include the following information: 
(a)  The name(s), telephone number(s), and address(es) of applicants, property owners, developers and/or builders; 
(b)  Delineation of the buildings, structures, or impervious surfaces situated thereon or contemplated to be built thereon; 
(c)  Delineation of all areas to be graded and limits of land disturbance; 
(d)  Size, species, and location of all existing significant trees, specimen trees, and significant woodlands located within the area to be platted or within the parcel of record. These significant trees, specimen trees, and significant woodlands should be identified in both graphic and tabular form; 
(e)  Identification of all significant trees, specimen trees, and significant woodlands proposed to be removed within the construction area. These significant trees, specimen trees, and significant woodlands should be identified in both graphic and tabular form; 
(f)  Measures to protect significant trees, specimen trees, and significant woodlands; 
(g)  Size, species, and location of all replacement trees proposed to be planted on the property in accordance with the tree replacement schedule; and 
(h)  Signature of the person(s) preparing the plan. 
4.  Mitigation. 
(a)  In any development that the tree/woodland allowable removal limits are exceeded, the applicant shall mitigate the tree loss by either reforestation of (tree replacement) appropriate areas within the development area, in accordance with the tree replacement schedule, or payment to the city of the sum per diameter inch calculated from the total amount of diameter inches of the required replacement trees in accordance with the tree replacement schedule. The fee per diameter inch shall be set forth in the city fee schedule, and the payment thereon shall be deposited into an account designated specifically for tree mitigation. 
(b)  The form of mitigation to be provided by the applicant shall be determined by the city. 
(c)  The planting of trees for mitigation shall be in addition to any other landscape requirements of the city. 
(d)  Significant tree replacements will be calculated by replacing the largest diameter tree first, proceeding down to the smallest diameter significant tree. 
5.  Required protective measures. The tree preservation plan shall identify and require the following measures to be utilized to protect significant trees, specimen trees, and significant woodlands: 
(a)  Installation of snow fencing or polyethylene laminate safety netting placed at the drip line or at the perimeter of the critical root zone (CRZ), whichever is greater, of significant trees, specimen trees, and significant woodlands to be preserved. No grade change, construction activity, or storage of materials shall occur within this fenced area. 
(b)  Identification of any oak trees requiring pruning between April 15 and July 1. Any oak trees so pruned shall be required to have any cut areas sealed with an appropriate nontoxic tree wound sealant. 
(c)  Prevention of change in soil chemistry due to concrete washout and leakage or spillage of toxic materials, such as fuels or paints. 
6.  Additional protective measures. The following tree protection measures are suggested to protect significant trees, specimen trees, and significant woodlands that are intended to be preserved according to the submitted tree preservation plan and may be required by the city: 
(a)  Installation of retaining walls or tree wells to preserve trees. 
(b)  Placement of utilities in common trenches outside of the drip line of significant trees, or use of tunneled installation. 
(c)  Use of tree root aeration, fertilization, and/or irrigation systems. 
(d)  Transplanting of significant trees into a protected area for later moving into permanent sites within the construction area. 
(e)  Therapeutic pruning. 
7.  Review process. The tree preservation plan shall be reviewed by the city to assess the best possible layout to preserve significant trees, specimen trees, and significant woodlands and to enhance the efforts to minimize damage to specimen trees, significant trees and significant woodlands. The applicant shall meet with city staff prior to submission of the development application or prior to application for the grading permit, whichever is sooner, to determine the most feasible and practical placement of buildings, parking, driveways, streets, storage and other physical features, in order that the fewest significant trees, specimen trees, and significant woodlands are destroyed or damaged. 
8.  Performance guarantee. Any applicant of a new development shall provide the required performance guarantee following preliminary approval of the tree preservation plan and prior to any construction and/or grading. The amount of the performance guarantee to be submitted, specific to the tree preservation fulfillments, shall be calculated as follows: 
(a)  Unless the applicant provides tree mitigation in the form of cash dedication, 100 percent of the cost of completing tree replacement mitigation as determined by the city; 
(b)  An amount to guarantee preservation of all trees, identified by the approved tree preservation plan to be preserved, within 15 feet of the construction zone (measured from the construction unit to the nearest side of the tree). The amount shall be calculated by multiplying the total diameter inches of significant trees and specimen trees to be preserved within this 15 feet zone by the rate of payment of $25.00 per diameter inch and the total square feet of significant woodlands to be preserved within the 15 feet zone by the rate of $1.20 per square foot. 
(c)  No performance guarantee shall be required for applicants of building permits of single-family residential units. 
(d)  Following written request by the applicant for acceptance, the performance guarantee will be released upon verification by the city that the tree preservation plan was followed and that the tree replacement schedule was complied with where necessary, but in no event shall the performance guarantee be released earlier than one year after the date of the project closure. 
9.  Removal of diseased trees required. Prior to any grading, all diseased, hazardous, and nuisance trees on the subject property shall be identified by the city forester or city tree inspector in accordance with the tree disease control and prevention regulations of the Code. Any and all diseased and nuisance trees so identified shall be removed from the property, at the time of grading, if so directed. 
10.  Compliance with plan. The applicant shall implement the tree preservation plan prior to and during any construction. The tree protection measures shall remain in place until all grading and construction activity is terminated or until a request is made to and approved by the city forester. 
(a)  No significant trees, specimen trees, or significant woodlands shall be removed until a tree preservation plan is approved and except in accordance with the approved tree preservation plan as approved by the city. If a significant tree(s), specimen tree(s) or any significant woodland that was intended to be preserved is removed without permission of the city forester or damaged so that it is in a state of decline within one year from date of project closure, a cash mitigation, calculated per diameter inch of the removed/destroyed tree or per total square foot of significant woodlands, in the amount set forth in the city fee schedule, shall be remitted to the city. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to inspect the development and/or building site in order to determine compliance with the approved tree preservation plan. The city shall determine whether compliance with the tree preservation plan has been met. 
D.  Allowable tree removal. 
1.  Tree removal allowance. Specimen tree, significant tree, and significant woodland removal shall be in accordance with the city-approved tree preservation plan and in no case shall the amount of removal exceed the following percentages: 
(a)  Single lot development. 
(1)  Single-unit residential, 20 percent. 
(2)  Commercial and multiunit residential, 30 percent. 
(b)  Multi-lot development. 
(1)  Single-phase development process. 
(aa)  Single unit residential, 40 percent. 
(bb)  Commercial and multiunit residential, 47.5 percent. 
(2)  Two-phase development. 
(aa)  Initial site development, 25 percent. 
(bb)  Individual lot development. 
a.  Single unit residential, 20 percent. 
b.  Commercial or multi-unit residential, 30 percent. 
2.  Exception. When practical difficulties or practical hardships result from strict compliance with the provisions of this paragraph, the city may permit significant tree, specimen tree, and significant woodland removal in excess of the allowable limits. In the event such exception is granted, a reforestation plan or a cash mitigation will be implemented. The city shall determine which form of mitigation shall be utilized. 
E.  Tree replacement. 
1.  Schedule. 
	NUMBER OF REPLACEMENT TREES 
Size of Tree Damaged or Destroyed 	Category A 	Category B 	Category C 
Coniferous, 12 to 24 feet high 	1 	2 	4 
Coniferous, 24 feet or higher 	2 	4 	8 
Hardwood deciduous, 6 to 20 inches diameter 	1 	2 	4 
Hardwood deciduous, 21 to 30 inches diameter 	2 	4 	8 
Softwood deciduous, 12 to 24 inches diameter 	1 	2 	4 
Softwood deciduous, greater than 24 inches diameter 	2 	4 	8 
Specimen tree 	3 	6 	12 
 
2.  Significant woodland replacement. Where replacement of a significant woodland is required, the applicant shall be responsible for furnishing and installing one category A replacement tree or two category B replacement trees or four category C replacement trees for every 500 square feet of significant woodland damaged or destroyed, or any increment thereof. 
3.  Size of replacement trees. 
(a)  Category A trees shall be no less than the following sizes: 
1.  Deciduous trees, not less than four inches in diameter. 
2.  Coniferous trees, not less than 12 feet in height. 
(b)  Category B trees shall be no less than the following sizes: 
1.  Deciduous trees, not less than two and one-half inches in diameter. 
2.  Coniferous trees, not less than six feet in height. 
(c)  Category C trees shall be no less than the following sizes: 
1.  Deciduous trees, not less than one and one-half inches in diameter. 
2.  Coniferous trees, not less than four feet in height. 
4.  Species requirement. Where ten or more replacement trees are required, not more than 50 percent of the replacement trees shall be of the same species of tree without the approval of the city. 
5.  Warranty requirement. Any replacement tree which is not alive or healthy, as determined by the city, or which subsequently dies due to construction activity within one year after the date of project closure shall be removed by the applicant and replaced with a new healthy tree meeting the same minimum size requirements within eight months of removal. 
Subd. 14.  Hours of operation. Hours of operation of any retail business, any restaurant or any motor fuel station shall be confined to the period between 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m., except for those meeting the special use setback, as defined in this chapter, from any residential use and fronting on a major thoroughfare or commercial service road, unless otherwise specifically approved by the council. 
Subd. 15.  Additional requirements, exceptions and modifications. The requirements and standards specified heretofore in this section shall be subject to the following: 
A.  Height limitations. Height limitations as set forth in E and R districts elsewhere in this chapter may be increased by 50 percent when applied to: Antennas, radios, TV's, or flagpoles. 
B.  Front yard variance. In any R district, wherever a platted block or otherwise subdivided area has dwellings located on 50 percent or more of the parcels located between two streets, the minimum required front yard setback line shall become the average setback established by the existing dwellings located in the block. This shall not supersede the requirements of section 11.60 of this Code where applicable. 
C.  Parking of mobile homes. Mobile homes shall not be permitted to be located for storage or habitation in any zoning district, except in an approved mobile home park, without a special permit being issued by the council as regulated by chapter 4 in this Code. 
Subd. 16.  Fences. 
A.  Construction and maintenance. 
1.  Every fence shall be maintained in accordance with the building and structure safety and appearance regulations in chapter 10 of this Code. No temporary fence, such as snow fence or an erosion control fence, shall be permitted on any property for a period in excess of 30 days unless otherwise approved by the city for good cause. 
2.  Above-ground electric boundary fences shall only be permitted in the A district when the property is an active farm. 
3.  The finished side of all fences shall face away from the fence owner's lot. 
B.  Residential district fences. In all parts of the city zoned residential, boundary fences shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Fences on all corner lots erected within 30 feet of the intersecting curbline shall be subject to traffic visibility requirements set forth elsewhere in this Code. 
2.  In side or rear yards, fences shall not exceed a maximum height of six feet. 
3.  In front yards, fences shall not exceed 42 inches in height. 
4.  Barbed wire fences shall be permitted only in non-residential zoning districts. 
C.  Business and industrial fences. Property line fences within all business and industrial districts shall not exceed eight feet in height, except by conditional use permit 
Subd. 17.  Coffee kiosks. Coffee kiosks shall be subject to the following standards: 
A.  The activity shall be conducted within a free-standing building, no larger than 100 square feet in size. 
B.  The use shall not result in the elimination of the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for all uses on the parcel. 
C.  Vehicular stacking lanes shall comply with the following: 
1.  A minimum length of 150 feet shall be provided for a single stacking lane or 80 feet per lane when multiple lanes are provided. 
2.  Stacking lanes shall be designed such that they do not interfere with existing parking and vehicular circulation. 
3.  Stacking lanes shall be clearly identified through striping, landscaping, and/or signage. 
D.  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold. 
E.  Evidence of issuance of a permit from the Minnesota Department of Health shall be provided to the city. 
F.  If the use of the building ceases for a period of six months, the conditional use permit shall lapse and the property owner shall remove the building and clean up the site. 
G.  No on-site preparation of food shall be allowed. 
Subd. 18.  Convenience store design. Convenience stores shall be subject to the following standards: 
A.  The minimum required building setback shall relate to any canopy, weather protection, pump island or building. 
B.  The sale or rent of motor vehicles, trailers, campers, boats and other items which are not kept entirely within the building shall be prohibited. 
C.  A minimum 20 feet landscaped yard shall be provided along all abutting public right-of-way lines, except where approved driveways occur. 
D.  No goods offered for sale on a motor fuel station site shall be stored, sold or displayed outside a building unless permitted otherwise pursuant to this section. 
E.  All recyclables, trash and waste material shall be stored within the building or within a separate enclosure subject to design and cosmetic requirements set forth in this chapter. 
F.  The outdoor lighting system shall be approved by the city and shall be so designed to prevent any undue light being directly visible from the public right-of-way or abutting lots, subject to lighting requirements as set forth in this chapter. 
G.  Wherever a motor fuel station abuts an R district, a solid six-foot high screen (not less) shall be erected and maintained along the side and rear property line that abuts the R district. 
H.  Access or egress curb cuts to a motor fuel station shall not be less than 50 feet from the curbline intersection on minor collector streets and 80 feet on major collector streets. 
I.  Accessory car washes are subject to the following: 
1.  Match the exterior material standards and design of the principal building. 
2.  Stacking space shall be designed to accommodate six vehicles. 
3.  Stacking space shall not interfere with on-site circulation or parking and loading areas. 
4.  Provisions shall be made to control and reduce noise of car wash operations and vacuums. 
5.  Vacuum locations shall not interfere with car wash stacking. 
6.  The regulations for commercial car washes in this chapter shall be met. 
Subd. 19.  Commercial Car Washes. 
A.  Entry and exit doors shall be closed during wash/dry cycles. 
B.  Stacking spaces shall be provided and oriented to prevent traffic backup on adjacent streets. 
C.  Parking and stacking spaces shall be screened from view of adjacent residential use areas. 
D.  Vehicular access points shall be limited to prevent traffic conflicts. 
E.  Vacuums shall not interfere with stacking spaces and not be in a yard adjacent to a residential use area. 
F.  The entire area other than that occupied by structure or landscaping shall be a concrete or paved surface. 
G.  Lighting shall have no direct source visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent land. 
H.  Screening shall be provided as specified in this Code. 
Subd. 20.  Municipal utilities for residential development. In all R-2, R-3, and R-4, districts, municipal water and sewer facilities shall be available and installed prior to completion of any structures and use of any structure or dwelling units thereon. 
Subd. 21.  Design and construction requirements for multiple family, office, commercial, industrial, and public and institutional developments. The following provisions shall apply to any new building construction in Residential Double, Townhouse and Multiple (R-2, R-3, R-4), Limited Business (LB), Neighborhood Business (NB), General Business (GB), Community Shopping Center (CSC), Limited Industrial (I-1), General Industrial (I-2), Research and Development Park (RD) and Business Park (BP) zoning districts: 
A.  General building design requirements. 
1.  Design supervision by architect. Architects shall be required for the construction of all buildings. The building plan, including site plan for such a building, shall be certified by an architect, registered by the state, stating that he has personally viewed the site and has designed the building to fit the site as planned and to be harmonious with the adjacent buildings, topography and natural surroundings and in accordance with the purposes and objectives of this chapter. This requirement shall not prohibit the preparation of the site plan or the landscape plan by a professional landscape architect. 
2.  Exterior vertical surface design. All exterior vertical surfaces shall have an equally attractive or the same finish. 
3.  Any building facade exceeding 40 feet (80 feet in I-1/I-2) in width shall be designed with multiple planes, multiple sections of coordinating materials, or both, to add visual interest every 40 (80) feet. 
4.  The ground level of any three-story or taller structure shall be visually distinct from the upper stories. 
B.  Specific building design requirements. 
1.  Storage space in multiple dwellings. A minimum of 150 cubic feet of storage shall be provided within the multiple-dwelling building for each dwelling unit, exclusive of storage space provided within each dwelling unit. In townhouse units only, this storage space may be provided in a garage serving the unit. 
2.  Canopies and awnings. The design of canopies shall be in keeping with the overall building design in terms of location, size (scale), and form. 
3.  Exterior building surface materials. 
a.  Policy statement. Exterior building materials shall be attractive in appearance, durable and compatible with adjacent structures and consistent with the city's standards for the district in which it is located. 
b.  The intent of this section is to provide a strong, dominant architectural theme through the use of a combination of appropriate, durable, non-degradable, and low maintenance materials. 
c.  Requirements. 
i.  Exterior surface materials of a newly constructed building shall be subject to the following requirements: 
A.  Classes of materials. Exterior building materials shall be divided into Class I, Class II, Class III, Class IV and Class V categories as follows: 
Class I 
•  Clay-based masonry units; brick (integrally colored) 
•  Natural stone 
•  Glass/spandrel glass 
•  Other comparable or superior materials (as approved by the city council) 
Class II 
•  Specialty concrete block such as textured, burnished block or rock faced block 
•  Masonry stucco 
•  Manufactured stone provided it replicates the appearance of natural stone, not concrete block 
•  Insulated metal panel systems 
•  Other comparable or superior materials (as approved by city council) 
Class III 
•  Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) 
•  Architecturally precast textured concrete panels 
•  Glass block 
•  Ornamental metal as an accent to the building 
•  Cement-based and architectural products (e.g. Quik-Brik and HardieBoard) 
•  Other comparable or superior materials (as approved by city council) 
Class IV 
•  Smooth concrete block 
•  Smooth scored concrete block 
•  Smooth concrete tip up panels 
•  Ceramic 
•  Wood 
•  Other comparable or superior materials (as approved by city council) 
Class V 
•  Steel, sheet or corrugated aluminum, or iron provided it is coated or anodized with a non-reflective, glare-free finish) 
•  Any other material not within the standards set forth in paragraph b.i. 
B.  New constructed buildings shall incorporate the classes of materials as follows: 
(1)  Buildings within LB, NB, CSC, RD and BP zoning districts shall use at least two Class I materials and the building must be finished with at least 65 percent Class I materials, not more than 35 percent Class II or Class III materials, and not more than ten percent Class IV materials. 
(2)  Buildings within GB, I-1 and I-2, zoning districts and located 800 feet or less from a county, state or federal right-of-way shall use at least two different Class I or Class II materials and the building must be finished with: at least 65 percent Class I materials or 65 percent combination of Class I and II materials provided not less than 35 percent is Class I materials; not more than 35 percent of Class III and Class IV materials; in no case shall Class IV materials exceed ten percent. 
(3)  Buildings within I-1, I-2 or GB zoning districts and located more than 800 feet from a county, state or federal right-of-way shall comply with the following: 
a.  Such buildings shall utilize at least 75 percent Class I, Class II or Class III materials. Buildings shall be constructed of a vertical finish made of noncombustible, non-degradable, and low maintenance construction material. 
b.  No more than 25 percent of the finish of the exterior, exposed walls of any newly constructed building may be finished with Class IV and V materials. 
d.  Expansion or enlargement of metal-sided buildings. 
i.  In the event any building, which is an existing, nonconforming metal-sided building under this subdivision on the effective date of this ordinance [from which this section is derived], is enlarged or expanded and the expansion is less than 10,000 square feet and 50 percent in size by total square feet of the existing, nonconforming metal building, the expansion structure need not comply with the provisions of this subdivision, but any exterior, exposed side or surface of the expansion structure shall be constructed of identical material and color to the existing, nonconforming building. In the event the expansion or enlargement is at least 10,000 square feet or 50 percent in size by total square feet of the existing, nonconforming metal building, whichever is greater, the provisions governing nonconforming structures or uses in this chapter shall govern. 
ii.  For purpose of this subsection, the total square feet of the existing nonconforming building shall be determined as the total size of the existing building as existed on June 1, 1995. The total square feet or percentage of any and all expansions to an existing nonconforming building as of June 1, 1995, shall be aggregated for purposes of calculating the size or percentage of the total expansion to the original building existing on June 1, 1995. 
C.  Expansion or enlargement of other nonconforming buildings. In the event any existing, nonconforming building, which is constructed of material other than metal, is enlarged or expanded, and the expansion is less than 10,000 square feet and 50 percent in size by total square feet of the existing nonconforming building, the expansion structure to the existing, nonconforming structure shall be constructed of compatible material and color to the existing, nonconforming structure. 
D.  Site design and development requirements. All multi-family, commercial and industrial uses shall be designed and developed in accordance with the following: 
1.  Landscaping. All yards shall be landscaped or be left in a natural state. If any yards are to be landscaped, they shall be landscaped attractively with lawn, trees, shrubs, etc. Any areas left in a natural state shall be properly maintained in a sightly and well-kept condition. Yards adjoining any residential district shall be landscaped with buffer planting, if this is not provided in the natural state. Plans of such screens shall be submitted for approval as part of a site plan and installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any land in the district. In the event this requirement cannot be met because of climate, a bond shall be required to insure compliance within a reasonable time. The design shall make use of all land contained in the site. All of the site plan shall be related to the multiple use, i.e., either parking, circulation, recreation, landscaping, screening, building, storage, etc. 
2.  Drainage. The drainage of stormwaters shall be provided for either on the site or in a public storm sewer. 
3.  Curbs. Interior curbs shall be constructed within the property to separate driving and parking surfaces from landscaped areas. Interior curbs required by this section shall be concrete construction. 
4.  Walkways. Surfaced walkways shall be provided from parking areas, loading zones and recreation areas to the entrances of buildings. 
5.  Surfacing. All interior driveways, parking areas, loading areas, etc., shall be of blacktop or concrete construction. 
6.  Burying utilities. All utilities, including electrical and telephone lines, shall be buried in all new subdivisions as required by chapter 13 of the Code, unless otherwise approved by the council. 
7.  Enclosure of trash and recyclables containers. All trash and recyclables containers stored outside in the R-4, LB, NB, GB, CSC, RD, I-1, I-2, PF and BP zoning districts shall be stored within an enclosure subject to the following standards: 
a.  The enclosure shall have an impermeable floor surface. 
b.  The enclosure shall be attached to the principal building in the limited business (LB), neighborhood business (NB), general business (GB), community shopping center (CSC), and research and development (RD) zoning districts. 
c.  The enclosure may be detached from the principal building in the residential multiple (R-4), limited industrial (I-1), general industrial (I-2), business park (BP) and public facility (PF) zoning districts. 
d.  The enclosure shall satisfy principal structures setbacks required for the applicable zoning district. 
e.  The enclosure shall be constructed of materials to match the exterior of the principal structure, with gates or doors having at least 90 percent opacity. 
f.  The enclosure shall be of sufficient size to enclose all trash and recyclables containers and shall be not less than six feet and not more than ten feet in height. 
g.  The above provisions apply in addition to the provisions of chapter 10 of this Code which regulate the storage, deposit, and disposal of refuse on all properties. 
8.  Lighting. On-site lighting shall be provided as is necessary for security, safety and traffic circulation. Such illumination shall be indirect and diffused or shielded. Lighting shall not be directed upon public rights-of-way or adjacent properties and the source of light shall not be visible from off the property. 
9.  Natural features. The site shall show due regard for all natural terrain features, such as trees, watercourses, historic areas or similar conditions. 
10.  Public safety. All site and building plans for multiple dwellings shall be reviewed by the fire and police departments. Plans shall be reviewed for fire warning and protection systems, public safety, vehicular access and concerns related to public safety. 
11.  Multiple-family dwelling complexes. Multiple-family dwelling complexes shall have a minimum recreation area equal to 200 square feet for each dwelling unit containing two or fewer bedrooms and 100 additional square feet for each dwelling unit containing more than two bedrooms. Said recreation area shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any ponding area. 
12.  Screening of mechanical equipment. 
a.  Purpose. The intent of this section is to promote consistent and high standards of design and construction for the commercial, industrial, and public uses in the city. These standards are set forth in order to enhance the visual appearance of the commercial, industrial, and public areas within the city by ensuring the high quality of development, redevelopment and compatibility with evolving architectural or planning themes that contribute to a community image of quality. 
b.  General requirements. The following requirements apply to all building and ground mounted mechanical equipment: 
(i)  All mechanical equipment shall be designed and located so as not to disrupt or detract from the visual theme and appearance of the subject building. 
(ii)  All mechanical equipment, whether located on a roof, side of a structure, or on the ground, shall be entirely screened from public view and from the ground level of any adjacent property or street that is of equal grade with the subject building. 
(iii)  Prior to any building construction or the issuance of a building or mechanical permit, all mechanical equipment and proposed screening shall be depicted on the building's site plan and/or building elevation drawings. 
(iv)  Screening and finishes shall be kept in a state of good repair and condition. 
(v)  All building mounted mechanical equipment on new buildings or newly located equipment on existing buildings shall be set back from the edge of the roof a minimum of 20 feet. 
(vi)  All existing mechanical equipment shall be identified on a proposed site plan. 
c.  Requirements for new constructions or major remodels. The following additional requirements shall apply to mechanical equipment installed with any new construction, or major remodel of existing structure: 
(i)  Where 50 percent or more of a building's long side or front façade area, whichever is longest, is resurfaced with new exterior materials; or 50 percent or more linear feet of the roofline is altered; or the roofline of any end cap of a multi-tenant commercial building is altered, the following requirements shall apply: 
1.  A parapet wall at least 30 inches in height as measured from the roof line shall be constructed on the perimeter of the roof. 
2.  A physical screen shall be used in combination with the parapet wall if all of the mechanical equipment cannot be fully screened by a parapet design. 
(ii)  When 45 percent or more of the existing exterior mechanical equipment serving any structure is replaced at one time, a parapet wall or physical screen shall be used to fully screen all new and existing mechanical equipment. 
(iii)  When circumstances exist for a new construction of major remodel that trigger both of the requirements of this subsection, the requirements set forth above which will most completely screen the mechanical equipment shall apply. 
d.  Requirements for replacement and retrofit of equipment. When the existing mechanical equipment is replaced or new equipment is installed and associated with improvements or retrofits, the new or replaced mechanical unit associated with an existing principal structure that is not fully screened from public view may be painted as an alternative to screening to meet the intent of this ordinance. Painting of mechanical units shall meet the following requirements: 
(i)  Paint color shall be earth tone and compatible with existing trim or siding color on principal structure. 
(ii)  Paint color shall be consistent with other painted equipment complying with the requirements and intent of this section. 
(iii)  Paint shall be durable and applied with an even and professional appearance. 
e.  Physical screening requirements. For purposes of this section, a physical screen shall be defined as a separate screening structure that surrounds a mechanical unit(s) and screens it from public view. When physical screening is required, the following shall apply: 
(i)  The physical screen shall be visually integrated with the principal structure in terms of materials, color, shape and size. Where individual tenant equipment is provided, a continuous screen is required. 
(ii)  Screening material consisting of wood is not integrated architecturally with the building, unless the building's exterior surface material consists of 75 percent or more of wood. 
(iii)  All screening material shall be at least as tall as the mechanical equipment itself and extend down to top of curb, unless a sight line analysis is provided that shows compliance with this section. 
f.  Ground mounted mechanical equipment. 
(i)  Ground mounted mechanical equipment shall be fully screened by either a masonry wall or opaque landscaping. 
(ii)  All landscaping screens must consist of plant material that remains fully opaque year-round. 
(iii)  Masonry walls shall be constructed of the same material and shall be the same color as the principal structure's building surface material. 
g.  Exemptions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the following mechanical equipment is exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(i)  All roof mounted mechanical equipment under eight inches in diameter. 
(ii)  Certain painted or metallic finishes and unit shapes that are determined by the city to meet the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
Subd. 22.  Outdoor display, outdoor storage, outdoor events—seasonal and temporary, cultural/entertainment events, and outdoor food sales. 
A.  Restrictions. All outdoor storage, temporary outdoor events and seasonal outdoor events shall comply with this subdivision. 
1.  No outdoor storage shall be permitted except in the general business (GB), community shopping center (CSC), limited industrial (I-1), and general industrial (I-2) districts, and upon the council's granting of a conditional use permit. 
2.  No seasonal outdoor events or temporary outdoor events shall be permitted except in the public facility (PF), planned development (PD), limited business (LB), neighborhood business (NB), general business (GB), community shopping center (CSC), limited industrial (I-1) districts. Temporary outdoor events may also be permitted in business park (BP), research and development (RD) and Cedar Grove (CG) districts. In no event shall seasonal outdoor events be permitted except upon the council's granting of a conditional use permit. 
3.  No cultural/entertainment event or outdoor food sales shall be permitted except in the public facility (PF), planned development (PD), limited business (LB), neighborhood business (NB), general business (GB), community shopping center (CSC), limited industrial (I-1), business park (BP), research and development (RD), and Cedar Grove (CG) districts. In no event shall a cultural/entertainment event or outdoor food sales be permitted except upon the city clerk granting of a permit as set forth herein. 
B.  Conditional use permit application. All applications for a conditional use permit for outdoor storage shall include a detailed and scale site plan specifying the dimensions, location, material and design of the storage enclosure and area. 
C.  Performance standards and noncompliance. 
1.  Standards for outdoor display. Outdoor display of merchandise or goods offered for sale, rent or lease shall be permitted only in the neighborhood business (NB), general business (GB) and community shopping center (CSC) zoning districts, subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  The display area shall not exceed 60 square feet. 
(b)  The display area shall be located immediately adjacent to the principal structure and only on the side of the building which contains a main entrance. 
(c)  The display area shall not extend more than five feet out from the building and shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(d)  The display area shall not take up required parking spaces or landscaping areas of the principal use. 
(e)  The display items shall consist solely of products sold or distributed within the principal structure by the occupant thereof. 
2.  Standards for outdoor storage. Outdoor storage permitted in accordance with subparagraph A shall conform to the following standards, in addition to those standards in connection with conditional use permit: 
(a)  Outdoor storage items shall be placed within an enclosure as necessary to achieve appropriate security and containment or for public safety reasons when determined necessary by the city. In general business (GB) and community shopping center (CSC) zoning districts, the enclosure shall be attached to the principal building and be constructed of materials which are aesthetically compatible with the principal building. In limited industrial (I-1) and general industrial (I-2) zoning districts, the enclosure may be detached from the principal building. 
(b)  The storage area shall be located in the side or rear yards and shall not encroach into any required front building setback area or other required setbacks. 
(c)  The outdoor storage area shall be screened from view from the public right-of-way and from any adjacent property which is designated for residential uses in the comprehensive guide plan. 
(d)  The storage area shall not interfere with any pedestrian or vehicular movement. 
(e)  The storage area shall not take up required parking spaces or landscaping areas. 
(f)  The storage area shall be surfaced with concrete or an approved equivalent to control dust and erosion. The surface shall be properly maintained to prevent deterioration. 
3.  Standards for temporary outdoor events and outdoor food sales. Temporary outdoor events and outdoor food sales shall be subject to the following standards: 
(a)  Adequate off-street parking shall be provided ensuring that no obstruction or interference occurs with existing traffic patterns. 
(b)  No portion of the sale or event shall take place within any public right-of-way. A minimum of ten feet setback shall be maintained from all property lines and no portion of the use shall take place within 100 feet of any property line of any residential use or residential zoned property. 
(c)  The site shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner and the display of items shall not cover more than five percent of the total lot as to not interfere with pedestrian safety, vehicular movement, emergency access and existing business activities. 
(d)  All signs for the event shall comply with City Code sign regulations. 
(e)  Tents and temporary membrane structures having an area in excess of 400 square feet and canopies in excess of 400 square feet shall be subject to a building permit. 
(f)  The owner and/or operator of the sale or event shall have the written permission of the fee owner of the property on which the sale or event is located to use the specific site. 
(g)  Hours of operation shall be subject to this chapter's regulations governing hours of operation for commercial business. 
(h)  No parking shall be permitted on any adjacent parcel without the prior written permission of the adjacent parcel owner. 
(i)  The owner and/or operator of the sale or event shall obtain a permit for the outdoor use of electronic sound system or audio equipment in accordance with chapter 10 of this Code if the use of such equipment will occur after 10:00 p.m. 
(j)  Temporary outdoor events on a property shall be restricted in duration and occurrence as follows: (1) ten days or less; (2) not more than once per 30-day-period; and (3) no more than three temporary events per year or a combination of 20 days total in a calendar year. 
(k)  Outdoor food sales on a property shall be restricted in duration and occurrence as follows: (1) up to 90 days per each issued permit; and (2) no more than four permits per calendar year. 
4.  Standards for seasonal outdoor events. Seasonal outdoor events permitted in accordance with subparagraph (A) shall conform to the following standards, in addition to those standards in connection with conditional use permit: 
(a)  The seasonal outdoor event shall meet the minimum requirements for temporary outdoor events set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  The event area shall be within an enclosure as necessary to achieve appropriate security and containment or for public safety reasons when determined necessary by the city. 
(c)  The event area shall not encroach into any required front building setback area or other required setbacks. 
(d)  The event area shall be screened from view from adjacent residential uses and residential zoned property. 
(e)  The event area shall not interfere with any pedestrian or vehicular movement. 
(f)  The event area shall not take up required parking spaces or landscaping areas of the principal use. 
(g)  The event area shall be surfaced with concrete or an approved equivalent to control dust and erosion. The surface shall be properly maintained to prevent deterioration. 
(h)  Seasonal outdoor events on a property shall be restricted in duration and occurrence as follows: (1) not more than 90 consecutive days per year; and (2) one seasonal outdoor event per calendar year. 
5.  Standards for cultural/entertainment events. Cultural/entertainment event permitted in accordance with subparagraph (A) shall conform to the following standards, subject to the issuance of a permit by the city clerk: 
(a)  A site plan showing off-street parking and traffic circulation must be approved by the chief of police and director of public works. 
(b)  No activity of the event shall take place within any public right-of-way unless a special event permit pursuant to chapter 7 has been issued. A minimum of ten feet setback shall be maintained from all property lines except 100 feet setback shall be maintained from any property line of any residential use or residential zoned property. 
(c)  All signs for the event shall comply with City Code sign regulations. 
(d)  Tents and temporary membrane structures having an area in excess of 400 square feet and canopies in excess of 400 square feet shall be subject to a building permit. 
(e)  The owner and/or operator of the event shall have the written permission of the fee owner of the property on which the event is located. 
(f)  Hours of operation shall be subject to this chapter's regulations governing hours of operation for commercial business. 
(g)  No parking shall be permitted on any adjacent parcel without the prior written permission of the adjacent parcel owner. 
(h)  Any outdoor use of electronic sound system or audio equipment after 10:00 p.m. shall be in accordance with a permit issued under chapter 10 of this Code. 
(i)  Cultural/entertainment event on a property shall be restricted in duration and occurrence as follows: (1) not more than three consecutive days per event; and (2) no more than six events per calendar year. 
D.  Exemptions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the occupant of a property zoned for commercial or industrial uses may store up to three passenger motor vehicles on the property, provided the vehicle(s) is (1) owned or leased by the occupant; (2) the vehicle is regularly used in connection with and as an integral component of the operation of the principal use on the property; (3) is not larger than the footprint of a standard passenger vehicle parking stall; and (4) parked and stored in a designated parking spaces as approved by the city. In no case shall the number of permitted stored vehicles under this paragraph exceed three for any given parcel of record. 
This exemption does not permit the outdoor storage of equipment, trailers, recreational vehicles, recreational camping vehicles, motorcycles or other similar vehicles, semi-tractors, or vehicles for sale. 
Subd. 23.  Home occupations. Home occupations shall be subject to the following requirements: 
A.  The occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and shall not change the character thereof. 
B.  No more than three persons shall be engaged in the home occupation, one of whom resides outside of the dwelling. 
C.  No home occupation activity shall be allowed within a detached or attached accessory building or garage. 
D.  Evidence of the home occupation shall not be visible from the street. 
E.  No signs shall be present other than those permitted in R zoning districts. 
F.  No home occupation shall involve over-the-counter sales. 
G.  Entrance to the home occupation shall be gained from within the principal structure. 
H.  The home occupation shall not utilize more than three off-street parking spaces for the occupant and visitors. 
Subd. 24.  Garage sales. Garage sales are allowed in all residential zoning districts with the following restrictions: 
A.  There shall not be more than three sales events in each calendar year per dwelling unit. 
B.  Sale events are limited to any consecutive 72-hour period. 
C.  Garage sale signs must comply with the sign ordinance. 
D.  Garage sale signs may be erected on private properties other than the property where the sale is conducted provided permission from the private property owner is obtained. Signs shall be removed at termination of the sale. 
Subd. 25.  Manufactured home park developments. Manufactured/mobile homes shall be developed under the requirements of chapter 4 of this Code. 
Subd. 26.  Antennae, satellite dishes, wind energy conversion systems and towers. 
A.  Purpose. The regulations and requirements of this subdivision are intended to: 
1.  Provide for the appropriate location and development of antennae, satellite dishes, towers, and wind energy conversion systems which are often needed to serve the residents and businesses within the city; 
2.  Minimize adverse visual affects of antennae, satellite dishes, wind energy conversion systems and towers through careful design, siting, and screening; 
3.  Prevent damage to adjacent properties from the collapse or destruction of antennae, satellite dishes, wind energy conversion systems and towers; 
4.  Maximize the use of existing tower or structures in order to limit the number of freestanding towers; and 
5.  Provide restrictions and regulations that do not conflict with any federal statute or FCC rule or regulation. 
B.  Building mounted antennae and satellite dishes. Building mounted antennae and satellite dishes shall be permitted in all zoning districts of the city, subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The height of any building mounted antenna or satellite dish, including its support structure, shall not exceed 50 percent of the total building height or 15 feet above the highest point of the roof, whichever is less; 
2.  Accessory equipment associated with a building mounted antenna or satellite dish shall be located within the building or within a roof or ground enclosure which is constructed of materials and color scheme compatible with the principal building; 
3.  Building mounted satellite dishes located within any agricultural district (A), estate district (E), residential district (R-1, R-1S, R-2, R-3, and R-4), public facilities (PF) district, or planned development district, within the area designated solely for residential uses under a planned development agreement (PD) shall not be larger than one meter (39 inches) in diameter; and 
4.  Building mounted satellite dishes and antennae located within any agricultural district (A); estate district (E); residential district (R-1, R-1S, R-2, R-3, and R-4); public facilities district (PF); or planned development district within the area designated solely for residential uses under a planned development agreement (PD) shall not be used for commercial purposes. 
C.  Public utility tower mounted antennae. Public utility tower mounted antennae shall be a permitted use in all zoning districts of the city in which the public utility tower is located, subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The height of any antennae mounted to a public utility tower shall not exceed 20 feet above the highest point of the public utility tower. 
2.  Accessory equipment associated with the antennae shall be located within an enclosure which shall not be greater in area than 400 square feet and shall be designed and constructed of material and color scheme compatible with accessory structures on the surrounding properties. 
3.  Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in this subdivision, a freestanding tower for the purpose of elevating an antennae shall be a permitted use in all zoning districts of the city in which a public utility tower is located, as defined in this chapter, provided that it is located within the base area of the public utility tower and directly surrounded by the support structure of the public utility tower and meets all of the requirements in this subparagraph. 
D.  Freestanding satellite dishes. Freestanding satellite dishes shall be permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Freestanding satellite dishes shall be located in the rear yard; 
2.  Accessory equipment associated with a freestanding satellite dish shall be located within the principal building or within an enclosure which is constructed of materials and color scheme compatible with the principal building or within an equipment encasement not exceeding 10 feet (w) × 10 feet (l) × 5 feet (h) in size; 
3.  Satellite dishes and any accessory equipment enclosures shall meet the setback requirements for accessory structures as set forth in this chapter of the Code; 
4.  Satellite dishes and accessory equipment enclosures shall not be located within any utility or drainage easement; and 
5.  Freestanding satellite dishes located within any agricultural district (A); estate district (E); residential district (R-1, R-1S, R-2, and R-3); or planned development district within the area designated solely for residential uses under a planned development agreement (PD) shall not be used for commercial purposes. 
6.  Freestanding satellite dishes shall not exceed 15 feet in height. 
E.  Freestanding towers and antennae. 
1.  Freestanding towers and antennae in residential use districts. Freestanding towers and antennae shall be permitted as an accessory use only in agricultural districts (A); estate districts (E); residential districts (R-1, R-1S, R-2, R-3, and R-4); and planned development districts (PD) within the area which is designated solely for residential uses under a planned development agreement, subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  The combined height of a freestanding tower and any antenna mounted thereto shall not exceed 60 feet, in height, measured from ground elevation of the tower to the highest point of the tower, including any antenna mounted thereto; 
(b)  Permanent platforms or structures, exclusive of antennae, that increase off-site visibility are prohibited; 
(c)  No more than one freestanding tower shall be permitted on any one residential lot; 
(d)  All setback requirements for accessory structures, as set forth in this chapter, shall be met, provided the minimum setback distance from a residential structure shall be equal to the permissible height of the tower; 
(e)  The tower shall be located in the rear yard; 
(f)  The tower shall be self supporting through the use of a design that uses an open frame or monopole configuration; 
(g)  No tower shall be used for commercial purposes. 
2.  Freestanding towers and antennae in non-residential use districts. Notwithstanding paragraph (1) herein, freestanding towers and antennae shall be permitted pursuant to a conditional use permit approved by city council only in limited industrial districts (I-1); general industrial districts (I-2); park district (P); public facility districts (PF) and planned development districts within the area designated solely for industrial uses under a planned development agreement (PD), provided an antenna shall be a permitted use in a public facility (PF) provided the antenna is placed or mounted on a city water reservoir tank or tower. Freestanding towers and antennae permitted under this paragraph shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  The combined height of any freestanding tower and antennae or satellite dishes mounted thereto shall not exceed: 
(i)  100 feet, measured from ground elevation of the tower to the highest point of the tower-antenna/satellite dish combination; or 
(ii)  125 feet, measured from ground elevation of the tower to the highest point of the tower-antenna/satellite dish combination, provided the tower is designed to: 
(A)  Accommodate the applicant's antennae and at least one additional comparable antennae for other communication providers; 
(B)  Accept antennae mounted at varying heights; and 
(C)  Allow the future rearrangement of antennae upon the tower. 
(iii)  150 feet, measured from ground elevation of the tower to the highest point of the tower-antenna/satellite dish combination, provided the tower is designed to: 
(A)  Accommodate the applicant's antennae and at least two additional comparable antennae for other communication providers. 
(b)  All setback requirements for any accessory equipment building or structure shall be met as set forth in this chapter, provided the minimum setback distance of the tower from any property line of a parcel or lot within a residential use district shall be equal to two times the height of the tower or 300 feet, whichever is greater; 
(c)  The tower shall be located in the rear yard; 
(d)  The tower shall be self-supporting through the use of a design that uses an open-frame or monopole configuration; 
(e)  Permanent platforms or structures, exclusive of the tower or antennae, that increase off-site visibility are prohibited; 
(f)  Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest possible extent practical; 
(g)  Accessory equipment associated with freestanding towers and antennae shall be located within an equipment building constructed of materials and color compatible with principal building and surrounding area or within an equipment encasement not exceeding 10 feet (w) by 10 feet (l) by five feet (h) in size. 
(h)  The applicant shall provide a color manipulated "as built" photograph of the tower as proposed for the location. 
(i)  No new tower shall be permitted unless the city council finds that the equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated at any preferred co-location site. The city council may find that a preferred co-location site cannot accommodate the planned equipment for the following reasons: 
(i)  The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the preferred co-location site, and the preferred co-location site cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate the planned equipment or its equivalent at a reasonable cost, as certified by a qualified radio frequency engineer; 
(ii)  The planned equipment would interfere significantly with the usability of existing or approved equipment at the preferred co-location site, and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost, as certified by a qualified radio frequency engineer; 
(iii)  A preferred co-location site cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably, as certified by a qualified radio frequency engineer; or 
(iv)  The applicant, after a good-faith effort, is unable to lease, purchase or otherwise obtain space for the planned equipment at a preferred co-location site. 
F.  Wind energy conversion systems. Wind energy conversion systems shall be permitted only in agricultural districts (A); limited industrial districts (I-1); general industrial districts (I-2); public facility districts (PF) and planned development districts within the area designated solely for industrial uses under a planned development agreement (PD) pursuant to a conditional use permit approved by city council subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The system shall not exceed a height of 100 feet; 
2.  All setback requirements for accessory structures as set forth in this Code shall be met, provided the minimum setback distance from any residential structure shall be equal to two times the height of the main structure of the system; 
3.  All systems shall have an automatic speed control device as part of the design; 
4.  All systems shall comply with the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's Noise Pollution Section (NPC 1 and NPC 2), as amended; and 
5.  Any wind energy conversion system which utilizes a propeller shall have neither a blade rotation diameter of greater than 35 feet nor a blade arc less than 30 feet above the ground. 
G.  General standards. All antennae, satellite dishes, towers, and wind energy conversion systems shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
1.  Location and color shall be in a manner to minimize off-site visibility to the greatest possible extent; 
2.  Compliance with all applicable provisions of the Code, including the provisions of the state building code therein adopted, in addition to the requirements set out in this subdivision; 
3.  No signs, other than for public safety warnings or equipment information, shall be affixed to any portion thereof; 
4.  No artificial illumination, except when required by law or by a governmental agency to protect the public's health and safety, shall be utilized; 
5.  The placement of transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be integrated within the site, being located within an existing structure whenever possible; any new accessory equipment structure shall be attached to the principal building, if possible, and constructed of materials and of a color scheme compatible with the principal structure and/or surrounding area or within an equipment encasement not exceeding 10 feet (w), by 10 feet (l), by five feet (h), in size; 
6.  Accessory equipment or buildings shall be screened by suitable landscaping, as set forth in this chapter, except where a design of non-vegetative screening better reflects and compliments the architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood; 
7.  Building permits shall be required for the installation of building mounted satellite dishes in excess of five feet in diameter, towers, and wind energy conversion systems; 
8.  Structural design, mounting and installation of a tower, antenna or satellite dish which requires a building permit shall be verified and approved by a qualified licensed engineer; and 
9.  Towers, and any equipment attached thereto, shall be unclimbable by design for the first 12 feet or completely surrounded by a six feet high security fence with a lockable gate. 
Subd. 26A.  Alternative energy systems. 
A.  Purpose and intent: It is the city's desire to become a more sustainable community by encouraging alternative energy sources that conserve energy and result in less/no pollution output. It is in the city's and its residents' best interests to encourage alternative energy systems that have a positive impact on energy production and conservation while not having an adverse impact on the community. The following purposes of this Section will further the foregoing city objectives: 
1.  To promote development and utilization of alternative energy sources subject to clear regulatory provisions for approving alternative energy systems while mitigating any negative impacts to neighboring properties. 
2.  To create a livable community where development incorporates sustainable design elements, such as resource and energy conservation and use of renewable energy. 
3.  To protect and enhance air quality and limit the effects of climate change through the decrease of the use of fossil fuels. 
4.  To encourage alternative energy development in locations where the technology is viable and the environmental, economic and social impacts can be mitigated. 
B.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subdivision: 
Alternative energy system: A ground source heat pump, wind energy conversion system or solar energy system. 
Community solar garden: A photovoltaic system that provides retail electric power (or a financial proxy for retail power) to multiple community households or businesses located off-site from the location of the community solar garden, under the provisions of Minn. Stats. § 216B.1641 or successor statute. 
Photovoltaic system: An active solar energy system that converts solar energy directly into electricity. 
Solar collector: A device, structure or a part of a device or structure for which the primary purpose is to capture sunlight and transform it into thermal, mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy as a component of a solar energy system. 
Solar energy: Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in the form of heat or light by a solar collector. 
Solar energy system: A device or structural design feature of which the primary purpose is to provide for interior lighting or provide for the collection, storage and distribution of energy for space heating or cooling, electricity (generation), or water heating. 
Solar energy system, active: A solar energy system of which primary purpose is to harvest energy by transferring collected solar energy into another form of energy or transferring heat from a solar collector to another medium using mechanical, electrical, or chemical means. 
Solar energy system, building-integrated: A solar energy system that is an integral part of a principle or accessory building, replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural component of the building. Building-integrated systems include, but are not limited to: photovoltaic or hot water solar energy systems that are contained within or substitute for roofing materials, windows, skylights, awnings and shade devices. 
Solar energy system, grid-intertie: A photovoltaic solar energy system that is connected to an electric circuit served by an electric utility company. 
Solar energy system, ground-mount: A solar energy system that is a freestanding system erected directly on the ground using a rack or pole structure. 
Solar energy system, off-grid: A photovoltaic solar energy system in which the circuits energized by the solar energy system are not electrically connected in any way to electric circuits that are served by an electric utility company. 
Solar energy system, passive: A solar energy system that utilizes building constituents such as walls, floors, roofs, windows, exterior building elements and landscaping that captures solar light or heat generated by the sun without transforming it to another form of energy or the use of mechanical and electrical equipment to enhance the conversion of solar energy to heat and electric power. 
Solar energy system, roof-mounted: A solar energy system mounted directly to or abutting the roof of a building. 
Solar farm: A commercial solar energy system facility that collects and converts sunlight into electricity, whether by photovoltaic (PV), concentrating solar thermal devices (CST), or other conversion technology, for the principal purpose of wholesale sales of generated electricity. 
Solar hot water system (also thermal system): A system that includes a solar collector and a heat exchanger that heats or preheats water for building heating systems or other hot water needs, including residential domestic hot water and hot water for commercial processes. 
C.  Solar energy systems: Solar energy systems shall be subject to the applicable regulations of the zoning district in which the system is located and the following requirements: 
1.  Exemptions. Building integrated solar energy systems and passive solar energy systems are exempt from the requirements of this subdivision and shall be regulated as any other building element. 
2.  Roof-mounted and ground-mounted solar energy systems. Roof-mounted and ground-mounted solar energy systems are deemed as a permitted accessory use in all districts, provided it meets all applicable zoning regulations for the district and the additional regulations set forth herein. 
3.  Setbacks. A roof-mounted solar energy system shall comply with the setback requirements for mechanical equipment and shall be set back a minimum of one foot from the edge of the roof for residential structures and ten feet for commercial, industrial and institutional structures. A ground-mounted solar energy system shall comply with the accessory structure setback requirements for the applicable zoning district in which the system is located. A community solar garden or solar farm shall comply with the setback requirements of a principal structure in the applicable zoning district in which it is located. 
4.  Height. A roof-mount solar energy system shall comply with the height requirements of the applicable zoning district. A roof-mounted solar energy system may be mounted at an angle to the roof to improve its efficiency; however, in any residential district and when installed on a residential structure, the highest point of any solar panel shall not be more than three feet, measured in a straight line, from the roof surface upon which the panel is mounted. A ground-mounted solar energy system shall not exceed 12 feet in height; however, the height may be increased up to an additional 15 feet if the system structure is set back from any property line an additional two feet for each one foot of height above 12 feet. 
5.  Aesthetics. The color of the solar collector is not required to be consistent with other roofing materials. Reflection angles from collector surfaces shall be oriented away from neighboring windows. Where necessary, screening may be required to address glare onto neighboring properties. 
6.  Screening. Roof-mounted solar energy systems located in non-residential districts or on non-residential uses shall be screened in accordance with the screening requirements of this chapter to the extent the screening does not adversely impact the effectiveness of the solar energy system. For ground-mounted solar energy systems, community solar gardens or solar farms, landscaping shall be provided to soften the view from public rights-of-way and adjacent residential properties and ground cover under the system shall be a suitable low/no maintenance vegetation that is, if possible, attractive to pollinators. 
7.  Surface coverage. A roof-mounted solar energy system shall not cover more than 80 percent of the south-facing roof surfaces or of an entire flat roof surface area. The surface area of ground-mount systems, together with all other structures, shall not exceed a maximum lot coverage of 30 percent for residential and 70 percent of commercial, industrial, and institutional zoning districts. 
8.  Power lines. All power lines shall be placed underground within the boundaries of the property if the power lines serving the site are underground. 
9.  Compliance with Minnesota State Building Code. All active solar energy systems shall comply with the Minnesota State Building Code, including the Plumbing Code, Electrical Code, Energy Code and Fire Code as applicable. 
10.  Certifications. Solar energy systems and all components thereof shall meet the minimum manufacturer standards, if any, as required by the Minnesota State Building Code, including the Plumbing Code, Electrical Code, Energy Code and Fire Code as applicable. 
11.  Utility connection. The property owner or occupant of a property on which a grid-intertie system is proposed to be installed shall provide to the city a copy of an executed agreement with the local utility provider prior to the issuance of a building permit evidencing the system to be installed is, in fact, a grid-intertie system. A visible external disconnect must be provided, if required by the utility provider. Off-grid systems are exempt from this requirement. 
12.  Abandonment. If a solar energy system remains nonfunctioning or inoperable for a period of 12 consecutive months, the system shall be deemed abandoned and shall constitute a public nuisance. Within 30 days of abandonment of the system or notice from the city to remove, the owner shall remove the abandoned system, including all parts and components, at the owner's expense and shall comply with all Minnesota State Building Code requirements for the demolition and removal of the system. 
13.  Permits. No solar energy system shall be erected, altered, improved, reconstructed, or installed in the city without first obtaining a zoning permit and any required permits under the Minnesota State Building Code from the city. 
D.  Wind energy conversion system. Wind energy conversion systems shall be subject to the regulations set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
Subd. 27.  Site plan review. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a formal site plan review procedure and provide regulations pertaining to the enforcement of site design standards consistent with the requirements of this section. Site plan review is required when a building permit is needed or site improvements or alterations are proposed. 
B.  Exceptions to review. The following shall be excepted from the foregoing requirements: 
1.  Agricultural developments. 
2.  One-family detached dwellings. 
3.  Two-family attached dwellings. 
C.  Approval authority. The city planner shall have approval authority of site plans. The site plan may be referred to the planning commission and/or city council for discussion, review, and informal comment. If any other development approvals such as variances or conditional use permits are required, then the site plan shall accompany those applications and be approved by the city council after review and recommendation by the planning commission. The city planner may also require a review by planning commission and city council to determine consistency of site plan with the evaluation criteria. 
D.  Evaluation criteria. The review shall be based upon, but not be limited to, compliance with the following: 
1.  Consistency with the city's Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  Provisions of the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances. 
3.  Relationships with the natural site features. 
4.  Relationships to surrounding land uses. 
5.  Design of the site in a manner that is sensitive natural features by minimizing development impacts. 
6.  Harmonious design relationships of the building and the site. 
7.  Building design, materials, and colors as they relate to compatibility with the site and adjacent uses. 
8.  The location of parking lots, driveways, and sidewalks as they relate to on-site and off-site impacts. 
9.  Buffering of sound and light on adjacent properties. 
E.  Information requirement. The information required for all site plan applications shall be consistent with the site plan review submittal checklist unless otherwise specified by the city planner in addition to other information that may be required for review purposes. 
F.  Minnesota state building code. The review and approval of site improvements pursuant to the requirements of city adopted building and fire codes shall be in addition to the site plan review process established under this section. The site plan approval process does not imply compliance with the requirements of these building and fire codes. 
Subd. 28.  Placement, erection and maintenance of signs. 
A.  Purpose, construction and definitions. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of this section shall be to regulate the placement, erection and maintenance of signs in the city so as to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city. 
2.  Construction. All terms and words used in this section shall be given their commonsense meaning considered in context, except as hereinafter specifically defined. 
3.  Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated: 
(a)  Business sign means any sign upon which there is any name or designation that has as its purpose business, professional or commercial identification and which is related directly to the use of the premises upon which the sign is located. 
(b)  Freestanding ground sign means a business sign erected on freestanding shafts, posts or walls which are solidly affixed to the ground and completely independent of any building or other structure. Any business freestanding ground sign which projects more than seven feet above ground level is considered a pylon sign. 
(c)  Governmental sign means any sign placed, erected or maintained by a governmental entity or agency for identification of or directions to a public facility or street or for traffic control or general public services. 
(d)  Local street means a street within the city that is under the exclusive control and jurisdictional authority of the city. 
(e)  Nonbusiness sign means any sign such as a personal nameplate or designation as for residences, churches, schools, hospitals, traffic or road signs, which do not contain advertising and are directly related to the premises upon which they are located. 
(f)  Noncommercial sign means any sign which does not contain advertising for the sale of products or services. 
(g)  Off-premises sign means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered somewhere other than on the property upon which the sign is located. 
(h)  Product sign means any sign upon which there is any brand name, trademark, logo, distinctive symbol, designation or advertising which has as its purpose the promotion of any business, product, goods, activity or service. Product signs shall be subordinate to business signs. 
(i)  Public right-of-way or public rights-of-way means the surface, air space above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, trail, avenue, boulevard, drive, court, concourse, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, skyway, waterway, dock, bulkhead, wharf, pier, easement or similar property or waters within the city owned by or under control of the city, or dedicated or otherwise conveyed to the city for general public use. 
(j)  Pylon sign means a business sign erected on freestanding shafts, posts or walls which are solidly affixed to the ground, and which projects more than seven feet above ground level. Pylon signs, when authorized, are considered a conditional use, as defined in the zoning chapter, and are subject to all conditions, regulations and fees required for conditional uses. 
(k)  Sign means any surface, facing or object upon which there is printed, painted or artistic matter, design or lighting. 
(l)  Sign area means the gross area, exclusive of supportive frame, which contains copy or identifying features such as a logo, character or identifying figure. The gross area shall be calculated as an enclosed area bounded by no more than 12 straight lines. 
(m)  Sign height means the distance from the lowermost ground point to which the sign is attached, to the highest point on the sign. 
(n)  Trail means any paved surface within the public right-of-way, outside of the paved street surface, used by pedestrians and cyclists. 
B.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Location of business signs. Business signs are permitted on property zoned business, industrial, agricultural, public facilities, RD or PD only in conjunction with an approved business, industrial or agricultural use. 
2.  Location of business signs in residential areas. Business signs are permitted in residentially zoned areas or areas of PD designation for residential use only under the following cases: 
(a)  "For sale" or "for rent" signs, four feet by four feet or smaller, advertising the premises upon which such sign is located. 
(b)  Real estate "for sale" signs, not over 100 square feet, of a land developer, which are located upon the premises offered for sale. 
(c)  Area identification signs for major apartment complexes. 
C.  General sign standards. 
1.  Construction and erection of signs. All signs shall be constructed and erected in a good and workmanlike manner of sound and sufficient materials so as to ensure the safety of the public and in accordance with all reasonable standards employed by professional signmakers. 
2.  Location on private property. No sign shall be erected, placed or located upon private property without the permission of the property owner or the lessee. 
3.  Location to property line. No business sign shall be located nearer than ten feet from any property or dividing line. 
4.  Location on public property. No sign, other than governmental signs, shall be placed upon any city owned public property, or railroad right-of-way. No sign, other than governmental signs, shall be affixed to any utility pole. 
5.  Moving parts, lights. No signs are allowed which contain moving sections or intermittent or flashing lights, except for intermittent display of time and temperature, governmental signs, and dynamic display signs allowed under subdivision K. below. 
6.  Obstruction of vision. No sign shall be erected or maintained in such place and manner as obstructs driver vision or is noxious, annoying or hazardous because of method of lighting, illumination, reflection or location. 
7.  Painted signs on buildings. No signs are allowed which are painted directly upon the walls of a building. 
8.  Placement within public right-of-way. No sign other than governmental signs, shall be located within any city owned public right-of-way, except as follows: 
(a)  Residential name and address signs may be located within the public right-of-way when such signs are attached to mail boxes, private lampposts or the like. 
(b)  Noncommercial signs may be placed in the public right-of-way of a local street only if the sign is located more than five feet from the back of the street curb where no trail exists, or where a trail exists, more than one foot from the edge of the trail furthest from the street curb. 
9.  Source of lighting. No signs are permitted for which the source of light is directly visible to passing pedestrians or vehicle traffic. 
D.  Off-premises signs. 
1.  No off-premises sign shall be permitted in any zone within the city except as permitted under this subparagraph. 
2.  The owner of an existing off-premises sign may construct a new off-premises sign pursuant to a conditional use permit issued in accordance with the provisions of chapter 11 of the City Code, and under the following criteria: 
(a)  No sign will be permitted which increases the number of signs beyond the number of signs depicted in Table A (which follows this section), as amended from time to time. 
(b)  No sign shall be permitted which increases the total square footage of all signs beyond the number of total square feet depicted in Table A (which follows this section), as amended from time to time. 
(c)  No sign shall be permitted which increases the total number of sign surfaces beyond the total number of sign surfaces depicted in Table A (which follows this section), as amended from time to time. 
(d)  The maximum square footage of a sign shall be 250 square feet; however, the city may allow a sign in excess of 250 square feet upon (i) the reduction of the total number of signs, square footage or surface areas depicted in Table A (which follows this section), as amended from time to time, and (ii) amendment to said Table A to reflect such reduction, and (iii) further, so long as the total square footage of all signs is not increased beyond the total of sign square footage depicted in said Table A, at the time of application for a new sign. 
(e)  No sign shall be located nearer to any other off-premises sign than 1,500 lineal feet on the same side of the street or 300 lineal feet on the opposite side of the street. 
(f)  No sign shall be located on a platted lot which contains a business sign. 
(g)  No sign shall be located within 300 feet of any freestanding ground sign or pylon sign. 
(h)  No sign shall be located within 200 feet of any residentially zoned district. 
(i)  No sign or any part thereof shall exceed 40 feet in height as measured from the land adjacent to the base of the sign. 
3.  Any new off-premise sign permitted under this paragraph, shall not be placed upon any property upon which a building or structure already exists. 
4.  Any new off-premise sign permitted under this paragraph, above, shall be located only on property zoned for business or industrial use. 
5.  Any off-premise sign now existing or permitted to be constructed shall be removed prior to the city approving the platting of the property upon which the sign is located or prior to the city issuing a building permit for the construction of a structure upon the property upon which the sign is located, whichever occurs earlier. 
6.  Any new off-premise sign pursuant to a conditional use permit issued hereunder shall be subject to the provisions governing conditional use permits as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
E.  Building-mounted, window/door and temporary business signs, standards. 
1.  Building signs on single-tenant buildings and end units in multi-tenant buildings. On single-tenant buildings, no more than three total signs, distributed on up to two elevations, are allowed in the following combinations, not to exceed the allowed sign area based on zoning: 
(a)  One elevation displaying a business name sign, and one elevation displaying a business name and a product name sign for a total of three signs; or 
(b)  One elevation displaying a business name sign, and one elevation displaying either a business name or a product name sign for a total of two signs; or 
(c)  One elevation displaying a business name sign or a product name sign for a total of one sign; or 
(d)  Two signs, each displaying a separate business name if two tenants are occupying one unit space for a total of two signs on one elevation. 
2.  Building signs on interior units of multi-tenant buildings. On multi-tenant buildings, no more than two signs per tenant on one elevation are allowed in the following combinations, not to exceed the allowed sign area based on zoning: 
(a)  One sign displaying a business name, and one sign displaying a product name for a total of two signs on one elevation; or 
(b)  Two signs, each displaying a separate business name if two tenants are occupying one unit space for a total of two signs on one elevation; or 
(c)  One sign displaying a business name for a total of one sign on one elevation; or 
(d)  One sign displaying a product name for a total of one sign on one elevation. 
3.  Design similarity. All business signs mounted on a building shall be similar in design. 
4.  Multi-tenant building signage. Building facade signage on multi-tenant buildings shall be evenly distributed between all tenants. 
5.  Product name signs. Product name signs shall be subordinate to business name signs. 
6.  Roof signs. No sign mounted upon a building is allowed to project above the highest outside wall or parapet wall. 
7.  Roof signs in BP and RD districts. In BP and RD districts, no roof signs shall be allowed. 
8.  Sign area. 
(a)  No signs or combination of signs mounted upon a building shall cover in excess of ten percent of the gross area of a side in the RD and BP zoning districts, and 20 percent of the gross area of a side in all other zoning districts, where business signs are allowed. 
(b)  A sign displayed on a window or within an area 18 inches from the face of the window, as measured from the interior glass to the building interior, shall not occupy more than 60 percent of the area of the windows and/or doors on the side of the building on which the window/door sign is displayed. The area of a window/door sign shall be included in the calculation of the sign area allowed for building-mounted signs provided herein and shall not exceed the applicable sign area permitted. Window/door signs shall be allowed only on the building façade that has building-mounted signage. Any sign not exceeding a two square feet area that depicts "Open/Closed" or hours of operation shall be exempt from requirements. A sign or display inside the building which is located more than 18 inches from the inside glass face of the window glass is not deemed a "window sign" for purposes of this section. 
(c)  Any property or business that exceeds the 60 percent window/door area as of the effective date of this ordinance shall be exempt from the 60 percent window/door area restriction, provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  The property owner/occupant completes and files an "exemption registration" with the city within six months of the effective date of the ordinance. If an exemption is not timely filed with the city, the 60 percent window/door sign area regulation will apply. 
2.  The property, which is exempt from the 60 percent window/door sign area regulation, is prohibited from exceeding its registered window/door sign coverage. 
3.  Any change in sign size or type rescinds/voids the exemption and the 60% window/door sign area regulation shall apply. 
4.  Any change in business located in the subject space rescinds/voids the exemption and the 60 percent window/door sign area regulation shall apply. 
5.  Any modification to the window or door size rescinds/voids the exemption and the 60 percent window/door sign area regulation shall apply. 
Any exemption not voided or rescinded as set forth in this section shall automatically expire and be void on January 1, 2014. 
9.  Sign projection. No sign mounted upon a building is allowed to project more than 18 inches from the vertical surface of the building. 
10.  Temporary signs for special business sales. Any commercial use may have up to three signs for the purpose of promoting a special sales event, provided the signs may not be displayed for no more than 14 days within a 60-day period. The 60-day period shall commence on the first day of posting a temporary sign and conclude 60 days thereafter. The temporary signs shall not exceed an aggregate total area of 100 square feet. The sign permit application shall specify the days, not to exceed 14, which the temporary sign will be displayed. 
11.  Canopy signage. Canopy signage is limited to the business name and/or logo, and shall not exceed 20 percent of the canopy facade, excluding corporate color raceway. No more than one canopy sign for each street frontage shall be permitted on a canopy for the business located upon the property; illumination is limited to business name and/or logo. 
F.  Freestanding business signs, standards. 
1.  Freestanding ground signs. Up to one allowed per building. Such signs shall be limited to seven feet total height, with four-foot maximum height of sign area. 
2.  Pylon signs. Up to one allowed per building. When used, a pylon sign is allowed in lieu of a freestanding sign. No pylon sign may be located within 300 feet of any other pylon sign, measured on the same side of the street. No pylon signs shall project more than 27 feet above the lot level, roadway level, or a specified point between the two levels as determined by the council. The level used shall be based upon visibility factors from the adjacent roadway(s). The applicant shall submit diagrams, drawings, pictures and other information requested by the city prior to action by the council upon the application. No pylon sign shall exceed 125 square feet in area per side except pylon signs authorized under subparagraph C[G], below. In the RD and BP districts, no pylon signs shall be allowed. 
3.  Major complex. When an area identification is required, such as for a shopping center, major apartment complex, or major industrial building, up to one freestanding or pylon sign may be allowed for each major adjacent street. The council shall determine the maximum size after reviewing the applicable conditions including terrain, safety factors, etc. 
4.  Freeway locations. An on-premises pylon sign for identification purposes is allowed for a business sign located directly adjacent to a freeway within the city. Any business that acquires a conditional use permit to erect a pylon sign for freeway identification may be allowed an additional freestanding ground sign to be located on the side of the property opposite of the freeway. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subdivision restricting the number of building-mounted signs permitted, a business name sign may be displayed on the elevation facing the freeway in lieu of an on-premise pylon sign permitted in this paragraph. All signs must comply in all other respects with the provisions of this section. A freeway shall be defined as a principal arterial highway as defined in the comprehensive plan. 
5.  Multi-lot developments. In multi-lot developments, the design and placement of monument and directional signs shall be coordinated through an overall signage plan. 
G.  Exemptions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the following signs are exempt from the permit or fee provisions of this section. No exempt sign shall exceed 16 square feet of area except where stated below: 
1.  For sale, lease, or rent signs of real estate when located on the property advertised, and when under 16 square feet in total copy area. 
2.  Church, hospital, or school directional signs, less than six square feet in total copy area. 
3.  One on-property church sign for each church site. 
4.  Signs warning of hazardous conditions. 
5.  Simple information signs, such as "exit," "loading dock," etc. 
6.  Simple nameplate signs on or over the entrance to a place of business or used to identify the parking area of a place of business. Not to exceed three square feet in gross area. 
7.  Signs erected by a recognized unit of government having jurisdiction in the city, or a school district within the boundaries of the school district. 
8.  Noncommercial signs. 
9.  Temporary signs for special civic events or garage or neighborhood sales, for a period not to exceed 20 days. 
H.  Nonconforming signs. 
1.  The protective inspections department shall order the removal of any sign erected or maintained in violation of the law as it existed prior to the effective date of this section. Removal shall be in accordance with this subdivision. 
2.  Other signs existing on the effective date of this section and not conforming to its provisions, but which did conform to previous laws, shall be regarded as nonconforming signs which may be continued if properly repaired and maintained as provided in this section and if in conformance with other provisions of the City Code. If said signs are not continued with conformance of above, they shall be removed in accordance with this subdivision. 
I.  Sign permits and fees. 
1.  Sign permits. No signs, except those specified in this subdivision, above, shall be erected or maintained anywhere in the city without first obtaining a sign permit. 
2.  Application, permit and fees. A formal application together with accompanying documents prescribed by the city shall be submitted to the city to obtain a sign permit. Permit fees are as adopted by resolution of the city council and shall accompany the permit application. If any sign is placed, erected, or installed without first obtaining a sign permit, then the permit fee shall be the amount equal to two times the permit fee. 
3.  Review of applications. The community development department shall consider approval of all sign permit applications, except that applications for approval of permits for advertising signs, pylon signs and any sign requiring a variance shall be submitted to the council for final approval. Freestanding signs exceeding seven feet in height shall require a footing and foundation inspection by the protective inspections division and all building code requirements shall be met. 
4.  Return of the fees. In the event said application shall be denied, the city shall return the applicant's permit fee, less a reasonable amount determined by the council which shall be retained as an administrative cost. 
J.  Removal. All signs which have not been removed within the designated time period may after due notice be removed by the city, and any expense incurred thereof may be charged to the sign owner or assessed against the property on which they are located. 
K.  Dynamic display signs. 
1.  Findings. Studies show that there is a correlation between dynamic displays on signs and the distraction of highway drivers. Distraction can lead to traffic accidents. Drivers can be distracted not only by a changing message, but also by knowing that the sign has a changing message. Drivers may watch a sign waiting for the next change to occur. Drivers are also distracted by messages that do not tell the full story in one look. People have a natural desire to see the end of the story and will continue to look at the sign in order to wait for the end. Additionally, drivers are more distracted by special effects used to change the message, such as fade-ins and fade-outs. Finally, drivers are generally more distracted by messages that are too small to be clearly seen or that contain more than a simple message. Time and temperature signs appear to be an exception to these concerns because the messages are short, easily absorbed, and become inaccurate without frequent changes. 
Despite these public safety concerns, there is merit to allowing new technologies to easily update messages. Except as prohibited by state or federal law, sign owners should have the opportunity to use these technologies with certain restrictions. The restrictions are intended to minimize potential driver distraction and to minimize proliferation in residential districts where signs can adversely impact residential character. 
Local spacing requirements could interfere with the equal opportunity to use such technologies and are not included. Without those requirements, however, there is the potential for numerous dynamic displays to exist along any roadway. If more than one dynamic display can be seen from a given location on a road, the minimum display time becomes critical. If the display time is too short, a driver could be subjected to a view that appears to have constant movement. This impact would obviously be compounded in a corridor with multiple signs. If dynamic displays become pervasive and there are no meaningful limitations on each sign's ability to change frequently, drivers may be subjected to an unsafe degree of distraction and sensory overload. Therefore, a longer display time is appropriate. 
A constant message is typically needed on a sign so that the public can use it to identify and find an intended destination. Changing messages detract from this way-finding purpose and could adversely affect driving conduct through last-second lane changes, stops, or turns, which could result in traffic accidents. Accordingly, dynamic displays generally should not be allowed to occupy the entire copy and graphic area of a sign. 
In conclusion, the city finds that dynamic displays should be allowed on signs but with significant controls to minimize their proliferation and their potential threats to public safety. 
2.  Dynamic display sign means any sign, except governmental signs, with dynamic display characteristics that appear to have movement or that appear to change, caused by any method other than physically removing and replacing the sign or its components, whether the apparent movement or change is in the display, the sign structure itself, or any other component of the sign. This includes a display that incorporates a technology or method allowing the sign surface to change the image without having to physically or mechanically replace the sign surface or its components. This also includes any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing, blinking, or animated display and any display that incorporates rotating panels, LED lights manipulated through digital input, "digital ink" or any other method or technology that allows the sign surface to present a series of images or displays. 
3.  Dynamic display signs are allowed subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Dynamic display signs are subordinate to off-premises signs, monument and pylon signs, and business signs. Dynamic displays must not be the predominant feature of the sign surface. The remainder of the sign must not have the capability to have dynamic displays even if not used. Dynamic display signs are allowed only on monument and pylon signs for conditionally permitted uses in residential districts and for all uses in other districts, subject to the requirements of this Section 11.70. Only one, contiguous dynamic display area is allowed on a sign surface; 
(b)  A dynamic display may not change or move more often than once every one minute; 
(c)  The images and messages displayed must be static, and the transition from one static display to another must be instantaneous without any special effects; 
(d)  The images and messages displayed must be complete in themselves, without continuation in content to the next image or message or to any other sign; 
(e)  Every line of copy and graphics in a dynamic display must be at least seven inches in height on a road with a speed limit of 25 to 34 miles per hour, nine inches on a road with a speed limit of 35 to 44 miles per hour, 12 inches on a road with a speed limit of 45 to 54 miles per hour, and 15 inches on a road with a speed limit of 55 miles per hour or more. If there is insufficient room for copy and graphics of this size in the area allowed under clause (a) above, then no dynamic display is allowed; 
(f)  Dynamic display signs must be designed and equipped to freeze the device in one position if a malfunction occurs. The displays must also be equipped with a means to immediately discontinue the display if it malfunctions, and the sign owner must immediately stop the dynamic display when notified by the city that it is not complying with the standards of this ordinance; 
(g)  Dynamic display signs must comply with the brightness standards contained in subdivision L. below; 
(h)  Dynamic display signs existing on October 6, 2007, must comply with the operational standards listed above. An existing dynamic display that does not meet the structural requirements in clause (b) may continue as a non-conforming use subject to the regulations governing non-conforming structures and uses set forth in this chapter. An existing dynamic display that cannot meet the minimum size requirement in clause (e) must use the largest size possible for one line of copy to fit in the available space. 
(i)  Exceptions. Recognizing that some dynamic displays, such as those used in point of sale dispensers, interactive vending machines and ATMs, often need to change images more frequently than defined by this ordinance in order to perform their intended function and that such image changes can occur in a manner in which they do not create distractions for drivers, dynamic displays with a total area of less than 160 square inches at any point of sale dispenser, interactive vending machines or ATM may be fully animated, provided they do not flash or blink in a manner clearly visible from the roadway and provided they either meet or exceed the building setbacks for the zoning district in which they are located or are at least 30 feet from the public right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
4.  Incentives. Off-premises signs do not need to serve the same way-finding function as do on-premises signs; they are restricted in number by the city; and they are in themselves distracting and their removal serves public safety. This clause is intended to provide an incentive option for the voluntary and uncompensated removal of off-premises signs in certain settings. This removal results in an overall advancement of one or more of the goals set forth in this section that should more than offset any additional burden caused by the incentives. These provisions are also based on the recognition that the incentives create an opportunity to consolidate outdoor advertising services that would otherwise remain distributed throughout the community and expand the function of off-premises signs to serve a public purpose by providing community and public service messages. 
A.  Incentive Option A—Reduction of Sign Surfaces. 
(a)  A person may obtain a permit for an enhanced dynamic display sign on one surface of an existing off-premises sign if the following requirements are met: 
(i)  The applicant agrees in writing to reduce its off-premises sign surfaces by one by permanently removing, within 15 days after issuance of the permit, one surface of an off-premises sign in the city that is owned or leased by the applicant and is depicted in Table A (which follows this section), which sign surface must satisfy the criteria of parts (ii) and (iii) of this subsection. This removal must include the complete removal of the structure and foundation supporting each removed sign surface. The applicant must agree that the city may remove the sign surface if the applicant does not timely do so, and the application must identify the sign surface to be removed and be accompanied by a cash deposit or letter of credit acceptable to the city attorney sufficient to pay the city's costs for that removal. The applicant must also agree that it is removing the sign surface voluntarily and that it has no right to compensation for the removed sign surface under any law. Replacement of an existing sign surface of an off-premises sign with an enhanced dynamic display sign does not constitute a removal of a sign surface. 
(ii)  The city has not previously issued a dynamic display sign permit based on the removal of the particular sign surface relied upon in this permit application. 
(iii)  If the removed sign surface is one for which a state permit is required by state law, the applicant must surrendered its permit to the state upon removal of the sign surface. The sign that is the subject of the dynamic display sign permit cannot begin to operate until proof is provided to the city that the state permit has been surrendered. 
(b)  If the applicant complies with the permit requirements noted above, the city will issue an enhanced dynamic display sign permit for the designated off-premises sign. This permit will allow a dynamic display to occupy 100 percent of the potential copy and graphic area and to change no more frequently than once every eight seconds. The designated sign must meet all other requirements of this ordinance. 
B.  Incentive Option B—Provision of Community and Public Service Messaging. 
(a)  A person may obtain a permit for an enhanced dynamic display sign on one surface of an existing off-premises sign if the following requirements are met: 
(i)  The enhanced dynamic display sign replaces an existing surface of an existing off-premises sign; 
(ii)  The city has not previously issued a dynamic display sign permit based on the replacement of the particular sign surface relied upon in this permit application. 
(iii)  The applicant shall enter into an agreement with the city to provide to the city no less than five hours (2,250 eight-second spots) per month per enhanced dynamic display sign in the city for community and public service messages at such times as shall be determined by the city. 
(b)  If the applicant complies with the permit requirements noted above, the city will issue an enhanced dynamic display sign permit for the designated off-premises sign. This permit will allow a dynamic display to occupy 100 percent of the potential copy and graphic area and to change no more frequently than once every eight seconds. The designated sign must meet all other requirements of this ordinance. 
L.  Brightness standards. 
1.  All signs must meet the following brightness standards: 
(a)  No sign may be brighter than is necessary for clear and adequate visibility. 
(b)  No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance as to impair the vision of a motor vehicle driver with average eyesight or to otherwise interfere with the driver's operation of a motor vehicle. 
(c)  No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance that it interferes with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device or signal. 
2.  The person owning or controlling the sign must adjust the sign to meet the brightness standards in accordance with the city's instructions. The adjustment must be made immediately upon notice of non-compliance from the city. The person owning or controlling the sign may appeal the city's determination through the following appeal procedure: 
(a)  After making the adjustment required by the city, the person owning or controlling the sign may appeal the city's determination by delivering a written appeal to the city clerk within ten days after the city's non-compliance notice. The written appeal must include the name of a person unrelated to the person and business making the appeal, who will serve on the appeal panel. 
(b)  Within five business days after receiving the appeal, the city must name a person who is not an official or employee of the city to serve on the appeal panel. Within five business days after the city names its representative, the city's representative must contact the sign owner's representative, and the two of them must appoint a third member to the panel, who has no relationship to either party. 
(c)  The appeal panel may develop its own rules of procedure, but it must hold a hearing within five business days after the third member is appointed. The city and the sign owner must be given the opportunity to present testimony, and the panel may hold the hearing, or a portion of it, at the sign location. The panel must issue its decision on what level of brightness is needed to meet the brightness standards within five business days after the hearing commences. The decision will be binding on both parties. 
3.  All signs installed after October 6, 2007, that will have illumination by a means other than natural light must be equipped with a mechanism that automatically adjusts the brightness in response to ambient conditions. These signs must also be equipped with a means to immediately turn off the display or lighting if it malfunctions, and the sign owner or operator must immediately turn off the sign or lighting when notified by the city that it is not complying with the standards in this section. 
Subd. 29.  Outdoor dining areas. 
A.  Restrictions . All outdoor dining areas shall comply with this subdivision. An outdoor dining area in conjunction with a Class I or Class II restaurant is a permitted accessory use if the restaurant is a permitted use in the zoning district and a conditional use if the restaurant is a conditional use in the zoning district. Notwithstanding that an outdoor dining area may be a permitted accessory use, an outdoor dining area that does not meet the special use setback from a residential property or that provides seating for more than 24 persons shall be subject to a conditional use permit or planned development approval as applicable. 
B.  Performance standards and requirements . 
1.  No portion of the outdoor dining area shall be located or occur within any public right-of-way, including the sidewalks/trails, boulevard areas or streets. 
2.  The outdoor dining area shall meet the following setback requirements: 20 feet from a public right-of-way, five feet from side lot line, and five feet from rear lot line. 
3.  The outdoor dining area shall not interfere with any pedestrian traffic or walkways intended for the general public. A minimum four feet wide area shall remain clear for pedestrian traffic on walkways and for entry into the restaurant building and adjacent uses. An outdoor dining area shall not be permitted to be located in or occupy any parking or other areas intended for vehicular traffic. 
4.  The outdoor dining area shall be handicap accessible and not restrict accessibility in other areas inside or outside the restaurant. 
5.  The outdoor dining area shall be used subordinate to the principal restaurant building. 
6.  The outdoor dining area shall be kept in a clean and orderly manner. No food or beverages may be stored outdoors, unless a suitable means for such storage has been reviewed and approved by the city. 
7.  The hours of operation of an outdoor dining area shall be restricted to the hours of operation within the principal restaurant's interior space. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the operation of business within an outdoor dining area shall not occur between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. If an outdoor dining area is subject to a conditional use permit or a planned development approval, the city council may be more restrictive in the hours of operation based upon the proximity of the area to residential dwelling units and upon considerations relating to the public health, safety, and welfare of residents, businesses, and other uses near the restaurant establishment. 
8.  The use of the outdoor dining area shall comply with all noise regulations in this Code. If an outdoor dining area is subject to a conditional use permit or planned development approval, the city council may restrict days, hours, nature and volume, and other aspects of entertainment in any outdoor dining area, including a prohibition against all forms of music, radio, television, and other entertainment, to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of residents, businesses and other uses near the restaurant establishment. 
9.  A fence, constructed of color and material suitable for the intended use, surrounding the outdoor dining area shall be required if the outdoor dining area provides seating for 24 or more persons or alcoholic beverages are served within the outdoor dining area. If a fence is required, a fencing plan shall be submitted with the site plan for the outdoor dining area for review and approval by the city. 
10.  If alcoholic beverages are served in the outdoor dining area, the restaurant establishment shall have an on-sale alcohol license that specifically includes and permits the sale or service of alcoholic beverages in the outdoor dining area. All regulations in chapter 5 of the Code shall apply and compliance shall be met. 
11.  The outdoor dining area must conform to all fire and building codes related to the number and types of exits that are required. 
12.  The parking regulations related to minimum required spaces for the restaurant establishment, plus one stall for every 12 seats within the outdoor dining area of more than 24 seats, as set forth in this chapter shall apply and compliance met. 
13.  All sewer availability charges imposed as a result of additional seating in the outdoor dining area shall be paid prior to the operation of any business within the outdoor dining area. 
Subd. 30.  Zoning permit. 
A.  Purpose . The purpose for a zoning permit, as provided herein, is to assist property owners who choose to make exterior improvements to their property by ensuring the improvements meet City Code requirements prior to the installation of the improvements and to protect property owners from unnecessary costs of removing or relocating improvements that are erected or installed not in compliance with City Code, as well as to protect adjacent properties that may be adversely affected by improvements not in compliance with City Code requirements. 
B.  Zoning permit required . Prior to constructing, installing or erecting any building, structure, or other fixed improvement upon any property within the city, a zoning permit from the city shall be obtained by the property owner. A zoning permit shall not be required for any building, structure or improvement for which a building, plumbing, or mechanical permit under the Minnesota State Building Code is required or which otherwise occurs within the interior of the principal building on the property. 
This subdivision shall apply to buildings, structures, or other fixed improvements, including, but not limited to, the following: sport court; patio; sidewalks; driveway replacement or expansion; play structures; piers or docks. 
C.  Zoning permit application and action . A zoning permit application on a form provided by the city shall be submitted to the Eagan Planning Division. The application shall include a site plan depicting the property's boundary lines, the proposed location of the proposed building, structure, or other improvement, accurate measurements of the proposed building, structure, or other improvement, and the accurate distance in feet from all property lines to the nearest points of the footprint of the proposed building, structure, or other improvement at its proposed location. A zoning permit application shall be denied if the proposed building, structure, or other improvement fails to meet all requirements of this chapter or other applicable provisions of the City Code. 
D.  Zoning permit inspection fee . If the zoning permit application requires a field inspection(s) by city staff to ensure compliance with the City Code, the applicant shall pay the established inspection fee prior to the city granting the zoning permit. An inspection fee shall be set by city council resolution. 
TABLE A 
Ref # 	Address 
(PID #) 	Location 	Surfaces 	SF/ 
Surface 	SF Total 
1 	2750 Sibley Mem. Hwy. (103288501001) 	I-494 between Hwy. 13 & Pilot Knob Rd. Northwest corner of property 	2 	624 	1,248 
2 	2750 Sibley Mem. Hwy. (103288501001) 	I-494 between Hwy. 13 & Pilot Knob Rd. Northeast corner of property 	2 	672 	1,344 
3 	4151 Sibley Mem. Hwy. (100190001356) 	Hwy. 13, between Cedar Ave. & Diffley Rd. 	1 	250 	250 
4 	3700 Nicols Road (100180056011) 	Hwy. 77, north of Hwy. 13 (on railroad) 	2 	378 	756 
5 	2196 Cedar Ridge Court (101682102001) 	Hwy. 77, between Diffley Rd. and Cliff Rd. 	2 	378 	756 
6 	1181 Trapp Rd. (beyond NE Corner) (102250005108) 	Soo Line right-of-way, south of I-494 and west of Hwy. 55 (added 9/5/99) 	1 
{1} 	480 
{20} 	480 
{20} 
7 	1255 Trapp Rd. (1022250014001) 	I-494, junction of I-35E 	2 	378 	756 
8 	2750 Eagandale Blvd. (beyond NW Corner) (102250014307) 	Soo Line right-of-way, Hwy. 55, west of I-35E 	2 	360 	720 
 
Subd. 31.  Minimum maintenance road—maximum density permitted. If sole access to a parcel is from a minimum maintenance public road duly designated by the city, then no subdivision of the parcel nor any improvement which would allow more than one dwelling unit per parcel shall be allowed on or after the effective date of this section, unless the minimum maintenance public road is reconstructed to meet the city's public street design standards as set forth in chapter 13 of this Code or access is from another public street that meets the city's public street design standards as set forth in chapter 13 of this Code. 
Subd. 32.  Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU). 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this subdivision is to permit and regulate an accessory dwelling unit (ADU) within a single-family detached dwelling in R-1 and Estate districts only as a permitted accessory use subject to the regulations set forth herein. The minimum lot size in R-1 and Estate zoning districts ensures that additional housing will have less impact on neighboring properties. Because this use will be located in established one-family residential districts (single family home neighborhoods), the installation and use of an accessory dwelling unit must be strictly controlled to avoid adverse physical, social, economic, environmental and aesthetic impacts. By allowing only those accessory dwellings unit that are in compliance with all of the performance standards of this subdivision, the character and quality of existing neighborhoods will be protected. 
B.  Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Accessory dwelling unit (ADU) means a subordinate habitable dwelling unit, which has its own basic requirements of shelter, heating, cooking and sanitation, added to or created within a single-family dwelling (hereinafter primary residence). 
C.  Performance standards. No property within a single-family residential district shall have more than one dwelling unit, except an ADU may be permitted as accessory use to a single family dwelling when the following requirements are met: 
1.  The primary residence must be located on a lot within an Estate or R-1 zoning district. 
2.  The property owner must reside in either the primary residence or the ADU as their permanent residence. The property owner must reside in the home not less than 185 days per calendar year, and during which period the subject property continues to be the applicant's legal and principal residence. 
3.  An ADU may not be subdivided or otherwise segregated in ownership from the primary residence structure. 
4.  An ADU's total floor area shall be no more than 960 square feet or 33 percent of the primary residence's footprint (excluding any attached improvements not constituting four-season habitable rooms), whichever is less. An ADU's total floor area shall not be less than 300 square feet. 
5.  No ADU shall be permitted if the building coverage on the lot exceeds, or will exceed with the addition of the ADU, 20 percent of the lot or parcel. 
6.  An ADU shall be designed and maintained as to be consistent with the architectural design, style, appearance and character of the primary residence as a single-family residence. An ADU shall not extend beyond the height of the primary residence. 
7.  An ADU shall be located within or attached to the primary residence and shall not be permitted in structures detached from the primary residence, including, but not limited to, accessory buildings, detached garages, or workshops. 
8.  An ADU may be created by the conversion of living space within the primary residence, but not by conversion of garage space unless a new two-car (or larger) garage is constructed on the lot without the need for a variance and the converted ADU complies with all state and city regulations and codes. 
9.  The total number of residents in the ADU may not exceed two persons. The ADU shall contain no more than two bedrooms. 
10.  Two off-street parking spaces shall be required for the ADU, in addition to the two off-street parking spaces required for the primary residence. An additional garage may be constructed, provided it complies with all state and city regulations. 
11.  No more than one ADU shall be permitted on a lot or parcel. 
12.  If the ADU has an exterior entry door, then it shall not be located on the same building façade as the front entrance door for the primary residence. 
13.  An ADU shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all state laws, state building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, and fire code regulations and City Code requirements. 
14.  The primary residence and ADU shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with the property maintenance regulations set forth in the City Code. 
15.  The primary residence and ADU shall be connected to municipal sewer and water, but shall be served by only one service line from the street to the primary residence. 
It is unlawful for a property owner to construct or allow occupancy within an ADU that does not comply with all of the foregoing requirements. 
D.  Registration required. An ADU as permitted in this chapter shall be registered with the city by filing with the city clerk a completed registration form provided by city. No ADU may be occupied until the ADU registration is filed with the city. The ADU registration shall be in effect for a period of 12 months and shall be renewed annually on a date determined by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 366, 2nd series, eff. 10-7-03; Ord. No. 384, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 10-28-04; Ord. No. 390, 2nd series, §§ 1—4, eff. 7-16-05; Ord. No. 396, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-7-06; Ord. No. 398, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-7-06; Ord. No. 396R, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 8-6-06; Ord. No. 402, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 9-26-06; Ord. No. 407, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 12-4-06; Ord. No. 405, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 4-14-07; Ord. No. 415, 2nd series, §§ 1—3, eff. 8-18-07; Ord. No. 416, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 10-6-07; Ord. No. 419, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 12-8-07; Ord. No. 337, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-4-08; Ord. No. 438, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 4-21-09; Ord. No. 440, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 7-7-09; Ord. No. 441, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 7-7-09; Ord. No. 451, 2nd series, §§ 1—6, eff. 2-16-10; Ord. No. 453, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-16-10; Ord. No. 463, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 10-5-10; Ord. No. 464, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 10-19-10; Ord. No. 472, 2nd series, § 1, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 477, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 4-20-2011; Ord. No. 478, 2nd series, § 3, eff. 4-20-2011; Ord. No. 480, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 6-21-2011; Ord. No. 508, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 6-5-2012; Ord. No. 528, 2nd series, § 3, eff. 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 529, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 545, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 6-2-2015; Ord. No. 559, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-7-2017; Ord. No. 571, 2nd series, § 11, eff. 11-17-2017; Ord. No. 574, 2nd series, §§ 1—3, eff. 1-12-2018; Ord. No. 578, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 6-22-2018; Ord. No. 580, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-20-2019; Ord. No. 584, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-22-2019) 
State Law reference— Advertising devices, Minn. Stat. ch. 173.  
Secs. 11.71—11.98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 11.99. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
Every person who violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 366, 2nd series, eff. 10-7-03)  
Chapter 12 - COMPREHENSIVE GUIDE PLAN AND LAND USE REGULATIONS—INTERIM USE STUDY 
 
Sec. 12.01. - Interim use study. 
A.  In May of 1998, the city council held a workshop concerning lands designated as the greater Cedarvale area to consider redevelopment of the area. At the city council's direction, a comprehensive review of issues regarding the greater Cedarvale area (now known as the Cedar Avenue and Highway 13 study area) has been under research by city staff. The city has hired a planning consultant with respect to the area. Pursuant to Minn. Stat. Section 462.355, Subd. 4, the Eagan City Council directed a study be conducted for the purposes of considering: 
i.  Amendment to the Eagan Comprehensive Guide Land Use Plan for the Cedar Avenue and Highway 13 study area; and/or 
ii.  The possible rezoning of lands in the Cedar Avenue and Highway 13 study area. 
B.  This interim use ordinance is adopted for the purpose of protecting the planning process above described and the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens. 
C.  With respect to property described in this section as the Cedar Avenue and Highway 13 moratorium area as shown on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated herein, commencing on the effective date of this section and ending on February 9, 2000: 
i.  No building permit for the construction of any structure on undeveloped property shall be issued. 
ii.  No building permit for construction, reconstruction, or alteration for over 90 percent of any existing structure shall be issued. 
iii.  No requests for rezoning or comprehensive guide plan amendments shall be considered or approved by the advisory planning commission or the city council. 
(Ord. No. 276, 2nd series, eff. 5-13-99; Ord. No. 286, 2nd series, eff. 11-1-99) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 276, 2nd series, effective May 13, 1999, amended the Code by adding a new § 12.01, which replaced a former § 12.01. Former § 12.01 pertained to an interim use study concerning lands designated as D-II, derived from Ord. No. 258, 2nd series, effective May 21, 1998, and was ended by official city council action on August 4, 1998.  
Sec. 12.02. - Interim Use: Study Area in Section 36. 
A.  On April 3, 2001, the Eagan City Council directed a study to be conducted for the purpose of considering the creation of a special area for properties located in Section 36, the southeast corner of the City. Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes §462.355, Subd. 4, the council directed staff to research the properties listed below for considering: 
(1)  an amendment to the Comprehensive Guide; and 
(2)  rezonings. 
B.  The areas of the study are the parcels in Section 36, identified as follows: 
Unplatted-Property 
Identification Number 	Dodd View Addition 	Halleys First Addition 
100360002179 	Lot 1, Block 3 	Lot 1, Block 1 
100360002279 	Lot 5, Block 3 	Lot 2, Block 1 
	Lot 1, Block 4 	Lot 3, Block 1 
	Outlot B 	Lot 4, Block 1 
	Outlot C 	Lot 5, Block 1 
		Lot 1, Block 2 
		Lot 2, Block 2 
		Lot 3, Block 2 
		Lot 4, Block 2 
 
(the "Property") 
C.  This interim ordinance is adopted and is applicable to the Property listed below for the purpose of protecting the planning process and the health, safety and welfare of the citizens. 
D.  Commencing on the effective date of this ordinance and ending on December 13, 2001, or such sooner time as the City Council may determine, the Property shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  no building permit for the construction, reconstruction or alternation of any structure shall be issued, except for permits for the necessary repair of existing buildings, as determined by the City Council. 
(2)  no proposal for rezoning or comprehensive plan amendment shall be recommend for approval or approved by the Planning Commission or the City Council. 
(3)  no portion of the Property shall be replatted or subdivision, except for the purpose of consolidation of parcels of land into single ownership. 
(4)  no conditional use permit or variance shall be recommended for approval or approved by the Planning Commission or the City Council. 
D.  The termination date of this ordinance may be extended for such additional periods as the City Council may deem appropriate not exceeding a total additional period of 18 months. 
(Ord. No. 310, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 4-26-01)  
Sec. 12.03. - Interim Use: Study Area in Section 15 and 22. 
A.  On July 17, 2001, the Eagan City Council directed a study to be conducted for the purpose of evaluating social, economic, environmental and land use impacts of a golf course in the central part of the City which may affect the properties located in Sections 15 and 22. Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes § 462.355, Subd. 4, the council directed staff to research the properties listed below for considering: 
(1)  Any amendments to the Comprehensive Guide; 
(2)  Rezonings; and 
(3)  Necessary environmental reviews. 
B.  The parcels affected by this ordinance are in Sections 15 and 22, and are identified as follows: 
Unplatted-Property Identification Number 
10-01500-013-76 
10-01500-014-76 
10-02200-013-04 
10-02200-013-75 
(the "Property") 
C.  This interim ordinance is adopted and is applicable to the property for the purpose of protecting the planning process and the health, safety and welfare of the residents. 
D.  Commencing on the effective date of this ordinance and ending on April 15, 2002, or such sooner time as the city council may determine, the property shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  No building permit for the construction, reconstruction or alternation of any structure shall be issued, except for permits for the necessary repair of existing buildings, as determined by the city council. 
(2)  No proposal for rezoning or comprehensive plan amendment shall be recommended for approval or approved by the planning commission or the city council. 
(3)  No portion of the property shall be replatted or subdivided, except for the purpose of consolidation of parcels of land into single ownership. 
(4)  No conditional use permit or variance shall be recommended for approval or approved by the planning commission or the city council. 
E.  The termination date of this ordinance may be extended for such additional periods as the city council may deem appropriate not exceeding a total additional period of 18 months. 
(Ord. No. 315, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 7-26-01)  
Sec. 12.04. - Interim use: Accessory building study. 
A.  On March 12, 2002, the Eagan City Council directed a study to be conducted for the purpose of evaluating whether to place new conditions or restrictions on the construction of accessory buildings, as that term is defined by Eagan City Code § 11.03, in residentially zoned districts. Pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 462.355, subd. 4, the city council directed staff to research the property listed below for considering: 
1.  An amendment to the Eagan City Code regarding the standards relating to accessory buildings, as that term is defined by Eagan City Code § 11.03, in residentially zoned districts. 
B.  All property located within all residential zoning districts (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and residential-planned development) within the City of Eagan are affected by this interim ordinance (the "property"). 
C.  This interim use ordinance is adopted and is applicable to the property for the purpose of protecting the planning process and health, safety and welfare of the citizens. 
D.  Commencing on the effective date of this interim ordinance and ending on June 30, 2002, or such sooner time as the city council may determine, the property shall be subject to the following: 
1.  No building permits for the construction, reconstruction, alteration, or expansion of any accessory building, as that term is defined by Eagan City Code section 11.03, shall be issued. 
2.  No conditional use permit or variance shall be recommended for approval or approved by the city council regarding the construction, reconstruction, alteration, or expansion of any accessory building as that term is defined by Eagan City Code section 11.03. 
E.  The termination date of this ordinance may be extended for such additional periods as the city council may deem appropriate not exceeding a total additional period of 18 months. 
(Ord. No. 334, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-28-02)  
Sec. 12.05. - Interim use: Study of Northeast Eagan. 
A.  Purpose. Since the early 1980's, property located within Section 1 of the City has included the development of major corporate campuses, particularly Northwest Airlines and Cray Research (now Ecolab). To accommodate and encourage these types of uses in the area, the city has adopted and amended its Comprehensive Guide Plan as office/service (O/S). To control the development within the area, the city has zoned the various properties for industrial, commercial, retail and office type uses. 
A request has been made by several property owners within Section 1 to amend the city's controls to allow housing as a component of development. The introduction of housing in the area may affect the city's goals and policies for this area of the city. Some policies which may be affected include road capacity, interstate interchanges, aviation (location of airport and noise), land supply for various uses, economic impacts, etc. In order to provide the council with the information it believes it needs to properly evaluate the current land use designation and official controls, as well as to acquire information as to whether and to what extent housing impacts the health, welfare and safety of the area, the council has authorized the performance of a study. 
The study of the area will be conducted under the direction of the community development department. The scope of the study shall be determined by the council at its discretion and may be amended as it deems necessary. 
The council has authorized the preparation of this ordinance in order to protect the study and the planning process. 
B.  Property. All property located northerly of Lone Oak Road and easterly of TH 149 (Dodd Road) within the City of Eagan are affected by this interim ordinance (the "property"). 
C.  Term and restrictions. Commencing on the effective date of this interim ordinance and ending on March 30, 2005, or such sooner time as the city council may determine, the property shall be subject to the following: 
i.  No building permits shall be issued for the construction, reconstruction, alteration, or expansion of any structure except for (i) necessary repairs of existing structures; (ii) tenant improvements made to existing structures for commercial, industrial or business park use; or (iii) expansion of a structure for commercial, industrial or business park use. 
ii.  No proposal for rezoning (which includes planned development amendments and planned development concepts) or comprehensive plan amendment shall be recommended for approval or approved by the planning commission or the city council. 
iii.  No conditional use permit or variance shall be recommended for approval or be approved by the planning commission or the city council. 
iv.  No portion of the property shall be replatted or subdivided, except for the purpose of consolidation of parcels of land into single ownership. 
D.  Additional terms. The termination date of this ordinance may be extended for such additional periods as the city council may deem appropriate not exceeding a total additional period of 18 months. Upon the request of a property owner, the city council may terminate the ordinance for a portion of the Property and permit actions outlined in section 12.05(C), if the council finds that the action proposed by the property owner for such property conforms to the current Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Code and does not conflict with the purpose of the moratorium. 
(Ord. No. 380, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 7-15-04)  
Sec. 12.06. - Interim use: Study of harboring carrier pigeons within the city. 
A.  On February 21, 2006, the Eagan City Council directed a study to be conducted to review Section 10.12, Subdivision 7, of the Eagan City Code (Harboring Carrier Pigeons) for the purpose of evaluating the current regulations and considering whether additional regulations are required, including any zoning regulations, governing the harboring of carrier pigeons within the city. 
B.  All property located within the City of Eagan (the "property") is affected by this interim use ordinance. 
C.  This interim use ordinance is adopted and is applicable to the property for the purpose of protecting the planning process and the health, safety and welfare of the city's residents. 
D.  Commencing on the effective date of this ordinance and ending on September 30, 2006 or such sooner time as the city council may determine, the property shall be subject to the following: 
1.  No permit for the harboring of carrier pigeons shall be accepted, reviewed, processed or issued. 
2.  No conditional use permit shall be approved or recommended for approval by the planning commission or the city council for the harboring of carrier pigeons. 
(Ord. No. 400, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 5-16-06)  
Sec. 12.07. - Interim use: Study of internally lighted signs within the City of Eagan. 
A.  The City of Eagan has zoning regulations prohibiting signs with moving sections or intermittent or flashing lights, except for intermittent display of time and temperature. The sign industry has developed new technology that includes electronic and digital displays that change on a frequent basis. 
B.  City staff is directed to study the existing zoning regulations governing signs and to determine if amendments are advisable to address new sign technology. 
C.  All property located within the City of Eagan (the "property") is affected by this interim use ordinance. 
D.  This interim use ordinance is adopted and is applicable to the property for the purpose of protecting the planning process and the health, safety and welfare of the city's residents. 
E.  Commencing on the effective date of this ordinance and ending on July 31, 2007, or such sooner time as the city council may determine, the property shall be subject to the following: 
1.  Signs, which are visible from a city street, that: (i) have any revolving, moving, flashing, blinking or animated characters, or (ii) have any image that changes more than four times a day, or (iii) contain any electronic display, are prohibited from being constructed, reconstructed, erected, installed or expanded. 
2.  No application for a permit, a conditional use permit, or any other city approval, for any sign as identified in subsection E.1. shall be accepted, reviewed, processed or granted. 
3.  The prohibitions in section E. do not apply to actions necessary to correct violations of city ordinances, as determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 408, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 1-16-07)  
Chapter 13 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS (PLATTING)[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Planning and zoning department, § 2.36; construction licensing, permits and regulation, excavations and mobile home parks, ch. 4; land use regulations, ch. 11. 
State Law reference— Subdivision regulations, Minn. Stat. § 462.358. 
 
Sec. 13.01. - Purpose. 
These regulations are adopted for the following purposes: (1) To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of the city; (2) to guide the future growth and development of the city in accordance with the comprehensive guide plan, the official map and the capital improvement program of the city; (3) to provide for adequate light, air and privacy, to secure safety of the land and undue congestion of population; (4) to protect the character and the social and economic stability of all areas of the city and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of all areas of the city; (5) to protect and conserve the value of land throughout the city and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land and to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings; (6) to guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation and other public requirements and facilities; (7) to provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the city having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways, and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and building line; (8) to establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and resubdivisions in order to further the orderly layout and use of land; and to insure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land; (9) to insure that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision; (10) to prevent the pollution of air, streams, ponds; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the city in order to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the city and the value of the land; (11) to preserve the natural beauty and topography of the city and to insure appropriate development with regard to these natural features; (12) to provide for open spaces through the most efficient design layout of the land; (13) to preserve agricultural and other open lands; and (14) to promote the availability of housing affordable to all persons and families of all income levels. 
(Code 1983, § 13.01, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 13.02. - Jurisdiction. 
Subd. 1.  Filing of conveyance of land. No conveyance of land to which these regulations are applicable shall be filed or recorded with the county recorder's office if the land is described in the conveyance by metes and bounds or by reference to an unapproved registered land survey made after April 21, 1961, or to an unapproved plat made after such regulations became effective. The foregoing provision does not apply to a conveyance if the land described: 
A.  Was a separate parcel of record as of December 21, 1954; or 
B.  Was a separate parcel of not less than 2½ acres in area and 150 feet in width on January 1, 1966; or 
C.  Was a single parcel of land of not less than five acres and having a width of not less than 300 feet, on July 1, 1980. 
D.  Is a single parcel of commercial or industrial land of not less than five acres and having a width of not less than 300 feet and its conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more lots or parcels, any one of which is less than five acres in area or 300 feet in width. 
E.  Is a single parcel of residential or agricultural land of not less than 20 acres and having a width of not less than 500 feet and its conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more lots or parcels, any one of which is less than 20 acres in area or 500 feet in width. 
Subd. 2.  Council waiver. 
A.  The council, after review by the planning commission or after staff review and approval of duplex lot splits, may waive compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter by adoption of a resolution after compliance with waiver provisions of this chapter, which resolution shall specify which provisions have been waived in any case: 
1.  In which compliance will involve an unnecessary hardship and where failure to comply does not interfere with the purpose of this chapter; or 
2.  Where an improved plat can be achieved by deviation from certain provisions of this chapter. 
B.  A waiver may be granted without planning commission review only when the subdivision consists of a split of a duplex lot or lots with existing structures having individual utility services designed in accordance with standards imposed by the council upon the original plat. 
Subd. 3.  Requirement for building permit. No building permit shall be granted for the erection of any building or structure upon lands which are not platted in accordance with the requirements of this section or which was platted as an outlot. 
(Code 1983, § 13.02, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 13, 2nd series, eff. 4-27-84)  
Sec. 13.03. - Interpretation; conflict. 
Subd. 1.  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Subd. 2.  Conflict with public and private provisions. 
A.  Public provisions. The regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other City Code provision, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any other City Code provision, rule or regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control. 
B.  Private provisions. These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where the provision of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern. 
[ Subd. 3.  Reserved. ] 
Subd. 4.  Saving provision. These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of prior existing subdivision regulations or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation or as waiving any right of the city under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of these regulations or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm or corporation, by lawful action of the city, except as they shall be expressly provided for in these regulations. 
(Code 1983, § 13.03, eff. 1-1-83)  
Sec. 13.04. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Abutting means as defined in City Code chapter 11. 
Alley means a minor public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property. 
Applicant means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises. 
Block means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets or a combination of streets, exterior boundary lines of the subdivision and/or bodies of water. 
Bond means any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond or letter of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the council and filed with the office of city treasurer. 
Boulevard means that portion of a street right-of-way between the curb or curbline and the property line. 
Buildable land means all of the area in the proposed subdivision less the area currently dedicated to or granted to the public for public use. 
Building means any structure having a roof which may shelter or enclose persons, animals or chattel. When said structure is divided by party walls without openings, each portion of such building so separated shall be deemed a separate building. 
Building setback means the minimum horizontal distance from a lot boundary to the nearest part of the foundation wall, except that no roof, eave or overhang shall project more than 30 inches into the setback zone. 
Capital improvements program means a proposed city schedule of future projects or capital purchases listed in order of priority together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project. 
Comprehensive guide plan means the duly adopted plan guiding the land use development of the city. 
Construction plan means the map or drawing accompanying a subdivision plat and illustrating the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with engineering and City Code requirements of the city and as conditioned in the approval of the plat. 
County plat committee means a committee established by the county board of commissioners to review plats. 
County recorder means the county recorder when referring to abstract or registered property under the torrens system in the county. 
Cul-de-sac means a local street with only one vehicular outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic. 
Developer means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises. 
Driveway provides access to a street from a residence, business or parking lot. 
Dwelling means as defined in City Code chapter 11. 
Easement means a recorded interest in land which authorizes a designated portion of that land for a specific limited use which shall include but not be limited to the following uses: ponding, drainage, utilities, access, parking, etc. 
Engineer means the director of public works of the city. 
Escrow means a deposit of cash with the local government in lieu of an amount required and still in force on a performance or maintenance bond. 
Excavation means as defined in City Code chapter 11. 
Final plat means a drawing, in final form, showing a proposed subdivision containing all information and detail required by state statutes and by this chapter to be presented to the council for approval and which, if approved, may be duly filed with the county registrar of deeds. 
Frontage means that side of a lot abutting on a public street right-of-way. 
Grade means the slope of a street or other public way, specified in percentage terms. 
Highway, limited access means a freeway or expressway, providing a trafficway for through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property on lands and other persons have no legal right to access to or from the same, except at such points and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such trafficway. 
Improvements. See definition of Public improvements. 
Licensed engineer means a person licensed as a professional civil engineer by the state. 
Lot means as defined in City Code chapter 11. 
Lot area means as defined in City Code chapter 11. 
Lot, corner means as defined in City Code chapter 11. 
Lot depth means as defined in City Code chapter 11. 
Lot line means as defined in City Code chapter 11. 
Lot line, front means as defined in City Code chapter 11. 
Lot line, rear means as defined in City Code chapter 11. 
Lot line, side means as defined in City Code chapter 11. 
Lot of record means as defined in City Code chapter 11. 
Lot, through means as defined in City Code chapter 11.13.11 
Lot width means as defined in City Code chapter 11. 
Model home means a dwelling unit used initially for display purposes which typifies the type of units that will be constructed in the subdivision. Such dwelling unit may be erected, at the discretion of the city, by permitting a portion of the subdivision to be temporarily developed for this purpose. 
Multiple dwelling means a structure used for residential living uses and having more than one dwelling unit in the same building. 
Nonaccess easement means an easement restricting vehicular access from a public street to public or private property. 
Official map means a map duly adopted by the council pursuant to the provisions of state statutes when such may exist. 
Outlot means a platted lot to be developed for a use which will not involve a building or be reserved for future replatting before development. 
Owner means any individual, firm, corporation, association, syndicate, partnership, or trust but shall mean the fee owner or owners and may include others with an interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under these regulations. 
Performance bond means a bond granted by the person(s) platting property to the city to guarantee the installation of improvements required in this chapter. 
Pedestrian way means a public pedestrian walkway provided between lots where required by the city to allow for pedestrian accessibility to streets or public service areas. This may also be referred to as a "trailway." 
Planned development means as defined in City Code chapter 11. 
Preliminary plat means a drawing clearly marked preliminary plat showing salient features of a proposed subdivision as specified in this chapter. 
Protective covenant means a contract between parties which constitutes a restriction on the use of the property for the benefit of the owners. 
Public improvement means any drainage ditch, street, sidewalk, public utility, pedestrian way, tree, or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established. 
Public land means land owned and/or operated by a governmental unit. 
Public services means services provided by utility companies including gas, electric, cable TV, telephone, etc. 
Publication means an official notice as prescribed by state statutes in a newspaper so designated for this purpose by the council. 
Registered engineer means an engineer properly licensed and registered in the state. 
Registered land surveyor means a land surveyor properly licensed and registered in the state. 
Replat means the platting of an area that was previously platted. 
Right-of-way means, for land platting purposes, that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots and/or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Public right-of-way shall be dedicated for public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established as required. Public use is meant to incorporate but not be limited to streets, crosswalks, sidewalks, trailways, railroads, electric/telephone/gas transmission and distribution lines, water main, sanitary sewer, storm sewer or other designated public special use. 
Screening means a strip of densely planted or natural growth with shrubs or trees at least four feet high at the time of planting, of a type that will form a yearround dense screen at least six feet high or an opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence at least six feet high. Either planting or barrier shall be maintained in good condition at all times and may have no signs affixed to or hung in relation to the outside thereof. 
Sketch plan means a sketch of a proposed subdivision showing information specified in subdivision 3 of section 13.10 and subdivision 1 of section 13.30 of this chapter. 
Solar energy system means a set of devices whose primary purpose is to collect solar energy and convert and store it for useful purposes, including heating and cooling of buildings and other energy using processes, or to produce generated power by means of any combination of collecting, transferring or converting solar generated energy. 
Solar skyspace means the space between a solar collector and the sun which must be free of obstructions that shade the collector to an extent which precludes its cost effective operation. 
Street means a public right-of-way which affords a primary means of access to abutting property. 
Street, arterial means a street which serves or is designed to serve heavy flows of traffic and which is primarily used as a route for traffic between communities and/or heavy traffic generating areas. 
Street, collector means a street which serves or is designed to serve as a trafficway for a neighborhood or as a feeder to an arterial street. 
Street, dead-end or cul-de-sac means a street with only one vehicular outlet. 
Street, half means a street designed to provide access to only one side of the right-of-way. 
Street, local means a street to serve primarily as an access to abutting properties. 
Street, private means a street which is not dedicated to the city for public use. 
Street, service means a marginal access street which is generally parallel to and adjacent to a major street. 
Street pavement means the wearing surface of a street. 
Street width means the width of the right-of-way, measured at right angles to the centerline of the street. 
Structure means as defined in City Code chapter 11. 
Subdivider means any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association, who shall lay out any subdivision or part thereof as defined herein, either by himself or with others. 
Subdivision means the division of any parcel of land into two or more lots, blocks or parcels. It also includes resubdivision of land and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing. 
Surveyor means a person duly registered as a land surveyor by the state. 
Trailway means an area so designated on a plat for public trail use in a manner regulated by the city. 
Use means as defined in City Code chapter 11. 
Variance means an exception granted by the council from the literal provisions of these subdivision regulations where unique conditions exist which do not apply to the area in general. 
Yard means as defined in City Code chapter 11. 
Zoning districts means as defined in City Code chapter 11. 
(Code 1983, § 13.04, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 401, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 9-26-06)  
Secs. 13.05—13.09. - Reserved.  
Sec. 13.10. - Application procedures and approval process. 
Subd. 1.  General procedure. Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any binding contract is made for the sale of any part thereof, before the subdivision is recorded with the county and before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdividing owner or his authorized agent shall apply for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedure, which includes basically three steps for a subdivision: 
A.  Preliminary plat, general design. 
B.  Preliminary plat, technical design. 
C.  Final plat. 
Subd. 2.  Petitions. All petitions for preliminary plats and final plats shall be filed with the city clerk and shall include all of the information required on the petition form provided by the city and all the information required by this chapter. A petition filed with the city clerk, which, if approved by the city council, would require a comprehensive guide plan amendment or rezoning, shall be deemed incomplete under Minn. Stat. § 462.358 and this chapter, until such time as the city council has approved the comprehensive guide plan amendment and/or the rezoning. It shall be the obligation of the petitioner to provide all information required by this chapter, and failure to do so may be used as a reason for the city council to deny said petition. 
Subd. 3.  Preliminary plat—General design. 
A.  Petition. Preliminary plat general design submission shall at a minimum include all information required by this chapter, all the information required on the petition, as adopted by the city, as well as the following: 
1.  Six full size copies and one eight-inch by 11-inch reduction of each general design plan, which plan shall include all the specified information as required in this chapter. 
2.  Fees as established by resolution of the council. 
3.  Abstractor's certificate of property owners within 350 feet of the subject land. 
4.  Exact legal description of the property. 
5.  A signed petition form, as adopted by the city, together with all documents referred to therein. 
6.  A signed escrow agreement, and all required funds thereunder, as adopted by the city. 
B.  Staff review. 
1.  Within ten days after the preliminary plat general design submission has been filed with the city, the city staff shall complete the initial review to determine if all required petition information has been filed. If it has not, the petitioner shall be so informed. However, failure by the city to inform the petitioner does not obligate the city in any manner. 
2.  When the submission is complete, the staff review and evaluation committee shall review the petition in preparation for the developer/staff meeting. The detailed review will determine whether or not the application is acceptable. 
3.  Following the developer/staff meeting, the applicant has until the end of the fifth business day following the meeting to submit revisions, special reports and/or companion applications deemed necessary at said meeting. 
4.  When the revisions, if any, are submitted and deemed complete, the city clerk shall advertise for a public hearing before the planning commission under the same provisions for which a public hearing is advertised and notices are mailed for a rezoning (as prescribed in section 11.40 of City Code chapter 11) and shall at the same time forward a copy to the applicable school district for review and comment at the public hearing where deemed appropriate by the school district. 
C.  Public hearing. 
1.  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the advertised date and time and afford all interested persons an opportunity to be heard. Within 30 days of the closing of the hearing but in no event later than 90 days after delivery of the petition to the city, the planning commission shall report its findings or make a recommendation on the preliminary plat to the council. 
2.  Within 120 days of delivery of a petition submitted in compliance with this chapter, the council shall approve or deny said preliminary plat, unless the subdivider gives written consent, wherein the council shall have additional time to either approve or deny said preliminary plat. This provision is intended to be in full compliance with Minn. Stat. § 462.358. Approval shall be for a period of one year or longer, as specified by the council. Upon expiration of the time limit, all approvals for preliminary plats or portions thereof for which a final plat has not been recorded with the county shall be null and void, and a new petition and processing shall be necessary to revalidate the preliminary plat unless the council shall grant an extension of time prior to the expiration date. 
Subd. 4.  Preliminary plat—Technical design. 
A.  Information with submission. After the proposed preliminary plat has been conditionally approved by the council, the technical design submission shall include any information required on the preliminary plat petition and such additional information as may be deemed necessary by the city for review and action. 
1.  Deposit with the city all required funds pursuant to the escrow agreement as adopted by the city. 
B.  Staff review. When the technical design information submission is complete, it shall be reviewed by the community development and engineering departments. Approval of the technical design is required before the preliminary plat is deemed complete for purposes of accepting an application for a final plat by the city. 
Subd. 5.  Final plat. 
A.  Requirements prior to final plat approval. The following information shall have been received by the city, prior to council approval and the recording of a final plat with the county: 
1.  A preliminary plat in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  An "environmental assessment worksheet" when required by and subject to the provisions of state statutes. 
3.  Approval by the county plat committee for all plats fronting on a county highway and approval by the state department of transportation for all plats fronting upon a state or federal highway. 
4.  Execution of a planned development agreement for property zoned as "planned development." 
5.  A completed and signed final plat application as prescribed by the city. 
6.  Payment of all fees as established by resolution of the council. 
7.  Ten copies of the final plat plus one copy of the hard-shell for the permanent files of the city which shall be the same as the document to be filed with the county. (See section 13.30, subdivision 3.) 
8.  A determination by the council on the method by which park dedication shall be satisfied. 
9.  An engineering feasibility study for city-installed public improvements and council award of the improvement project. 
10.  Submission of all data and details as required under section 13.30 of this chapter. 
11.  Easements or deeds as may be required by the city for trailways, ponding, parks, utilities or similar public purposes in a form prescribed by the city attorney. 
12.  Submission of cash escrow, letter of credit or similar guarantee as required under the development deposit agreement. 
13.  Execution of a development contract, drafted by the city, embodying the terms and conditions of approval. 
14.  Submission of a cash escrow, letter of credit or similar guarantee to guarantee performance of the terms and conditions set forth in the development contract. 
15.  Evidence of title certified to date. 
B.  Staff review. Within ten working days after the final plat application has been received, the city shall complete the initial review to determine if all required information has been filed. If it has not, the petitioner shall be so informed. However, failure by the city to inform the petitioner does not obligate the city in any manner. When the provisions of this section 13.10, subdivision 5 have been completed, the city administrator shall schedule the final plat for a regular council meeting. 
C.  Signing and recording of final plat. 
1.  Right to convey individual lots. No right to convey individual lots shall accrue to any plat by reason of preliminary or final approval until the actual signing of the plat by city officials and the recording of the plat with the county. 
2.  Signing of plat. The final plat shall not be released by the city clerk for recording with the county until the following has occurred: 
(a)  The signature of the mayor or, in his absence, the acting mayor has been recorded on the plat attesting to the date upon which the council approved the final plat. 
(b)  The signature of the city clerk and seal of the city has been recorded on the plat attesting to the above-referenced actions by the city and the validity of the signatures. 
(c)  The letter of credit, performance bond, cash escrow or similar guarantee for the final plat application escrow and contract management escrow required by the development escrow agreement has been received. 
(d)  The final plat shall be signed within ten days of council approval if all of the required material is on file. 
3.  Recording of plat. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to file the plat with the county recorder within 60 days from final plat approval by the council, unless a time extension has been granted by the council. Failure to record the plat within the 60-day period shall render final plat approval by the council null and void until a new application has been processed and approved by the city, unless the council has granted an extension of time in which the final plat shall be recorded. 
4.  Proof of recording. The city shall not issue building permits or commence construction under public utility or street contracts on the platted property until such time as the city clerk has been satisfied that the plat has been recorded with the county recorder. If problems arise which are beyond the subdivider's control, the city can waive this restriction. 
(Code 1983, § 13.10, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 13, 2nd series, eff. 4-27-84; Ord. No. 37, 2nd series, eff. 6-20-86; Ord. No. 77, 2nd series, eff. 3-3-89; Ord. No. 209, 2nd series, eff. 12-14-95; Ord. No. 199, 2nd series, eff. 2-23-95)  
Sec. 13.11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 309, 2nd series, § 1, adopted April 12, 2001, repealed § 13.11 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to minor subdivisions, as adopted by Ord. No. 291, 2nd series, § 1, effective May 11, 2000.  
Secs. 13.12—13.19. - Reserved.  
Sec. 13.20. - General provisions. 
Subd. 1.  Model homes. Model homes or dwelling units, in a number authorized by the council, may be permitted in any residential subdivision subject to the following conditions: 
A.  The model home area shall be designated on the preliminary plat, reviewed by the planning commission, and approved by the council. Said approval shall include an approved site plan detailing the area so designated and temporary improvements such as public parking areas, nonresidential structures and/or similar improvements normally associated with a model home area. 
B.  The model home area shall exist for a time period specified in the development contract or until the project is sold out or rented out, whichever shall be sooner. At the end of said time period, the subdivider shall be required to restore the area to a normal residential character, unless a time extension is granted by the council, so that the model home may serve to advertise another area. 
C.  The city may require a bond, in an amount determined by the council, to insure restoration of a model home area. 
D.  Signs in a model home area shall be regulated by City Code section 4.20 and amendments thereto. 
E.  Individual units, built on speculation, with no exterior alterations for model home purposes, shall be exempt from these requirements. 
F.  Model homes may not be constructed prior to final plat approval by the council. 
G.  Model homes may be constructed prior to the availability of public utilities, but not occupied as residential living units until public utilities are connected to the dwellings. 
Subd. 2.  Grading of site prior to final plat. Subsequent to preliminary plat approval, the developer may apply for an excavation permit from the council and, upon receipt of such permit, may commence construction to the grades and elevations required by the approved preliminary plat. Said "excavation permit" shall be issued under the provisions of City Code section 4.30 and amendments thereto. Issuance of said "excavation permit" does not obligate the council, in any manner, to approve a final plat. Lot grading prior to the approval of a final plat shall be done under the requirements of section 13.30, subdivision 15, subparagraph H of this chapter. 
Subd. 3.  Effective period of preliminary plat approval. The approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of one year or longer, as specified by the council. The council, however, may, upon adequate cause shown, grant an extension of the approval period. At the end of this time, final plat approval on the subdivision shall have been obtained from the council. Any preliminary plat not receiving final approval within the period of time set forth herein shall be null and void, except as provided by Minn. Stat. § 462.358, subd. 3c, and the developer shall be required to resubmit a new application for preliminary plat approval subject to all new zoning restrictions and subdivision regulations of the city existing at the time of submission of the new application. (See section 13.10, subdivision 4.) 
Subd. 4.  Zoning regulations. Every plat shall conform with existing zoning provisions of the City Code and subdivision regulations applicable at the time of proposed final approval, except that any plat which has received preliminary approval shall be exempt from any subsequent amendments to the zoning chapter rendering the plat nonconforming, provided that final approval is obtained within the one-year or longer period, as specified by the council. Said conformance shall not be interpreted as restricting the council's authority to allow flexibility in density and dimensional requirements in areas zoned planned development (PD) as provided in the zoning chapter. 
Subd. 5.  Private ownership of multiple-dwelling lots. Where the filing of a final plat on a multiple-dwelling project is to be delayed as approved by the council until after foundations, which will form lot boundaries, are constructed, said delay in filing shall be subject to the following conditions: 
A.  All final plat procedures shall be followed and completed prior to issuance of building permits except for the preparation of final plat map, signing of the final plat, unless signature is not required by state law, and dedication of public lands shown on the plat. In place of the final plat map, the subdivider shall prepare a preliminary copy of the final plat map which the council shall use in granting its approval and the city shall use in issuing building permits. 
B.  The final plat map shall be submitted, signed by the city, unless signature is not required by state law, and recorded with the county, and final plat requirements shall be met in all other respects prior to the occupancy for residential use of any dwelling unit included in the area of the final plat. 
Subd. 6.  Findings related to preliminary and final plats. In the case of all platting, the planning commission and the council shall be guided by criteria, including the following, in approving, denying or establishing conditions related thereto: 
A.  That the proposed subdivision does comply with applicable City Code provisions and the comprehensive guide plan. 
B.  That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision complies with applicable plans of the county, the state, or the metropolitan council. 
C.  That the physical characteristics of the site, including, but not limited to, topography, vegetation, susceptibility to erosion and siltation, susceptibility to flooding, water storage and retention, are such that the site is suitable for the type of development or use contemplated. 
D.  That the site physically is suitable for the proposed density of development. 
E.  That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are not likely to cause environmental damage. 
F.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements are not likely to cause health problems. 
G.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not conflict with easements of record or with easements established by judgment of court. 
H.  That completion of the proposed development of the subdivision can be completed in a timely manner so as not to cause an economic burden upon the city for maintenance, repayment of bonds or similar burden. 
I.  That the subdivision has been properly planned for possible solar energy system use within the subdivision or as it relates to adjacent property. (Refer to city handbook on solar access.) 
J.  That the design of public improvements for the subdivision is compatible and consistent with the platting or approved preliminary plat on adjacent lands. 
K.  That the subdivision is in compliance with those standards set forth in the city's water quality and wetland management plan which is properly approved and filed in the office of the city clerk and in effect as of the date the subdivision application was received by the city, hereinafter referred to as the "water quality management plan." Said document and all of the notations, references and other information contained therein shall have the same force and effect as if fully set down herein and is hereby made a part of this chapter by reference and incorporated herein as fully as if set forth herein at length. It shall be the responsibility of the city clerk to maintain the water quality management plan and make the same available to the public. 
L.  That the subdivision is in compliance with the city's storm water management regulations pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act as set forth elsewhere in this Code. 
M.  That the subdivision is in compliance with the city's wetland protection and management regulations as set forth elsewhere in this Code. 
Subd. 7.  Platting additions. 
A.  Prior to granting final plat approval, the council may permit or require the plat to be divided into two or more additions and may impose such conditions upon the filing of the additions as it may deem necessary to assure the orderly development of the plat. 
B.  The city may also require the developer to plat all areas not developed at the time of platting the first addition into outlots. 
Subd. 8.  Public uses. 
A.  Parks, trail, recreational areas, ponding areas and other public uses. 
1.  Designation on preliminary plat. Where a proposed park, recreational facility as defined in Minn. Stat. § 471.191, playground, wetland, trail, ponding or open space area, shown on the city's comprehensive guide plan, park development guide, official map, or suitable alternate approved by the council, is located in the whole or in part in a subdivision, such area or areas shall be shown on the preliminary plat or otherwise designated to the city. The city must first reasonably determine, however, that such area or areas will need to be acquired for the purposes stated above in this subsection. The city, whether acquiring land or a cash contribution in lieu thereof, shall give due consideration to the open space, recreation or common areas and facilities open to the public that the applicant proposes to reserve for this subdivision in making such determination. Such area or areas shall also be dedicated to the city by the subdivider if the council requests such dedication under the remaining provisions of this subdivision. 
2.  Parkland dedication or cash contribution. Said dedicated land, which shall be buildable land, shall be in an amount determined to be reasonable by the council as established by resolution. The cash contribution amount shall be established pursuant to section 13.20, subd. 10 of this ordinance. The cash contribution amount shall be based on the fair market value of the land no later than at the time of final approval. 
In lieu of the conveyance of dedicated land as provided above, the owner or subdivider may, at the option of the city, pay to the city, for use in acquisition and development of parks, a cash payment. The cash payment shall be placed in a special fund to be used only for the purposes for which the payments were obtained. Cash payments received must be used only for the acquisition and development or improvement of parks, recreational facilities, playgrounds, trails, wetlands, or open space based on the approved park system's plan. Cash payments must not be used for the ongoing operation or maintenance of parks, recreational facilities, playgrounds, trails, wetlands or open space. 
Previously subdivided property, from which a park dedication has been received, that is being resubdivided with the same number of lots, is exempt from additional park dedication requirements. As a result of resubdividing the property, if the number of lots is increased, then new park dedication or per lot cash contribution shall apply to the net increase of lots. 
3.  Dedication credits for construction. Dedication credit shall not be granted for the construction of recreational facilities unless a specific agreement granting credit is approved by the council. 
4.  Dedication of wetlands and ponding areas. 
(a)  Wetlands and ponding areas, needed as a part of the overall city storm drainage plan, shall be dedicated in fee or easement at the option of the city and in a form acceptable to the city. However, no credit shall be given for park dedication unless said area meets the criteria for public parks as stated in the city's comprehensive plan and the city's park dedication resolution and is approved as such by the council. Said dedication of land or easement shall be in a form approved by the council. 
(b)  As a prerequisite to plat approval and/or a waiver of plat approval, the applicant shall dedicate wetlands and ponding areas required under the city water quality management plan and/or shall make a cash contribution to the city's water quality management fund at the city's option. Wetland and ponding area dedication shall be in an amount as determined by the council as reasonably necessary to comply with the city's water quality management plan. The cash contribution amount shall be as established pursuant to section 13.20, subd. 10 of this ordinance. 
5.  Land in excess of dedication requirements. Where land proposed for public use exceeds the amount legally and reasonably required by the city and the subdivider will not dedicate the additional amount, the council shall have a maximum of four months from the date of preliminary plat approval by the council to proceed with an option or purchase of said additional amount. Where a purchase is not initiated, the plat shall be revised to permit another use and the processing of the plat shall continue. 
6.  Timing of dedication. If a new subdivision is designed to be platted into more than one addition, all park or other public use lands contemplated under this section for each phase of the subdivision, except streets, alleys or easements other than those leading directly to such sites, shall be dedicated by the time of approval of the final plat for that phase. 
7.  Condition of areas to be dedicated. Areas to be dedicated for public use, trail, wetland or ponding shall be brought to a suitable condition by the subdivider prior to acceptance by the city. All dead and diseased trees, trash, junk, unwanted structures or similar undesirable elements shall be removed by the owner at his expense. Said condition shall also be in accordance with the city handbook on environmental protection. 
8.  As a prerequisite to plat approval and/or a waiver of plat approval, the applicant shall dedicate land required to complete the city's trail plan and/or shall make a cash contribution to the city's park trail fund, at the city's option. Land dedication shall be in an amount as determined by the council as reasonably necessary to comply with the city's trail plan in accordance with the city's trail dedication policy. The cash contribution shall be as established pursuant to section 13.20, subd. 10 of this ordinance. For residential property, the cash contribution shall be made at the time of approval of the final plat or approval of the waiver of plat in the amount as determined by the rate schedule in effect at the time of the approval. With respect to commercial, industrial, or public facility property, the cash contribution shall be made at the time of the issuance by the city of a building permit in the amount as determined by the rate schedule in effect at the time of the issuance of the permit. 
B.  Title and survey requirements. Lands so dedicated shall be accompanied by a certificate of survey or shall be designated as a lot or outlot on the plat as determined by the city. Further, such lands shall be free and clear of all liens and encumbrances including special assessments as evidenced by an up-to-date abstract of title or registered property abstract to be submitted at developer's cost to the city for its examination. Such dedication shall be in the form and manner as prescribed by the city attorney. 
Subd. 9.  Landlocked parcels. As a general rule, the city shall not permit landlocked parcels or parcels that are only served by private easements. However, the city may permit the following: 
A.  Landlocked parcels in a multiple-dwelling or commercial complexes provided said parcel(s) have access to a public street by an easement over another parcel within the same multiple-dwelling or commercial complex. Said landlocked parcel is permitted in this instance only for the purpose of establishing separate taxable parcels within a complex. 
B.  Landlocked parcels which are unbuildable (outlots or parcels) reserved as permanent public open spaces such as ponding areas may be permitted. 
Subd. 10.  Fees. Where fees are not specifically stated in this chapter, said fees shall be established by resolution of the council, which may revise the fee schedule from time to time. A schedule of all fees established by this chapter shall be published and available at the city hall. 
Subd. 11.  Council vote. All actions related to this chapter, including amendments, variances, waivers and plat approvals, shall require a majority vote of the members of the council present at a duly constituted council meeting. 
Subd. 12.  Planned developments. In platting areas zoned planned development (PD) districts as described in the zoning chapter, the following shall be required: 
A.  A valid "planned development agreement" shall be entered into at or prior to final plat approval by the city or said approval shall be null and void. 
B.  As a part of the approval of a plat, the council may grant any dimensional deviations from the strict dimensional requirements for each base zoning district as deemed necessary to accomplish an overall plan under the provisions of a planned development district. 
C.  Said deviation as described in the above subparagraph shall not be interpreted to automatically increase densities above those permitted in the planned development agreement. Said deviations shall relate only to dimensions. 
D.  Said dimensional deviations approved as a part of a plat in a planned development district shall not require individual variances. 
E.  Said dimensional deviations as referenced in this subdivision of this chapter shall relate to lot area, lot width, lot depth, frontage on a public street, street width, setbacks for any yard, height, setback from adjacent zoning district or use, length of culs-de-sac, length of block and radius of culs-de-sac. 
F.  Said dimensional deviations shall be clearly stated and documented at the time of approval by the council before they shall have full form and effect. 
Subd. 13.  Plat approved without variances. Where a plat has been approved by the city and recorded with the county which contains a lot or lots which do not meet the minimum required dimensions as stated in this chapter or in the zoning chapter, said lots shall have the following status: 
A.  Said lot(s) shall be considered conforming lots and be entitled to all rights normally expected with a conforming lot under the circumstances of subparagraphs B and C below. 
B.  Said lot(s) shall not be entitled to any special consideration for other variances and no other dimensional variances other than those existing on the plat shall be automatically accrued. 
C.  Deviations from the zoning chapter are noted in subdivision 12 of this section. 
Subd. 14.  Building permits prior to public and private services. 
A.  No permits until contract awarded. In plats that are to be served by municipal water and sanitary sewer, the city shall not issue building permits until a contract has been awarded for the installation of said water and sewer by the city or by the developer and as approved by the city. (See subdivision 1 of this section.) 
B.  No occupancy until public and/or private utilities available. Where building permits are issued as provided in subparagraph A above, the building or units therein shall not be occupied (except model homes—see subdivision 1 of this section) until said building(s) are provided with public sewer and water service, private services (gas, electricity, sewer, water) and an improved public street to the extent that the street is graded and gravel surfaced. 
C.  Where a building permit is issued under subparagraph B above, the person to whom the permit is issued proceeds at his own risk and the city assumes no obligation to provide public services within a specified time limit. 
D.  Private septic system and well. Exceptions to subparagraph B above shall be automatically granted for public sewer and water utilities for lots which are served by private septic systems and private water wells when said private systems are approved by the city. 
Subd. 15.  Noise abatement. Where a plat is located along a freeway, major arterial or other area which generates high volumes of noise, the subdivider shall be required to prepare a plan to provide noise abatement. Said plan shall provide for noise abatement through architectural site design, the construction of earth berms, dense vegetation, walls, or the combination thereof or similar means which shall be reviewed and approved by the city. Such barriers shall be constructed in accordance with PCA standards for the appropriate land use. 
Subd. 16.  Consolidation of lots of record. The owner of contiguous platted lots of record may consolidate those lots at any one location into one lot by recording the consolidation with the county and filing a copy of a certificate of survey, showing same, with the city clerk within 30 days of recording. 
Subd. 17.  Division of lots of record. Contiguous platted lots of record which have been consolidated shall not be resubdivided except through a replat or waiver of platting as provided in this chapter. 
Subd. 18.  Preliminary plat compliance with floodplain requirements. With the approval of a preliminary plat, the city shall review the plat to insure that each lot or parcel contains sufficient area outside of the floodplain for structures, sewer systems and related activities. 
(Code 1983, § 13.20, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 54, 2nd series, eff. 6-10-88; Ord. No. 74, 2nd series, eff. 1-6-89; Ord. No. 96, 2nd series, eff. 2-16-90; Ord. No. 102, 2nd series, eff. 5-25-90; Ord. No. 138, 2nd series, eff. 4-29-92; Ord. No. 401, 2nd series, § 2, eff. 9-26-06; Ord. No. 516, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 3-5-2013)  
Secs. 13.21—13.29. - Reserved.  
Sec. 13.30. - Data and design standards. 
All preliminary plats, general and technical design, and final plats shall provide, as a minimum, the following data and shall conform to the design standards set forth in this section except where deviations are approved by the council in a "planned development" district or where a specific variance is granted by the council. 
Subd. 1.  Preliminary plat—General design submission. The preliminary plat-general design submission shall contain six sets of the following plans: a preliminary plat plan, a site plan, a general utility and street plan, a general grading/drainage/erosion control plan, a general landscape plan and a parkland dedication plan. These plans shall be submitted in accordance with subdivision 3 of this section. 
A.  Preliminary plat plans. A preliminary plat plan shall contain the following: 
1.  General information. 
(a)  Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate or be similar to the name of any other plat. The use of the word "estate" shall only be permitted if the property is zoned "estate." 
(b)  Vicinity map as provided by the city illustrating the general location of the proposed subdivision. 
(c)  Legal description of the boundary of the subdivision. 
(d)  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owners, developer, surveyor and/or engineer, and contact person. 
(e)  North arrow (orientated up). 
(f)  Graphic scale of 1? = 50' or 1? = 100'. 
(g)  Sheet size of 22? × 34? or 24? × 36?. 
(h)  Date of preparation. 
(i)  Benchmark. 
2.  Site data for proposed subdivision. 
(a)  Boundary line of the proposed subdivision clearly indicated. 
(b)  Proposed lot boundaries, with numbers, areas, and dimensions. 
(c)  Proposed block boundaries, with numbers. 
(d)  Names and widths (paved and right-of-way) of streets and other rights-of-way. Public street names shall be consistent with existing street names in the city or proposed names shall be shown in alpha designation until approved by the community development department. 
(e)  Location, dimension and purpose of any public easements, including all utility lanes. 
(f)  Location and dimension of park dedications. 
(g)  Minimum building setback lines on all lots with the width of the lot shown at the minimum front setback line. 
(h)  Plat size data, including total number of lots, total plat area, public right-of-way area, ponding easement area and parkland area (in acres). 
(i)  Lot sizes, including largest lot, smallest lot, average lot and median lot. 
3.  Existing conditions data for proposed subdivision and adjacent (within 100 feet) land. 
(a)  Existing zoning. 
(b)  Plat names, and lots, blocks and outlots for adjacent platted property. 
(c)  Tax parcel numbers for adjacent unplatted property. 
(d)  Property owners' names. 
(e)  Location, widths and names of all existing or previously platted streets or other public ways, showing type, width and also conditions of improvements. 
(f)  Location, dimension and purpose of public easements of record. 
(g)  Topographical data, including contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet. Watercourses, marshes, wooded areas and rock outcrops, power transmission lines and poles, and other significant features shall also be shown. 
(h)  Locations of existing structures with an indication of whether said structures will be demolished or relocated. 
(i)  Location of existing tree masses including type, size and quantity. 
4.  Traffic data. Projected traffic information as may be required for internal and abutting streets related to average daily trips (ADT) and a.m. and p.m. peak hour for purposes of traffic analysis. Traffic data shall be completed by the city whenever the city determines the need to be appropriate. 
B.  Site plans. A site plan shall contain the following: 
1.  General information. 
(a)  Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate or be similar to the name of any other plat. The use of the word "estate" shall only be permitted if the property is zoned "estate." 
(b)  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owner, developer, surveyor and/or engineer, and contact person. 
(c)  North arrow. 
(d)  Graphic scale of 1? = 50' or 1? = 100'. 
(e)  Sheet size of 22? × 34? or 24? × 36?. 
(f)  Date of preparation. 
2.  Site data for proposed subdivision. 
(a)  Boundary line of the proposed subdivision clearly indicated. 
(b)  Proposed lot boundaries, with numbers, areas, and dimensions. 
(c)  Proposed block boundaries, with numbers. 
(d)  Location, dimension and purpose of any easements. 
(e)  Location and dimension of park dedications. 
(f)  Minimum building setback lines on all lots with the width of the lot shown at the minimum front setback line. 
(g)  Names and widths (paved and right-of-way) of streets and other rights-of-way. Public street names shall be consistent with existing street names in the city or proposed names shall be shown in alpha designation until approved by the community development department. 
(h)  Proposed building footprints with dimensions, area and setbacks shown. This may be shown by building envelope for single-family residential development. 
(i)  Proposed parking areas, with dimensions, setbacks and number of spaces indicated. 
C.  General utility and street plan. A general utility and street plan shall contain the following: 
1.  General information. 
(a)  Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate or be similar to the name of any other plat. The use of the word "estate" shall only be permitted if the property is zoned "estate." 
(b)  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owner, developer, surveyor and/or engineer, and contact person. 
(c)  North arrow. 
(d)  Graphic scale of 1? = 200'. 
(e)  Sheet size of 22? × 34? or 24? × 36?. 
(f)  Date of preparation. 
(g)  Benchmark. 
2.  Site data for proposed subdivision and adjacent (within 100 feet) land. 
(a)  Boundary line of the proposed subdivision clearly indicated. 
(b)  Lot boundaries within the proposed subdivision. 
(c)  Block boundaries within the proposed subdivision. 
(d)  Plat names, and boundaries of lots, blocks and outlots for adjacent platted property. 
(e)  Tax parcel numbers for adjacent unplatted property. 
(f)  Location of existing utilities on the proposed subdivision and within 100 feet of the proposed subdivision. 
(g)  Names and widths (paved and right-of-way) of streets and other rights-of-way. Public street names shall be consistent with existing street names in the city or proposed names shall be shown in alpha designation until approved by the community development department. 
D.  General grading/drainage/erosion control plan. A general grading/drainage/erosion control plan shall contain the following: 
1.  General information. 
(a)  Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate or be similar to the name of any other plat. The use of the word "estate" shall only be permitted if the property is zoned "estate." 
(b)  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owner, developer, surveyor and/or engineer, and contact person. 
(c)  North arrow. 
(d)  Graphic scale of 1? = 50' or 1? = 100'. 
(e)  Sheet size of 22? × 34? or 24? × 36?. 
(f)  Date of preparation. 
(g)  Benchmark. 
2.  Site data for proposed subdivision and adjacent (within 100 feet) land. 
(a)  Boundary line of the proposed subdivision clearly indicated. 
(b)  Lot boundaries within the proposed subdivision. 
(c)  Block boundaries within the proposed subdivision. 
(d)  Plat names, and boundaries of lots, blocks and outlots for adjacent platted property. 
(e)  Tax parcel numbers of adjacent unplatted property. 
(f)  Existing contours at two-foot intervals to mean sea level datum, indicated by dashed lines, extending 100 feet beyond the proposed subdivision boundaries. 
(g)  Proposed contours at two-foot intervals to mean sea level datum, indicated by solid lines, extending 100 feet beyond the proposed subdivision boundaries. 
(h)  Building footprints of existing and proposed structures. 
(i)  Location of existing ponds, wetlands, lakes, streams or marshes with proposed data for normal water elevation, ordinary high water elevation, storage volume and area of drainage boundaries. 
(j)  Any other information required, not otherwise required herein, for a land disturbance and erosion control plan under this City Code. 
E.  General landscape plan. A general landscape plan shall contain the following: 
1.  General information. 
(a)  Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate or be similar to the name of any other plat. The use of the word "estate" shall only be permitted if the property is zoned "estate." 
(b)  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owner, developer, surveyor and/or engineer, and contact person. 
(c)  North arrow. 
(d)  Graphic scale of 1? = 50' or 1? = 100'. 
(e)  Sheet size of 22? × 34? or 24? × 36?. 
(f)  Date of preparation. 
2.  Site data for proposed subdivision. 
(a)  Location of existing utilities. 
(b)  Location of existing tree masses including type, size and quantity. 
Pursuant to the City Code, the information noted in the following items (c), (d) and (e) shall be submitted as required for industrial/commercial and multiresidential subdivision. 
(c)  Location, type and size of proposed plant material. 
(d)  Location of areas to be seeded and/or sodded. 
(e)  Plant list including proposed varieties, quantities, size and root type. 
F.  Park dedication plan. The petitioner is responsible for providing a park dedication proposal at the time of application. The proposal shall meet all requirements as defined by the parks dedication policy, as adopted by the city. If the city requires a land contribution, a parkland dedication plan shall be provided with the preliminary plat-general submission. A parkland dedication plan shall contain the following: 
1.  General information. 
(a)  Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate or be similar to the name of any other plat. The use of the word "estate" shall only be permitted if the property is zoned "estate." 
(b)  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owner, developer, surveyor and/or engineer, and contact person. 
(c)  North arrow. 
(d)  Graphic scale of 1? = 50' or 1? = 100'. 
(e)  Sheet size of 22? × 34? or 24? × 36?. 
(f)  Date of preparation. 
2.  Site data for park dedication parcel. 
(a)  Proposed parkland dedication boundaries clearly indicated. 
(b)  Existing topography within and 50 feet beyond the dedication parcel boundary. 
(c)  Location of existing wetlands, ponds, lakes, streams or marshes with data for normal water elevation, ordinary high water elevation and flowage. 
(d)  Location of existing tree masses including type, size and quantity. 
(e)  Location of existing utilities and public easements within and immediately adjacent to the dedication parcel. 
(f)  Location of existing structures. 
(g)  Areas of 12 percent slope or greater clearly indicated. 
(h)  Location of existing trails and sidewalks within and adjacent (within 100 feet) to the dedication parcel. 
(i)  Location of proposed trails and sidewalks within and adjacent (within 100 feet) to dedication parcel, with type and grade shown every 100 feet. 
(j)  Location of adjacent (within 100 feet) parkland and public-owned parcels. 
3.  Park cash contribution. If the petitioner is providing a cash contribution in lieu of a parkland dedication, as determined by the city, a letter of proposal shall be provided with the preliminary plat-general design submission. This letter of proposal shall contain the following: 
(a)  For residential development proposals, the cash dedication shall be based on the type of units. 
(b)  For industrial, office and commercial development proposals, the cash dedication shall be based on the square footage of net developable land. 
(c)  Credit to cash dedication proposal and substantiating information for park and recreation benefit. 
Subd. 2.  Preliminary plat—Technical design submission. After the preliminary plat-general design has been conditionally approved by the council, the following technical information shall be submitted for approval by the community development department and engineering department. Said approval shall be required before the preliminary plat is deemed complete for purposes of accepting an application for a final plat by the city. The preliminary plat technical design submission shall contain two types of plans: a technical utility and street plan and a technical grading/drainage/erosion control plan. These plans shall be submitted in accordance with section 13.10, subdivision 4. 
A.  Certificate of boundary survey by a registered land surveyor licensed to practice in the state. 
B.  Technical utility and street plans. A technical utility and street plan shall contain the following: 
1.  General information. The information as required in subdivision 1, subparagraph C, item 1 above, shall be provided on the technical utility and street plan. However, the scale of the technical utility and street plan shall be 1? = 50'. 
2.  Site data for proposed subdivision and adjacent (within 100 feet) land. The information as required in subdivision 1, subparagraph C, item 2 of this section, shall be provided on the technical utility and street plan. In addition, section lines and corners shall be clearly indicated. 
3.  Technical utility and street data. 
(a)  The location, line size, invert and top or casting elevations, direction of flow arrows, hydrants and gate valves and service location of all existing sanitary sewer, water or storm sewer, trunks, laterals or services on or adjacent to the property. 
(b)  Proposed private water well and/or septic system locations with sufficient soil and general information. The information as required in subdivision 1, subparagraph D, item 1 of this section, data for analysis of suitability by the city engineer. 
(c)  Public streets showing right-of-way widths, paved street widths and paved radii. 
(d)  Public street grades with centerline elevations and percent of grade indicated every 100 feet. 
C.  Technical grading/drainage/erosion control plan. A technical grading/drainage/erosion control plan shall contain the following: 
1.  General information. The information as required in subdivision 1, subparagraph D, item 1 of this section, shall be provided on the technical grading/drainage/erosion control plan. 
2.  Site data for proposed subdivision and adjacent (within 100 feet) land. The information as required in subdivision 1, subparagraph D, item 2 of this section, shall be provided on the technical grading/drainage/erosion control plan. In addition, section lines and corners shall be clearly indicated. 
3.  Technical grading/drainage/erosion control data. 
(a)  Location and finish floor elevations of any existing structure, including on-site private wells and septic tanks (whether abandoned or to remain after property is platted). 
(b)  Location of existing structures on adjacent (within 100 feet) property. 
(c)  Location of proposed building, auxiliary structures, parking areas and roads. 
(d)  Limits of clearing and grading. 
(e)  Identification of any physical characteristics of the site constituting a susceptibility to erosion and siltation to any adjacent street right-of-way; identification of the special measures, if any, to be used to prevent any erosion to and siltation onto an adjacent street right-of-way; and identification of the location of erosion/sediment control structures and indication of type such as: hay bales, silt fence, sedimentation basin. 
(f)  A signed letter shall accompany the submittal stating the person/company responsible for erosion and sediment control plan preparation, implementation and maintenance. 
D.  Technical landscape plan. A technical landscape plan shall contain the following: 
1.  General information. The information as required in subdivision 1, subparagraph E, item 1 of this section, shall be provided on the technical landscape plan. 
2.  Technical landscape data. The information as required in subdivision 1, subparagraph E, item 2 of this section, shall be provided on a grading plan for the technical landscape plan submission. 
E.  Technical park plan. A technical park plan shall contain the following: 
1.  General information. The information as required in subdivision 1, subparagraph F, item 1 of this section, shall be provided on the technical park plan. 
2.  Site data for proposed park dedication parcel. The information as required in subdivision 1, subparagraph F, item 2 of this section, shall be provided on the technical park plan. 
3.  Technical park dedication data. Proposed improvements within the parkland dedication parcel resulting from the proposed development, including utilities, grading and restoration. 
Subd. 3.  Final plat. 
A.  The final plat plan shall be on sheets 20 inches wide by 30 inches long and shall be at a scale of 100 feet equals one inch or such other standard scale as approved by the city engineer and, in all other respects, shall comply with the Minnesota Statutes. Where necessary, the plat or final plat may be on several sheets accompanied by a key map showing the entire subdivision. For large subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted for approval progressively in contiguous sections satisfactory to the council. The final plat plan shall contain all information required on a final plat by state law and the county. 
B.  The following final development plans shall be supplied with the final plat: 
1.  Lot dimensions and area calculations, including square footages. Area calculations of lots shall delineate the area of any dedicated ponding easements in addition to net area of lot exclusive of ponding easement or public rights-of-way. 
2.  All elevations, topography and vertical control data tied to sea level datum, 1929 general adjustments. 
3.  Letter from the county plat committee with recommendations, if any, on any preliminary plat which abuts a county road. 
4.  Protective covenants and association articles and bylaws where applicable, if any. 
5.  Certificates, affidavits, endorsements, photographs or data as may be required by the council and/or the planning commission pursuant to the subdivision regulations. 
6.  A topographical contour map including proposed contour grading at vertical intervals of not more than two feet shall be submitted with the final plat. 
Subd. 4. Street design standards. The following design standards are to be followed unless the council shall permit a variance because of unusual circumstances due to the topography, placement of buildings or other factors making it reasonable to vary the standards set forth without nullifying the intent and purpose of the comprehensive plan or this section. 
A.  Public streets. 
1.  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall be in conformity with the comprehensive plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
2.  Where such is not shown in the comprehensive plan, the arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall either: 
(a)  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or 
(b)  Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the council to meet a particular situation where topography or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical. 
3.  Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged and so that they will not tend to function as collector streets. 
4.  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the council may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess easement reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection for residential property and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
5.  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. 
6.  When connecting street lines of the same street deflect from each other at any one point by more than ten degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to insure a sight distance of not less than 150 feet for minor or collector streets, and of such greater radii as the city engineer shall determine for special causes. 
7.  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at less than 60 degrees. 
8.  Sight easements at street intersections may be required by the council to insure compliance with section 11.10, subdivision 7, Traffic Visibility, of the zoning chapter. Streets shall be designed in order to comply with zoning provisions. 
9.  Street surface widths and other design standards will be addressed in the city handbook. Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown in the comprehensive plan and where not shown therein, shall not be less than as follows: 
				Width 			Percent Grade 
Road Type 	ADT 	R/W 	Street 
 (2) 	Number Traffic Lanes 	Number Park Lanes 	Min. 	Max. 
Local Access 							
	1. 	Cul-de-sac 	   150 	50' (1a) 	28' (1b) 	2 	2 	0.5 	8 
	2. 	Low density 	   300 	50' 	28' 	2 	2 	0.5 	10  
	3. 	Medium 	300—1,000 	60' 	32' 	2 	2 	0.5 	9 
	4. 	High 	 1,000 	60' 	36' 	2 	1 	0.5 	8 
				60' 	32' 	2 	0 	0.5 	8 
Collector 							
	1. 	Low 	 1,500 	80' 	44' 	2 	2 	0.5 	8 
				70' 	36' 	2 	1 	0.5 	8 
	2. 	Medium 	1,500—5,000 	80' 	44' 	2 	2 	0.5 	7 
	3. 	High 	5,000 	86' 	48' 	4 	- 	0.5 	6 
Arterial 							
	1. 	Low 	10,000 	 86 (4) 	48' 	4 	- 	0.5 	6 
	2. 	Medium 	10—15,000 	100 (4) 	52' 	4 	- 	0.5 	5 
	3. 	High (3) 	15,000 	110 (4) 	2 @ 28 	4 	- 	0.5 	4 
 
(1a) 	Minimum right-of-way radius for "bubble" is 55 feet without center island and 65 feet with a center island. 
(1b) 	Minimum street radius for "bubble" is 45 feet without center island and 55 feet with a center island. 
(2) 	Face of curb to face of curb. 
(3) 	Parkway design (optional for medium arterial). 
(4) 	At major intersections increase to 120 feet. 
 
Note: The actual right-of-way width will be determined by the public works department (unless specifically set by the council) after considering all characteristics of the adjacent development. 
10.  Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformance with the other requirements of these regulations and where the council finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract. 
11.  Cul-de-sac dead-end streets, designated to be so permanently with the number of dwelling units to be reviewed and approved by the council, shall not be longer than 500 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside street pavement diameter of at least 90 feet and street width diameter of at least 120 feet. For purposes of measuring culs-de-sac, the distance from the centerline of the intersected streets to the centerline of the cul-de-sac shall be used. 
12.  Approval of culs-de-sac in new subdivisions shall be determined by the city after review of topography, desirability for the whole subdivision, expected maintenance costs, emergency vehicle access and compliance with city planning objectives. 
13.  Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed the following, with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves: 
Street Type 	Grade 
Arterial 	5 
Collector 	7 
Local 	8 
 
14.  No street grade shall be less than 0.5 percent. At intersections, the street grade shall not exceed 2.0 percent for the first 100 feet approaching said intersection. 
15.  All streets shall be constructed to the minimum loadbearing capacities dictated by existing soil conditions and the proposed designated use as follows: 
(a)  Residential noncontinuous streets (culs-de-sac): five-ton-per-axle loadbearing capacity. 
(b)  Residential low volume continuous noncollector streets: seven-ton-per-axle loadbearing capacity. 
(c)  Residential, medium-high volume collector streets: nine-ton-per-axle loadbearing capacity. 
(d)  All commercial and industrial streets: nine-ton-per-axle loadbearing capacity. 
B.  Private streets. 
1.  Where deemed appropriate by city staff, private streets shall have a street name designation as approved by the city planner. 
2.  Private drive intersections with public dedicated streets shall have a minimum 180-foot offset between centerlines intersecting onto a public street. 
3.  Private streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles (90 degrees), but no less than 60 degrees with public dedicated streets. 
4.  Sight easements at intersections may be required by the council to assure compliance with section 11.10, subdivision 7, Traffic Visibility, of the zoning chapter. 
5.  Minimum width for private drives as defined from face of curb to face of curb shall be as follows: 
  Number of 
  Potential 
Units Served 	  Type of Street 	Minimum Width 
(Face to Face) 
4 or less 	No curb and gutter 	12' 
5—8 	Concrete curb 	20' 
9—20 	Concrete curb 	24' 
More than 20 	Concrete curb and gutter 	28' 
Through streets 	Concrete curb and gutter 	28' 
 
6.  Cul-de-sac dead-end streets with the number of dwelling units to be reviewed and approved by the council shall not be longer than 500 feet from the centerline intersection of a through street and shall have a turnaround at the extreme far end with an outside street pavement diameter of at least 90 feet. For purposes of measuring culs-de-sac, the distance from the centerline of the intersected street to the centerline of the cul-de-sac shall be used. 
7.  Street grade shall not exceed ten percent with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves. 
8.  Concrete valley gutters to cross all driveway openings where the street grade is less than 1.0 percent. No street grade shall be less than 0.5 percent. At intersections, the street grade shall not exceed 3.0 percent for the first 100 feet approaching said intersection. 
9.  All streets shall be constructed to minimum loadbearing capacities of seven tons per axle as dictated by existing soil conditions. 
10.  Concrete curbing and gutter shall be poured in place and installed prior to the installation of any bituminous surfacing to insure proper grade and alignment. 
11.  Minimum setback for any structure from the back of curb shall be 25 feet for any through private street. Setback for any structure shall be a minimum of 20 feet for any dead-end private street. 
12.  All private and public street intersections shall have a minimum 15-foot radius. 
13.  All private street construction shall have a crowned centerline providing for directional drainage into the gutter line and subsequently into an internal storm sewer system. 
Subd. 5.  Sidewalks and trailways. Sidewalks and/or trailways shall be installed in accordance with City Code provisions and applicable policies. 
Subd. 6.  Easements. 
A.  Utility and drainage easements abutting public street rights-of-way and adjacent properties and centered on rear or side lot lines shall be at least ten feet wide or wider as may be required by the city. 
B.  Where a subdivision is traversed by a ponding area, watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse and incorporating elevations as required by the city. 
C.  Trails or pedestrian ways shall be shown as "trailways" on the final plat or as separate easements as the city may direct. 
D.  All other easements of record and those required by the city as necessary to provide the required utilities to service the subdivision. 
Subd. 7.  Blocks. 
A.  The length, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
1.  Provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the needs of the type of use contemplated. 
2.  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions. 
3.  Needs for convenience access, circulation control and safety of street traffic. 
4.  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
B.  Block lengths shall not exceed 1,200 feet. 
Subd. 8.  Lots. 
A.  The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated and in accordance with zoning regulations. 
B.  Lot dimensions shall be as required by the zoning provisions except where variances are approved by the council or unless otherwise specifically approved as a part of the approval of a planned development. 
C.  The subdividing of land shall provide each building lot with a minimum of 50 feet of frontage directly abutting on a publicly dedicated street, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  In no instance shall a private easement satisfy the above requirement. 
2.  In the instance of townhouses, apartment complexes or quadrominiums, the area to be owned in common shall be required to meet the above requirement. 
D.  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten feet in width may be required by the city, across which there shall be no right to vehicular access. Said screen shall only be required along the line of lots where said screen would be at an elevation as related to the traffic arterial so as to provide an effective screen. 
E.  Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to the right-of-way line of the abutting street. 
Subd. 9.  Building locations and elevations. (Refer to City Code chapter 11 and the state building code adopted by reference in chapter 4.) 
Subd. 10.  Public and park spaces. Public park sites or public open spaces shall be shown as required under section 13.20, subdivision 8 of this chapter. 
Subd. 11.  Vegetation including trees, shrubs, hedges, etc. Street trees, when planted, shall be placed inside the property line and not in the boulevard. Only those varieties approved by the city shall be used. 
Codifier's note— Also see City Code section 10.22 for additional regulations relating to planting and maintenance of trees. 
Subd. 12.  Solar access. The city requests that the developer consider all potential solar energy conservation measures when planning a subdivision. A city handbook, outlining the design criteria for solar access, is available at city hall. 
Subd. 13.  Environmental protection. The city will enforce environmental protection and erosion control in the development of subdivisions within the city. This includes off development sites as well as wetlands areas. 
Subd. 14.  Underground utilities. 
A.  All utilities, including transmission service lines, shall be required to be placed underground unless economic, technological or land characteristic factors make underground placement unfeasible as determined by the council. 
B.  Routing of utilities shall avoid unstable soils, bluff line or high ridges, and the alteration of the natural environment for aboveground or underground utilities shall be minimized to the maximum extent possible. 
Subd. 15.  Required improvements. The following required improvements shall be installed in accordance with the engineering policy, standards and specifications adopted by the city: 
A.  Monuments. Monuments shall be placed at all block and lot corners, angle points, points of curves in streets and at intermediate points as shall be required by the city. The monuments shall be of such material, size and length as may be approved by the city. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to see that the monuments are maintained in good order during construction and development. 
B.  Utility improvements. 
1.  Sanitary sewer system. 
(a)  Where available, municipal sewer facilities shall be provided in the development of the subdivision. 
(b)  Where municipal sewer facilities are not available, individual sewage systems shall be provided in accordance with the state pollution control agency standards and as approved by the city. 
2.  Water systems. 
(a)  Where available, municipal water facilities shall be provided in the development of the subdivision. 
(b)  When municipal water facilities are not available, individual water systems shall be provided in accordance with state department of health standards. (Contained in Water Well Construction Code, 7 MCAR 1.210—1.224.) 
3.  Streets. Streets shall be provided for as required in subdivision 4 of this section. 
4.  Sidewalks. Sidewalks and pathways shall be provided for as required in subdivision 5 of this section. 
5.  Drainage facilities. Storm sewer, open drainage or other facilities and easements shall be installed and provided, as will adequately provide for the drainage of surface waters. 
(a)  Said drainage facilities shall be provided as approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  Storm sewer and/or other drainage facilities shall be installed as determined to be necessary by the city engineer for the proper drainage of the surface waters. 
C.  Construction of sanitary sewer systems, water systems, storm sewers, streets and sidewalks located on public rights-of-way or easements to be dedicated to the city within the subdivision shall be completed by either the city or, at its option, the applicant/developer. 
1.  City-installed improvements. The developer may request the city to install the improvements. The developer shall submit a petition in the form prescribed by the city to the city engineer requesting said installations. The council may accept the petition and install the improvements and assess the cost in accordance with city policy and Minn. Stat. ch. 429. This petition request shall include a requested method of assessment spreading (per lot, front footage, percentage ratios, etc.). The applicant shall waive its rights to any and all public hearings required and agree to the acceptance of all costs associated with city-installed improvements, provided that all benefited properties are assessed. The city installation of required improvements shall not provide for any overall site grading but, rather, shall be limited to required grading within dedicated easements and rights-of-way necessary to perform the installation of future public dedicated services as requested by the applicant. 
2.  Developer-installed improvements. If the developer/applicant elects to install future city services (streets, utilities, etc.) for future turnover to the city for future maintenance, the following items shall be adhered to prior to acceptance for perpetual maintenance by the city for occupancy of any structure within the proposed subdivision: 
(a)  Detailed plans and specifications prepared by a registered engineer licensed in the state shall be prepared in accordance with present city standards, reviewed and approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  Soil analysis. Prior to providing plans for utilities, analysis of the soil to the depth of the utility proposed should be made by a reputable firm and provided with the utility report when required by the city. 
(c)  Detailed record plan "as-built" drawings must be provided in accordance with city standards no later than 90 days upon completion and acceptance of public streets and/or utilities by the city, unless otherwise approved in writing by the public works department. 
(d)  The developer shall allow access by the city personnel to perform inspections during the construction of these streets and/or utilities. The developer shall notify the city in writing, coordinate and hold a preconstruction conference with all affected parties at least 72 hours prior to starting construction of any street, trail or utility improvements. The developer shall be financially responsible for all costs incurred by the city in performing inspections to insure compliance with the approved plans and specifications. 
(e)  If the developer fails to give proper notification or does not allow the city to perform the inspection of the utilities and/or streets, the city reserves an option to require any concealed conditions to be exposed for proper inspections, or the right to deny acceptance for perpetual maintenance by city forces. 
(f)  Upon completion, inspection and final acceptance of the affected streets and/or utilities to be reverted to the city for future maintenance, the developer shall submit a one-year warranty maintenance bond to cover defects in materials and workmanship to be in effect one full year from the date of final written acceptance by the city. The developer shall also submit a hold harmless, lien waiver, or other agreement as required by the city. If the city was not properly noticed or given the opportunity to perform the proper inspections to insure compliance with the approved plans and specifications, the city, at its option, may elect to require the submission of up to a five-year warranty maintenance bond or cash escrow for any portion of the system where inspection was not able to be performed. Failure to comply with these requirements on behalf of the developer will allow the city the right to deny access or connection to these streets and/or utilities. 
(g)  The developer/applicant shall provide the city with a financial guarantee in an acceptable form and an amount equal to 60 percent of the estimated cost of the improvements to be performed privately by the developer/applicant. 
D.  Street lighting. Street lights shall be installed as provided by the City Code. 
Codifier's note— The policy, standards and procedures for installing and billing street lighting are provided for in chapter 3 of the City Code.) 
E.  Trees. "Street" trees shall be planted as provided in subdivision 11 of this section. 
F.  Driveway approaches. Concrete or bituminous driveway surfaces over each boulevard on lots adjacent to streets improved to city standards shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of the issuance of building permits. 
G.  Payment for public improvements. Before a final plat is approved by the council, the applicant shall submit an agreement and performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit or cash escrow agreement in such reasonable amount as determined by the council to assure the following: 
1.  Guaranteed completion of the required improvements undertaken by the applicant as approved by the city within a specified time after commencement of any construction in the subdivision, or such portion thereof less than the entire subdivision to be developed at any one time as approved by the council; provided, that the council, for good cause, may extend the period of time in which the improvements must be installed. 
2.  If the required improvements to be installed by the applicant are not completed and paid for within the specified period of time or such period approved by the council as hereinabove provided, all amounts held under the escrow agreement, performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be turned over and delivered to the city and applied to the cost of the required improvements. Any balance after such improvements have been made and paid for shall be returned to the subdivider. 
3.  The performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit or cash escrow agreement herein required shall be equal to 60 percent of the estimated cost of the improvements to be installed either by the developer/applicant or by the city. Such bond shall be reduced periodically upon submission of proof of compliance by the developer. In no event shall the financial guarantee for the improvements to be performed privately by the developer/applicant be reduced to less than 20 percent of the original amount until total completion and acceptance by the city. At such time the bond can be released in its entirety. 
H.  General grading. Before a final plat is approved by the council, the applicant shall execute a development agreement and submit the required financial guarantees in an amount as determined by the city engineer to guarantee the following: 
1.  Guaranteed completion of development site grading and drainage with the erosion control measures as required by the city erosion and sediment control manual. To provide overall developments, street and lot grades in accordance with the approved detailed grading, drainage, and erosion control plans submitted by the applicant. 
2.  The general development grading shall be completed within the terms of the development agreement and shall be completed subject to forfeiture of financial guarantees as submitted. 
3.  All grading costs outside of public rights-of-way and/or easements shall be at the applicant's expense and will not be considered for city installation or financing and/or provisions of Minn. Stat. ch. 429. 
4.  Individual lot grading shall be in conformance with subdivision 8 of this section. 
I.  Dedication of public rights-of-way. The council may extend the provisions of the performance bond or similar guarantee, to include a guarantee that the public rights-of-way shall be dedicated in accordance with the provisions under which a plat is approved. 
(Code 1983, § 13.30, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 13, 2nd series, eff. 4-27-84; Ord. No. 27, 2nd series, eff. 2-7-86; Ord. No. 51, 2nd series, eff. 7-31-87; Ord. No. 77, 2nd series, eff. 3-3-89; Ord. No. 155, 2nd series, eff. 11-25-92; Ord. No. 399, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 2-4-08)  
Secs. 13.31—13.39. - Reserved.  
Sec. 13.40. - Administration and enforcement. 
Subd. 1.  Enforcing officer. 
A.  The council shall designate a city employee who shall be primarily responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. 
B.  The enforcing officer shall enforce this chapter and, in furtherance of said authority, may: 
1.  Enter upon the land or within a building during reasonable working hours as found necessary to fulfill his duties as administrator of this chapter. 
2.  Conduct inspections of buildings and use of land to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter. 
3.  Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including but not limited to maps, amendments, bonds, variances, waivers, plats, development agreements and applications thereto. 
4.  Institute in the name of the city appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator as provided by law. 
5.  Establish and enforce with council approval necessary or desirable regulations in writing, clarifying or explaining any provision of this chapter. 
Subd. 2.  Board of appeals and adjustments. 
A.  Members. The board of appeals and adjustments shall consist of the individual members of the council as provided by City Code section 11.40, subdivision 2. 
B.  Functions of the advisory planning commission and council. 
1.  The planning commission shall make recommendations to the council on variances, waivers or appeal petitions received under this chapter within 60 days after having been filed with the city. 
2.  The council shall have the duty of hearing all appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination by the zoning administrator under this chapter. 
3.  The council shall have the duty of hearing requests for variances from the literal provisions of this chapter. 
4.  The council shall have the duty of hearing requests for a waiver of these platting regulations. 
C.  Procedures and organization of the board of appeals and adjustments. 
1.  The council may establish its own rules of procedure which shall not be inconsistent with or contrary to the statutes of the state. 
2.  The council shall keep written records of its minutes and the findings and determinations made by it on all matters. 
3.  Petitions or appeals shall be made on forms pertaining thereto provided by the city. 
4.  All findings and determinations of the council shall be the final authority. 
Subd. 3.  Variances and waivers. 
A.  Purpose. The council may grant variances from the strict application of the provisions of the applicable Code provisions and impose conditions and safeguards in the variances so granted where practical difficulties or particular hardships result from carrying out the strict letter of the regulations of such Code provisions. 
B.  Procedures. 
1.  Request for a variance shall be filed with the city on the city's application form. The application shall include a statement of the exceptional conditions and the peculiar and practical difficulties claimed as a basis for the need for a variance and shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as established by council resolution. The application shall also be accompanied by sufficient copies of detailed, written and graphic materials necessary for the explanation of the request, together with a list of property owners affected or within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of the subject property. The request shall be considered as being officially submitted when all the information requirements are complied with. 
2.  The city council shall hold a public hearing to review each request for a variance and shall approve or deny the request within 60 days of the filing of a completed application, unless extended in a manner consistent with Minn. Stat. § 15.99. All owners of property located within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of the subject property shall be mailed a notice of the request for variance and the date and time of the city council's public hearing. In cases when a variance to a regulation is requested with other applications for public hearing before the advisory planning commission, the advisory planning commission shall make a recommendation to grant or deny the variance application to the city council. 
3.  The city council may approve, approve with conditions or deny a request for a variance. In considering all requests for a variance, city council shall consider the following factors: 
a.  Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances apply to the property which do not apply generally to other properties in the same zone or vicinity, and result from lot size or shape, topography, or other circumstances over which the owners of property have no control. 
b.  The literal interpretation of the provisions of this Code would deprive the applicant property use commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the provisions of this Code. 
c.  That special conditions or circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant. 
d.  That granting of the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Ordinance to owners of other lands, structures or buildings in the same district. 
e.  The variance requested is the minimum variance which would alleviate the hardship. 
f.  The variance would not be materially detrimental to the purposes of this Code or to property in the same zone. 
C.  Lapse of variance or appeal. Whenever within one year after granting a variance or appeal the use as permitted by the variance or appeal shall not have been completed or utilized, then such variance or appeal shall become null and void unless a petition for extension of time in which to complete or to utilize the use has been granted by the council. Such extension shall be requested in writing and filed with the city clerk at least 30 days before the expiration of the original variance or appeal. There shall be no charge for the filing of such petition. The request for extension shall state facts showing a good faith attempt to complete or utilize the use permitted in the variance or appeal. 
D.  Reapplication. No application of a property owner for a variance shall be considered within a period of one year following a denial of such request, except that a new application may be permitted if new evidence or a change of circumstances warrant it. 
Subd. 4.  Preliminary plat and final plat. The procedures for filing petitions and holding hearings required for preliminary plats and final plats shall be as described in this section and section 13.10 of this chapter. 
A.  Initiation. Proceedings for a petition under this chapter shall be initiated by: (1) a petition of all persons deemed owners under section 13.04 for a preliminary plat, final plat, waiver or variance; (2) by action of the planning commission; or (3) by action of the council. 
B.  Petitions. All petitions for preliminary plat approval which are initiated by the owner or owners of the property shall be filed with the city clerk, and the application shall be accompanied by an abstractor's certified property certificate showing the property owners within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of the property in question. The petition shall be forwarded to the planning commission by the city administrator. 
C.  Public hearing—Notice and procedure. The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing on a preliminary plat affording the parties interested the opportunity to be heard and shall give not less than ten days' nor more than 30 days' notice of time and place of such hearing, published in the designated legal newspaper of the city. Such notice shall also include the legal description of the land and the proposed changes in zoning. At least ten days before the hearing, the city clerk shall mail an identical notice to the owners of the property and to each of the property owners within 350 feet of the outside boundaries of the land proposed to be rezoned. Failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceeding, provided a bona fide attempt to comply with this subdivision has been made. 
Subd. 5.  Fees. The required fees to be paid for each petition required under this chapter shall be established by separate resolution of the council, and the fee schedule may be revised from time to time. Where said fees do not cover costs incurred by the city in the processing of the petition, the petitioner shall be required to pay additional fees upon receipt of an itemized invoice from the city. 
Subd. 6.  Amendments. This chapter may only be amended by the council after a public hearing has been held by the planning commission to consider the amendment and a recommendation has been made related thereto, unless 60 days shall have passed since the hearing wherein the council can act without a planning commission recommendation. 
(Code 1983, § 13.40, eff. 1-1-83; Ord. No. 34, 2nd series, eff. 6-6-86; Ord. No. 148, 2nd series, eff. 7-29-92; Ord. No. 377, 2nd series, § 1, eff. 4-29-04) 
Cross reference— Administration and general government, ch. 2.  
Secs. 13.41—13.98. - Reserved.  
Sec. 13.99. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions. 
(Code 1983, § 13.99, eff. 1-1-83)  
Chapter 14 - SPECIAL SERVICE DISTRICT NO. 1 
 
Sec. 14.01. - Special service district no. 1. 
Subd. 1.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish special service district no. 1 capable of providing city services not ordinarily provided throughout the city from general fund revenues. The purpose of special service district no. 1 is to promote employment and enhance the tax base within the city and to assist motorists seeking to locate the area. 
Subd. 2.  Services the district may provide. 
A.  The special service district no. 1 may render or contract for such special services as: 
1.  Promotion and management of the Cedarvale retail area as a trade or shopping area; 
2.  Signage identifying the overall retail area; 
3.  Preparation, mowing, maintenance and repair of landscaping on public right-of-way; 
4.  Installation, maintenance and repair of street and pedestrian lighting in excess of city standard; 
5.  Installation, maintenance and repair of public parking facilities; 
6.  Provision and coordination of public safety services in excess of city standards; 
7.  The repair, maintenance, operation, rerouting and replacement of existing public improvements, and those authorized by Minn. Stat. § 429.021, within the boundaries of the special service district established under this section; and 
8.  Administration, coordination and preparation of studies and designs for the special services defined. 
B.  Special services do not include services that are ordinarily provided throughout the city from ordinary revenues of the city unless an increased level of service is provided in the special district. 
Subd. 3.  Payment for services. The costs of special service district no. 1 services shall be paid from revenues collected from service charges imposed within the district. 
Subd. 4.  Area included within special service district no. 1. The special service district no. 1 shall include the land, identified as Cedarvale retail area, as follows: 
Beginning at the centerline intersection point of Silver Bell Road and Beau-De-Rue Drive, then south along the centerline of Beau-De-Rue Drive approximately 660 feet to the south right-of-way line of Gold Trail, then southeasterly along said right-of-way approximately 100 feet to the east line of Leibel Addition, then south along said east line approximately 190 feet, then westerly along the south line of Leibel Addition approximately 290 feet to the centerline of Beau-De-Rue Drive, then southwesterly along said centerline approximately 430 feet to the centerline point of Beau-De-Rue Drive and Rahn Road, then southeasterly along centerline of Rahn Road 410 feet to the extended south line of parcel 010-10, then southwesterly along said south line approximately 770 feet to its intersection with the west line of parcel 031-10, then south along said west line approximately 780 feet to the north line of outlot A of Cedar Grove no. 3, then west along said north line approximately 1,595 feet to the west line of the NE ¼ of section 19, then north along said west line approximately 1,150 feet to the extended south line of MNDOT right-of-way plat no. 19-6, then northeasterly along said south line approximately 2,795 feet to its intersection with the southwest line of MNDOT right-of-way plat no. 19-8, then easterly along said southwest line approximately 330 feet to the NE corner of the NE ¼ of section 19, then north along the east line of said right-of-way plat no. 19-8 approximately 190 feet to the northwest corner of parcel 120-54, then northeast approximately 185 feet to the north corner of said parcel, then southeast approximately 176 feet to the northeast corner of said parcel, then south approximately 192 feet to the centerline of Silver Bell Road, then west approximately 260 feet to the point of beginning at the centerline intersection of Silver Bell Road and Beau-De-Rue Drive, also including lot 1, block 1, Silver Bell Center Addition. 
(Ord. No. 179, 2nd series, eff. 6-24-94)  
Secs. 14.02—14.99. - Reserved.  
Chapter 25 - LISTING OF UNCODED ORDINANCES IN EFFECT 
All ordinances described in this chapter remain in effect after adoption of the City Code. They are of a permanent and continuing nature as authority for a specific act which has been performed. These ordinances are of two types, that generally distinguish them from other provisions of the City Code, either (1) their texts have no continuing reference value, or (2) they are in the nature of a contract and of only occasional reference value. For these reasons it appears justified to list and describe them here only to facilitate finding them in the event this becomes necessary. 
REGULATING ELECTIONS 
Ordinance No. 51, adopted July 16, 1974, regulates elections and provides for biennial elections. 
CONSOLIDATED IMPROVEMENT BOND DEBT SERVICE FUND 
Ordinance No. 59, adopted December 10, 1974, established the consolidated improvement bond debt service fund and provides security for the bonds payable therefrom. 
INDUSTRIAL STRENGTH CHARGE 
Ordinance No. 67, adopted December 21, 1976, establishes an industrial user strength charge and an industrial user strength charge formula. 
GRANT OF GAS FRANCHISE 
Ordinance No. 7, adopted January 7, 1969, grants franchise to Northern Natural Gas Company for a period of 25 years. 
Ordinance No. 28, adopted November 18, 1969, grants franchise to Northern States Power Company for a period of 25 years. 
Ordinance No. 54, adopted September 3, 1974, grants franchise to Minnesota Gas Company in River Hills 9th Addition for a period of 25 years. 
Ordinance No. 102, adopted September 20, 1983, grants franchise to Northern Natural Gas Company for a period of 25 years, and repeals Ordinance No. 7. 
GRANT OF ELECTRIC FRANCHISE 
Ordinance No. 26, adopted September 16, 1969, grants franchise to Northern States Power Company for a period of 25 years in the area delineated therein. 
Ordinance No. 27, adopted November 18, 1969, grants franchise to Dakota County Electric Cooperative for a period of 25 years in the area delineated therein. 
GRANT OF CABLE TV FRANCHISE 
Ordinance No. 101, adopted June 7, 1983, grants franchise to Group W Cable for a period of 15 years. 
PIPELINE ORDINANCE 
Ordinance No. 23, adopted August 20, 1968, grants permission to Williams Brothers Pipe Line Company to use certain roads for construction, maintenance and operation of a pipeline for the transportation of petroleum products for a period of 25 years. 
ORDINANCE CODIFICATION 
Ordinance No. 1, 2nd series, adopted December 7, 1982, adopted a codification of the ordinances of the city. 
SINGLE-FAMILY HOUSING AND MULTIFAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS—HOUSING PROGRAMS 
Ordinance No. 103, adopted November 1, 1983, grants the Dakota County Housing and Redevelopment Authority the authority to exercise on behalf of the City of Eagan the powers conferred by Minn. Stat. §§ 462C.012, 462C.08 relating to planning and implementation of a single-family mortgage revenue bond housing program. 
Ordinance No. 25, 2nd series, adopted June 7, 1985, amends Ordinance No. 103 in its entirety to add provisions relating to the issuance of revenue bonds for multifamily housing developments. 
